Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XXIII: Southeast Asia (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1994)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v23).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Southeast Asia (Foreign Relations of the United States, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XXIII)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume XXIII

Southeast Asia

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Southeast Asia (Foreign Relations of the United States, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume XXIII)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Southeast Asia Region (Documents 1-40)

Burma (Documents 41-65)

Cambodia (Documents 66-142)

Indonesia (Documents 143-326)

Malaysia (Documents 327-349)

Philippines (Documents 350-395)

Thailand (Documents 396-482)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the formulation of policies, including the events which contributed to that process, and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government, including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

The editors of this volume are convinced that it meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing. Although this volume records policies and events of more than 30 years ago, the Foreign Relations statute allows the Department until 1996 to reach the 30-year line in the publication of the series.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a triennial subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series. The subseries documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years (1961–1963) of the administration of John F. Kennedy. In planning and preparing the 1961–1963 triennium, the editors chose to present the official record of U.S. foreign affairs toward Southeast Asia in a volume separate from Vietnam and Laos. For the first year and a half of the Kennedy administration, Laos was the most pressing crisis in Southeast Asia. After the conclusion of the Geneva Conference on Laos in July 1962, events in Vietnam came increasingly to dominate the administration’s policy toward Southeast Asia. Nevertheless, the Kennedy administration maintained an active and important relationship with the rest of Southeast Asia as reflected in this volume.

To understand fully the Kennedy administration’s total policy approach to Southeast Asia, this volume should be read in conjunction with the four volumes on Vietnam for 1961–1963 (volumes I–IV) and volume XXIV, Laos Crisis. This is especially true for this volume’s compilations on Thailand, where the introduction of U.S. armed forces into Thailand was in response to events in Laos; the Southeast Asia region with its emphasis on the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization’s inability to respond effectively to the Laos crisis; and Cambodia, Vietnam’s and Laos’ neighboring state.

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe that this volume generally meets the standards and mandates of this statute, although access to some records was limited, as noted below.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The editors have had complete access to all the retired records and papers in the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the decentralized (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have access to the papers of President Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

Department of State historians have also enjoyed full access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretary of Defense and his major assistants.

As noted above, the Foreign Relations statute requires that the editors have full and complete access to all records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions. Since early 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency, in cooperation with the Department of State, has provided expanded access to Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records still in the custody of that Agency. Department historians’ expanded access was arranged by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. This access arrangement coincided with the research of volumes for the 1961–1963 triennium. As Department of State and CIA historians have continued to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of this access, the quality and variety of documentation made available and selected for publication in the volumes has improved.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues that cannot be documented in the volume but will be addressed in a microfiche supplement or in bibliographical notes.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The compiler-editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors give priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

10. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

11. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

12. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

13. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

14. Documentation that illuminates special decision-making processes that accomplished the policies recorded in particular volumes;

15. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Scope and Focus of Documents Researched and Selected for Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, Volume XXIII

In planning and preparing this volume documenting U.S. foreign policy toward Southeast Asia during the Kennedy administration, the research and editing of which was completed in 1990–1991, the editor undertook research in the records of various agencies and individuals. The records of the Department of State constitute one of the most important sources for the published record. Certain intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research were unknown to the Department historians at the time this volume was compiled, but arrangements have been made for Department historians to have access to these records for future volumes.

The editor of this volume fully researched the papers of President Kennedy and other White House foreign policy records, the other key source for documentation on Southeast Asia. Other sources of documentation were also important, although not on the scale of the Department of State or the Kennedy Library records.

The editor had complete access to the papers of General Maxwell Taylor at the National Defense University, which proved on occasion to provide important documents. The Harriman Papers at the Library of Congress were also valuable. Department of Defense files, especially those of Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, provided crucial documentation on Southeast Asia. Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were also used to supplement the record, as were cables of the Secretary of Defense as maintained by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Historical Office. The Lyndon B. Johnson Library provided additional documentation on Southeast Asia, especially after November 22, 1963.

For this volume, the CIA historians made relevant intelligence files available to the editor. The records of Director of Central Intelligence John A. McCone were a particularly useful source. White House foreign affairs files were the principal source of intelligence documentation included in this volume. Copies of important CIA documents are maintained at the Kennedy Library where Department of State historians enjoyed full access, thanks to the cooperation of the CIA History Staff. Copies of other CIA documents were found in Department of State files.

In selecting documents for inclusion in volume XXIII, the editor focused on the actions of President Kennedy and his immediate advisers at the White House and elsewhere in the government in formulating policy with respect to Southeast Asia. This volume documents the meetings of the President with his advisers from the White House, the Department of State, and other agencies, as well as the written advice to the President from these advisers. The editors have also included the major internal U.S. Government policy recommendations and decision papers relating to Southeast Asia.

In the compilation on Indonesia, the role the United States played in expediting the transfer of West New Guinea from the Netherlands to Indonesia meant that much of the documentation printed relates to consultations with the two parties to the dispute. In the case of the confrontation between Indonesia and the British Commonwealth over the formation of Malaysia, consultations with the British and Australians become equally important. In the compilation on the Philippines, the role of the U.S. Congress is highlighted.

Intelligence assessments regarding Southeast Asia are reflected in documents selected for publication here. The capabilities of Indonesia and the Netherlands in a potential conflict over West New Guinea was a key intelligence question. Thailand’s ability to meet the threat of Communist insurgency in its northeast region was another. Cambodia’s orientation vis-à-vis the West and East was still another. The editor did not, however, attempt to document the details of operational activities by intelligence authorities in connection with Southeast Asia.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Incoming telegrams from U.S. Missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The unnumbered first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established by the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and assists with any access and/or clearance problems that arise. Time constraints prevent the Advisory Committee from reviewing all volumes in the series.

This volume has not been reviewed by the Advisory Committee.

Declassification Review

The declassification review of this volume in 1992 and 1993 resulted in the decision to withhold about 1.5 percent of the documents originally selected. Only three documents were denied in full, and most of the other excisions were very limited. The remaining documentation provides a full account of the major foreign policy issues confronting and the policies undertaken by the Kennedy administration toward Southeast Asia.

There were no important excisions in the regional compilation. The few substantive excisions in the Burma compilation relate to matters of privacy. In the Cambodia compilation, the question of derogatory personal characterization arose. The solution was to release a fair portion of the unflattering comments so that readers would realize the mind-set of those responsible for policy while excising personal characterizations that might give undue offense. Also in the Cambodia compilation, documentation on neighboring countries’ support of Khmer dissident movements has been excised.

The Indonesia compilation’s excisions related mostly to the aftermath of the 1958 rebellion and the outside support the rebels received. The Malaysia compilation’s excisions are almost exclusively sharp expressions of disagreement and an apparent misunderstanding between the United States and its allies over the implied and agreed obligations of the United States to support the British Commonwealth’s position in the Federation of Malaysia. In the Philippines compilation, the limited documentation on U.S. intelligence operations has been excised and, in one case, a document has been denied. Finally, the Thailand compilation has excisions and two documents denied. The substantive deletions and excisions concern the Thai role in Laos, a communication from Prime Minister Sarit not sent through normal diplomatic channels, and a conversation between the Director of Central Intelligence and Thai officials. In all these compilations, names of hitherto unacknowledged CIA personnel, references to stations, and certain CIA internal recordkeeping information have been excised.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification:

1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgements

The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library, in particular Suzanne Forbes, who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume.

Under the supervision of former Editor in Chief John P. Glennon and former Division Chief David Mabon, Edward C. Keefer collected, selected, and edited all the material presented in this volume. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw the production of the volume. Breffni Whelan prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian Bureau of Public Affairs

July 1994

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Indexed Central Files: The Department of State used the decimal central file system through January 1963 after which it began a new subject-numeric central filing system. The new subject-numeric system was divided into broad categories: Administration, Consular, Culture and Information, Economic, Political and Defense, Science, and Social. Within these categories were subcategories and then numerical subdivisions relating to specific topics. The subject-numeric system used an abbreviation rather than a number for a country, area, or topic. The decimal and subject-numeric central files were major sources for this volume. The following are the principal sources cited from both filing systems organized by compilation: Southeast Asia Region 033.9211: visits of Thai officials to the United States

033.1100-JO: foreign visits and travel of Vice President Johnson

033.1100-KE: foreign visits and travel of Attorney General Robert Kennedy

379: SEATO affairs

611.92: U.S.-Thai political relations

751J.00: political developments in Laos

790.00: political developments in the Far East

790.5: national defense affairs in the Far East

DEF 4 SEATO: SEATO alliance

SEATO 3 FR (PA): Paris SEATO meeting

SEATO 8–5: SEATO rules of procedure

Burma 033.90B11: visits of Burmese officials to the United States

110.12-BO: foreign visits of Under Secretary of State Chester Bowles

611.90B: U.S.-Burmese political relations

690B.93: Burmese-Republic of China political relations

751J.00: political developments in Laos

790B.00: political developments in Burma

790B.02: government recognition in Burma

790B.13: cabinet and government ministries in Burma

790B.5-MSP: military assistance program in Burma

790B.551: military personnel in Burma

793.551: KMT in Burma, Laos, and Thailand

POL BURMA: general policy and background

POL 1 BURMA: general policy and background

POL 26 BURMA: rebellions, coups, insurgencies

POL 27 BURMA: military operations

POL US-BURMA: general policy and background, U.S.-Burmese relations

POL 1 US-BURMA: general policy and background, U.S.-Burmese relations

DEF 19 US-BURMA: U.S. military assistance to Burma

DEF 19–2 US BURMA: U.S. advisory and training assistance to Burma

CSM 9–6 BURMA: Communist terrorism, kidnapping, and assassination

PER EVERTON, JOHN SCOTT: files relating to Ambassador Everton

Cambodia 611.51H: U.S.-Cambodian political relations

651H.00: international political relations of Cambodia

651H.92: Cambodian-Thai political relations

751H.00: political developments in Cambodia

751H.51K: Cambodian-South Vietnamese political relations

751J.00: political developments in Laos

751K.00: political developments in South Vietnam

811.0051H: U.S. investment in Cambodia

851H.2612: roads and highways in Cambodia

851H.47411: ceremonial communications to Cambodia from the United States

POL CAMB: general policy and background

POL 1 CAMB: general policy and background

POL 7 CAMB: visits and meetings

POL 15–1 CAMB: head of state, chief executive

POL 27 CAMB: military operations

POL 27–13 CAMB: neutrality

POL CAMB-CHICOM: general relations between Cambodia and the People’s Republic of China

POL 17 CAMB-S VIET: diplomatic relations between Cambodia and South Vietnam

POL CAMB-THAI: general relations between Cambodia and Thailand

POL CAMB-US: general relations between Cambodia and the United States

AID (FREE WORLD) CAMB: free world aid to Cambodia

AID (US) CAMB: U.S. aid to Cambodia

AID (US) 4 Thai: agreements on U.S. aid to Thailand

DEF 19 US-CAMB: U.S. military aid to Cambodia

Indonesia 033.1100-KE: foreign travel of Attorney General Robert Kennedy

033.4311: trips of Australian officials to the United States

033.9811: trips of Indonesian officials to the United States

033.9861: trips of Indonesian officials to the Soviet Union

101.2: administrative files of the National Security Council

298.1122 POPE, ALLAN LAWRENCE: welfare of Allan Pope

611.98: U.S.-Indonesian political relations

656.9813: transfer of territory from the Netherlands to Indonesia

711.11-KE: files relating to President Kennedy

798.00: political developments in Indonesia

798.5: defense affairs in Indonesia

798.00: U.S.-Indonesia political developments

798.11: Indonesian chief of state, chief executive

798.5-MSP: U.S. military assistance program in Indonesia

798.56: Indonesian-Dutch political developments

898.2553: petroleum in Indonesia

POL 7 INDON: visits and meetings

POL 15–1 INDON: head of state, chief executive

POL 25–3 INDON: anti-foreign demonstrations, protests, and riots

POL 32–4 INDON: unification and merger of territories

POL AUST-INDON: general relations between Australia and Indonesia

POL INDON-MALAYSIA: general relations between Indonesia and Malaysia

POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA: territorial disputes between Indonesia and Malaysia

POL INDO-US: general relations between Indonesia and the United States

AID (US) INDON: U.S. aid to Indonesia

AID (US) 15–8 INDON: U.S. commodities to Indonesia

E 1–1 INDON: economic stabilization

DEF 12 INDON: armaments

DEF 14 INDON: non-military activities of armed forces

PET 6 INDON: oil companies in Indonesia

PET 10 INDON: oil resources and fields

PET 15–2 INDON: nationalization and expropriation of petroleum

Malaysia (Malaya) POL MALAYA: general political developments

POL 7 MALAYA: visits and meetings

POL 15–1 MALAYA: head of state, chief executive

POL 32–4 MALAYA: unification of territories

POL 3 MALAYSIA: organizations, alignments, and federations

POL 16 MALAYSIA: independence and recognition

POL 15–1 KENNEDY-US: files relating to President Kennedy

POL 2 INDON: general reports

POL INDON-MALAYSIA: general political relations between Indonesia and Malaysia

POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA: territorial disputes between Indonesia and Malaysia

POL INDON-UK: general relations between Indonesia and the United Kingdom

POL INDON-US: general relations between Indonesia and the United States

DEF 4 ANZUS: Australia, New Zealand, United States collective defense pact

Philippines 033.1100-JO: foreign visits of Vice President Johnson

033.9611: visits of Filipino officials to the United States

211.9641: World War II claims by Filipinos

411.966: measures affecting import trade between the United States and the Philippines

411.9641: trade relations between the United States and the Philippines

611.96: U.S.-Philippines political relations

796.00: political developments in the Philippines

796.11: chief executive, head of state of the Philippines

896.10: general financial matters of the Philippines

896.13: monetary system of the Philippines

896.235: sugar industry in the Philippines

POL 1 PHIL: general policy and background

POL 7 PHIL: visits and meetings

POL 15–1 PHIL: head of state, executive branch

POL PHIL-US: general U.S.-Philippines relations

DEF 6 PHIL: armed forces

DEF 7 PHIL-US: U.S.-Philippines visits and military missions

Thailand 033.1100-JO: foreign visits and travel of Vice President Lyndon Johnson

033.1100-KE: foreign visits and travel of Attorney General Robert Kennedy

033.9211: visits of Thai officials to the United States

379: SEATO affairs

611.92: U.S.-Thai political relations

711.551: U.S military personnel

751J.00: general political developments in Laos

792.00: political developments in Thailand

792.13: Thailand’s cabinet

792.5: national defense affairs of Thailand

792.5-MSP: U.S. military assistance to Thailand

792.56311: U.S. bases in Thailand

POL THAI: general policy and background

POL 15–1 THAI: head of state; chief executive

POL THAI-US: general Thai-U.S. relations

POL 27 LAOS: military operations in Laos

POL 7/US MANSFIELD: foreign visits of Senator Mike Mansfield

CSM 9–6 THAI: Communist infiltration and subversion

AID (US) 4 THAI: aid agreements

REF THAI: general policy and plans on refugees and migration

Lot Files: Documents from the central files have been supplemented by material from the decentralized files, the lot files, of the Department of State. The most important of the lot files used for this volume were: Bundy Files: Lot 65 D 240 Files of William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern (later East Asian and Pacific) Affairs, 1963–1969.

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Files of visits of foreign leaders to the United States and of international conferences abroad attended by the President, Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, 1961–1964.

EA/BUC Files: Lot 66 D 483 Files of the Office of Burma Union and Cambodia Affairs for 1963.

EA/BUC Files: Lot 66 D 492 Cambodia files for 1963 of the Office of Burma Union and Cambodia Affairs.

EA/MS Files: Lot 66 D 462 Files of the Office of Malyasia and Singapore Affairs, 1963–1964. Also includes Borneo files for 1963.

EA/PHL Files: Lot 66 D 502 Philippine desk files for 1963.

EA/RA (SEATO) Files: Lot 67 D 143 Office of Regional Affairs of the Bureau of East Asian Affairs, SEATO files for 1955–1964 (subsequently retired to WNRC in RG 59, as FRC 71 A 6682).

EA/Thailand Files: Lot 66 D 500 Thailand desk files for 1963.

EA/Thailand Files: Lot 67 D 320 Files of the Office of Thailand Affairs, November 1963–1964.

FE Files: Lot 64 D 25 Official letters filed by sender and memoranda of conversation filed by country, and country-subject files for the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, 1962.

FE/SEA (Burma) Files: Lot 65 D 439 Burma desk files for 1961.

FE/SEA (Burma) Files: Lot 65 D 440 Burma desk files for 1962.

FE/SEA (Cambodia) Files: Lot 65 D 55 Cambodia desk files for 1961–1962.

FE/SEA (Laos) Files: Lot 65 D 169 Laos desk files for 1961.

FE/SEA (Thailand) Files: Lot 66 D 298 Thailand desk files for 1961–1962.

FE/SPA Files: Lot 64 D 500 Economic files for Indonesia, Malaya, Malaysia, and Singapore for 1962–1963.

FE/SPA Files: Lot 64 D 523 Philippine desk files for 1961–1962, relating mostly to economics.

FE/SPA Files: Lot 65 D 542 Malaya and Singapore desk files for 1961–1962, and files for British Borneo for 1962.

FE/SPA (Indonesia) Files: Lot 65 D 553 Indonesia desk political files for 1961–1962.

FE/SPA (Indonesia) Files: Lot 66 D 484 Indonesia desk political and economic files for 1963–1964.

FE/SPA (Philippines) Files: Lot 65 D 179 Philippine desk files for 1963 related to economic issues.

FE/SPA (Philippines) Files: Lot 66 D 16 Philippine desk files for 1962.

FE/SPA/E Files: Lot 63 D 214 Economic files for Indonesia, Malaya, and Singapore for 1960–1961.

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165 NIEs and SNIEs on East Asia and the Pacific, 1952–1985, maintained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110 NIEs and SNIEs on East Asia and the Pacific, 1952–1985, maintained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

OCB Files: Lot 62 D 430 Master files of the Operations Coordinating Board for 1953-January 1961, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State, 1961–1964.

S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121 Files of the Policy Planning Staff, 1962.

S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147 Chronologies, minutes, and briefings used by the Secretary of State and Under Secretaries of State, 1961–1963. Includes records of the Secretary of State’s staff meetings and the telephone conversations of Under Secretary of State Ball.

S/S-NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961–1968, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Central Intelligence Agency DCI (McCone) Files Files of Director John A. McCone, 1962–1965.

Department of Defense (see also entries under Washington National Records Center) Office of the Secretary of Defense, Historian’s Office, Secretary of Defense’s Cable files Telegrams to and from the Secretary of Defense maintained by the Historian’s Office, Department of Defense.

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Rusk Appointment Book

Papers of Lyndon B. Johnson, Presidential Papers National Security File, Country File, Cambodia

Vice Presidential Security File, Memoranda to the Vice President

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts George W. Ball Papers Transcripts of Under Secretary of State Ball’s telephone conversations.

Roger Hilsman Papers Official papers of Director of Intelligence and Research and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Hilsman, 1961–1964.

Papers of Johnson F. Kennedy, Presidential Papers National Security File

Country Series: Burma, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaya and Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, West New Guinea

Files of McGeorge Bundy (cited as Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy) Meetings and Memoranda Series: NSC, NSAMS, Staff Memos Regional Series, Southeast Asia

Trips and Conference Series, Proposed trip to the Far East

President’s Appointment Book

President’s Office Files Countries: Laos Security, Indonesia Security, Thailand Security

Thompson Papers, Southeast Asia

National Defense University, Washington, D.C. Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Military Adviser to the President, 1961–1962, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1962–1964.

Library of Congress Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers Special files of W. Averell Harriman, Kennedy and Johnson administrations.

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense

Lansdale Files: FRC 63 D 1803 Files of Edward G. Lansdale, Deputy Assistant and Assistant to the Secretary of Defense (Special Operations), 1957–1961.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382 Files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, 1961.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501 Files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, 1962.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4565 Files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, 1963.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 5464 Files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Affairs, 1962–1963.

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Official files of the Secretary of Defense and Deputy Secretary of Defense for 1962.

OSD/A Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Miscellaneous files of the Secretary of Defense and Under Secretary of Defense and their assistants, 1951–1966.

Published Sources

Documentaries and Congressional Documents Department of Defense. United States–Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967 [The Pentagon Papers]. 12 vols. Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971.

Department of State. American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents. 2 vols. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957.

——————. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, 1962, 1963. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965, 1966, 1967.

National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1962.

U.S. Senate. Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committeee Together With Joint Sessions of the Armed Services Committee (Historical Series), Vol. XIV, 88th Congress, 2d session, 1962. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1986.

Memoirs Note: The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor does it endorse their interpretation of events.

Ball, George. The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1982.

Hilsman, Roger. To Move a Nation. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co., 1967.

Johnson, U. Alexis. The Right Hand of Power. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1987.

Jones, Howard P. Indonesia: The Impossible Dream. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971.

Rusk, Dean (as told to Richard Rusk). As I Saw It. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1990.

Salinger, Pierre. With Kennedy. Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Co., 1966.

Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965.

Sorenson, Theodore C. Kennedy. New York: Harper & Row, 1965.

Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1972.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AC, aircraft

ACSI, Assistant Chief of Staff (Army), Intelligence

admin, administration/administrative

AF, air force

AFP, Armed Forces of the Philippines

AFPFL, Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League

AG, Attorney General

AID, Agency for International Development

Aidto, series indicator for telegrams from the Agency for International Development

ANZUS, Australia-New Zealand-United States (treaty organization)

AP, Associated Press

ARMA, Army Attaché

ARPAC, Army, Pacific

ASA, Association for Southeast Asia

ASAF, Asia/Africa

ASAS, Association of Southeast Asian States

ASW, anti-submarine warfare

BCP, Burmese Communist Party

BDF, Burmese Defense Forces

BG, battle group

BLT, battalion landing team

BPP, Border Patrol Police

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

CALTEX, Standard Oil of California, Texas

CAT, Civil Air Transport

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

CG, Commanding General

ChiCom, Chinese Communist

ChiNats, Chinese Nationalist

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CHJUSMAAG, Chief, Joint U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group

CI, counter intelligence

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIA-DDP, Central Intelligence Agency, Deputy Directorate, Plans

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CJTF, combined joint task force

CODEL, congressional delegation

COMUSMACTHAI, Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Thailand

COMUSMACV, Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

CONUS, continental United States

CP, Communist Party

CPB, Communist Party Burma

CR, cavalry reconnaissance

CT, Country Team

DAC, Development Assistance Committee

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDI/ONE, Deputy Director for Intelligence, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DLF, Development Loan Fund

DOD, Department of Defense

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

ECAFE, Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (of the United Nations)

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EX-IM, Export-Import

FARK, Forces Armées Royales Khmeres (Royal Khmer Armed Forces)

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Information Service

FCN, friendship, commerce, and navigation

FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FMM, French Military Mission

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GA, General Assembly (of the United Nations)

GI, government issue

GOI, Government of Indonesia

GON, Government of the Netherlands

GOP, Government of the Philippines

GOT, Government of Thailand

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GUB, Government of the Union of Burma

GVN, Government of Vietnam

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICA, International Cooperation Administration

ICC, International Control Commission

IMF, International Monetary Fund

Indo, Indonesia

Inf Bn, infantry battalion

Inf Co, infantry company

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/RFE, Office of Research for the Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

ISA, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

ISP, International Security Plan

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum

JFK, John F. Kennedy

JUSMAG, Joint U.S. Military Assistance Group

KIA, Kachin Independence Army

KLM, Koninklijke Luchtvaart Maatschappij (Royal Dutch Airlines)

KMT, Kuomintang

KNU, Karen National Union

KNDO, Karen National Defense Organization

KS, Khmer Serei

LAS, long-range assistance strategy

LFE, Assistant Legal Adviser, Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

LP, Liberal Party

MA, military aid

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAP, Military Assistance Plan

Maphilindo, Malaysia-Philippines-Indonesia

Masjumi, Majelis Syoro Muslimin Indonesia (Council of Indonesia Muslim Assosciations)

MDC, mobile development units

MDP, master defense plan

MEDT, miltary equipment delivery team

MILTAG, military advisory group

MND, Ministry of National Defense

MOBRIG, mobile brigade

Mtn Pack Inf Co, Mountain Pack Infantry Company

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NG, New Guinea

Niact, needs immediate action

NIE, National Intelligence Estmate

Nofom, no foreign dissemination

NP, Nationalista Party

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NU, Nahdatul Ulama (Muslim Scholar Party)

NVN, North Vietnam

OASD, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense

OCB, Operations Coordinating Board

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OFD, Office of Finance Development

OIC, officer in charge

ONE, Office of National Estimates

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

P, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

PACAF, Pacific, Air Force

PACFLT, Pacific Fleet

PACOM, Pacific Command

PARU, Police Aerial Resupply Unit

PC, Philippine Constabulary

PG, planning group

PKT, Partai Komunis Indonesia (Indonesia Communist Party)

PL, Pathet Lao

PL/VM, Pathet Lao/Viet Minh

PM, Prime Minister

PNI, National Party of Indonesia

POL, petroleum, oil, lubricants

POLAD, Political Adviser

PRC, People’s Republic of China

PSI, Partai Sosialis Indonesia (Indonesian Socialist Party)

PX, post exchange

RCT, Regimental Combat Team

RCTHDQ, Regimental Combat Team’s headquarters

RDVN, Rural Development, Vietnam

Res, resolution

RG, Record Group

RGUB, Revolutionary Government of the Union of Burma

RKG, Royal Khmer Government

RT, Royal Thai

RTA, Royal Thai Army

RTAF, Royal Thai Air Force

SC, Security Council (of the United Nations)

SEA, Southeast Asia; Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SEATELCOM, Southeast Asia telecommunications

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while he is away from Washington

septel, separate telegram

SG, Secretary-General (of the United Nations)

SLAT, Special Logistics Action, Thailand

SNIE, Special National Security Estimate

SOFA, Status of Forces Agreement

S/P, Policy Planning Council/Staff

STANVAC, Standard Vacuum Oil Company

SVN, South Vietnam

SYG, Secretary-General (of the United Nations)

TEA, Thai Exiles Assosciation

TF, task force

TG, Thai Government

T/O, table of organization

UK, United Kingdon

UN, United Nations

UNTEA, United Nations Temporary Executive Agency

UP, Union Party

URC, Union Revolutionary Council

USAF, United States Air Force

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIS, United States Information Service

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VC, Viet Cong

VDC, Volunteer Defense Corps

VLF, very low frequency

VOA, Voice of America

WE, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

WNG, West New Guinea

List of Persons List of Persons

Abdul Rahman, Tunku, Malayan Prime Minister; after September 16, 1993, Malaysian Prime Minister

Abdul Razak, Tun, Malayan Deputy Prime Minister

Abello, Emilio, Philippines Ambasador to the United States, February-October 1962

Acheson, Dean, former Secretary of State; counselor to the Government of Cambodia at the International Court of Justice, 1962

Aidit Dipa Nusantara, leader of the PKI (Partai Komunis Indonesia/Indonesian Communist Party)

Alexander, Clifford L., Jr., member of the National Security Council Staff, 1963

Alphand, Hervé, French Ambassador to the United States

Amory, Robert, Deputy Director, Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, until March 30, 1962

Anderson, Daniel V., Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until December 1961

Anderson, Admiral George W., Chief of Naval Operations, August 1, 1961-August 1, 1963

Arzac, Daniel M., Jr., Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after November 1961

Aung Gyi, member of the Revolutionary Council and Vice Chief of Staff, Burmese Defense Forces, after March 1962; responsible for Ministry of Trade Industry

Baldwin, Charles F., Ambassador to Malaya (Malaysia after September 16, 1963)

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February 1-December 3, 1961; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Ballantyne, Robert J., Officer in Charge of Philippine Affairs, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after June 1962

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs after February 1963

Barrington, James, Permanent Secretary of the Burmese Foreign Office

Barwick, Sir Garfield E.G., Australian Minister of External Affairs after December 22, 1961

Battle, Lucius D., Department of State Executive Secretary, March 16, 1961-May 2, 1962; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs Beale, Sir Howard, Australian Ambassador to the United States

Beaudry, Robert M., Acting Officer in Charge of Netherlands Affairs, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1963

Bell, David E., Director of the Agency for International Development after December 21, 1962

Bell, James D., Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until April 1962

Bissell, Richard M., Jr., Deputy Director (Plans), Central Intelligence Agency, until February 17, 1962

Blue, William L., Deputy Director, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until July 1961; Director until February 1962

Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador to France after September 4, 1962

Boun Oum, Prince, Prime Minister of the Royal Lao Government (as recognized by the United States) until June 23, 1962

Bowles, Chester B., Under Secretary of State, January 25-December 3, 1961; thereafter President’s Special Representative and Adviser on Africa, Asia, and Latin America until June 19, 1963; thereafter Ambassador to India

Breitweiser, Major General Robert A., Director of Intelligence, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, until 1962

Brubeck, William H., Department of State Executive Secretary, May 14, 1962-July 20, 1963

Buffum, William B., Officer in Charge of UN Political Affairs, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, until August 1961; thereafter Deputy Director, Office of UN Political and Security Affairs

Bundy, McGeorge, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs after January 20, 1961

Bundy, William H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until November 29, 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Bunker, Ellsworth, U.S. mediator in the Indonesian-Netherlands negotiations, March–August 1962

Burdett, William C, Jr., Deputy Director, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until September 1962; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Burke, Admiral Arleigh A., Chief of Naval Operations until August 1, 1961

Burris, Colonel Howard L., Assistant to Vice President Johnson

Butler, Richard A., British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs after October 20, 1963

Byroade, Henry A., Ambassador to Burma after September 10, 1963

Caccia, Sir Harold, British Ambassador to the United States until September 28, 1961

Chayes, Abram J., Legal Adviser of the Department of State after February 6, 1961

Chiang Kai-shek, Generalissimo, President of the Republic of China

Chou En-lai, Foreign Minister of the People’s Republic of China

Cleveland, Robert G., Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until May 1962; thereafter Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, until September 1962

Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister

Cowen, Myron M., Ambassador to the Philippines, March 2, 1949-November 14, 1951

Cross, Charles T., Officer in Charge of Laos Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, September 3, 1961-August 4, 1963

Czyzak, John J., Assistant Legal Adviser for the Far East, Department of State

Dato Ong Yoke Lim, Malayan Ambassador to the United States (after September 16, 1963, Malayasian Ambassador)

Dawee, Chullasapya, Air Chief Marshal, Deputy Secretary General of the Thai Military Staff; Chief of the Royal Thai Air Force

Dap Chhuon (General Chhuon Mochulpich), former Commander of Royal Cambodian Forces in Siem Reap and Kompong Thorn Province; killed in February 1959

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

Decker, General George H., Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, until September 1962

Dexter, John B., Officer in Charge of Burmese Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after April 1962

Diem, see Ngo Dinh Diem

Dillon, Douglas, Secretary of the Treasury

Djuanda Kartawidjaja, Indonesian First Vice Prime Minister until March 1962; thereafter First Minister until his death in November 1963

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States after March 1962

Drumright, Everett F., Ambassador to the Republic of China until March 8, 1962

Dulles, Allen W., Director of Central Intelligence until November 29, 1961

Dungan, Ralph, Special Assistant to the President

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States until January 20, 1961

Emmons, Arthur B., III, Deputy Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until September 1962

Everton, John S., Ambassador to Burma, May 4, 1961-May 21, 1963

Feldman, Myer, President’s Deputy Special Counsel

Felt, Admiral Harry D., Commander in Chief, Pacific

FitzGerald, Desmond, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Forrestal, Michael V., member of the National Security Council Staff from January 1962

Fowler, James R., Acting Regional Director, Office of Far Eastern Operations, International Cooperation Administration, until November 1961; thereafter Deputy Assistant Administrator for Far East, Agency for International Development

Garcia, Carlos P., President of the Philippines until December 1961

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense after January 24, 1961

Greenhill, Denis A., Minister of the British Embassy in the United States

Halla, Phillip J., member of the National Security Council Staff

Hamilton, Fowler, Administrator of the Agency for International Development, September 30, 1961-December 7, 1962

Hannah, Norman B., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after October 1962

Hare, Raymond A., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, January 21-March 5, 1961

Harkins, General Paul D., Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, after February 8, 1962; also Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Thailand, after May 1962

Harriman, W. Averell, Ambassador at Large, February 13-November 29, 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, November 29, 1961-April 4, 1963; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Heinz, Rear Admiral Luther C., Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Helms, Richard, Deputy to the Deputy Director, Plans, Central Intelligence Agency until February 2, 1962; thereafter Deputy Director for Plan

Hickerson, John D., Ambassador to the Philippines until December 8, 1961

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, February 19, 1961-April 25, 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Ho Chi Minh, President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and Chairman and General Secretary of the Lao Dong Party

Holt, Harold E., Australian Minister of Finance and Treasurer

Home, Earl of (Alexander Frederick Douglas-Home), British Foreign Minister until October 20, 1963; thereafter Prime Minister as Sir Alec Douglas-Home

Humphrey, Donald D., head of the U.S. Economic Team to Indonesia, August-September 1961

Huydecoper, Jan L.R., Counselor of the Netherlands Embassy in the United States until August 1962

Ingraham, Edward C, Jr., Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, February 1961-September 1962; thereafter Officer in Charge of Indonesian Affairs

Jani (Yani), General, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, Indonesian Army; Chief of Staff of the Army, 1963

Janow, Seymour J., Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development

Jantzen, Robert, First Secretary and Political Officer of the Embassy in Thailand

Jarvis, Francis G., Officer in Charge, Economic Affairs, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Johnson, Major General Briard P., Chief, Joint U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, Thailand

Johnson, Lyndon B., Vice President of the United States until November 22, 1963; thereafter President

Johnson, Robert H., member, National Security Council Staff until February 1962; member of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State, after August 1963

Johnson, U. Alexis, Ambassador to Thailand until April 10, 1961; thereafter Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Jones, Howard D., Office of East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Jones, Howard P., Ambassador to Indonesia

Kaysen, Carl, member, National Security Council Staff until December 4, 1961; thereafter President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States until his assassination on November 22, 1963

Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney General of the United States

Kohler, Foy D., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 1962

Komer, Robert W., member, National Security Council Staff after January 1961

Koren, Henry L.T., Director, Offfice of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after December 26, 1961

Landon, Kenneth P., member, National Security Council Staff

Lansdale, Major General Edward G., Secretary of Defense’s Deputy Assistant for Special Operations until May 1961; thereafter Special Assistant for Special Operations

Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore Prime Minister

Leimena, Johannes, Indonesian Deputy Chief Minister and Minister of Distribution until March 1962; Deputy First Minister for Distribution until November 1963; thereafter Second Vice Prime Minister

LeMay, General Curtis, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, after June 30, 1961

Lemnitzer, General Lyman L., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until September 31, 1962

Lindquist, Robert S., Officer in Charge of Indonesian Affairs, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until September 1962

Linehan, John A., Jr., Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, January 1961-February 1962

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Ambassador to Vietnam after August 1, 1963

Lon Nol, General, Chief of Staff, Cambodian Armed Forces, and Minister of Defense

Luns, Joseph, Netherlands Foreign Minister

Lutkins, LaRue R., Deputy Director, Office of Chinese Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until September 1961

Macapagal, Diosado, Vice President of the Philippines until December 1961; thereafter President

Macmillan, Harold, British Prime Minister until October 20, 1963

Malik, Adnan, Indonesian Ambassador to the Soviet Union and Indonesian representative at the Netherlands-Indonesian talks at Middleburg, Virginia

Martadinata, Rear Admiral E., Commander of the Indonesian Navy

Martin, Edward M., Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until May 17, 1962

Martin, Edward W., Director, Office of Chinese Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until September 1961

Masters, Edward D., Officer in Charge of Thai Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, February 1962-August 1963

McBride, Robert H., Director, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until June 1961

McConaughy, Walter P., Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, April-December 1961

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence from November 29, 1961

McFarland, James H., Officer in Charge of Philippine Affairs, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until June 1962

McGhee, George, Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State, February 13-November 29, 1961; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until April 25, 1963; thereafter Ambassador to Germany

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense from January 21, 1961

Mein, John G., Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in the Philippines until January 1963

Menzies, Sir Robert G., Australian Prime Minister; Australian Minister for External Affairs until December 22, 1961

Murrow, Edward R., Director of the United States Information Agency

Mutuc, Amelito, Philippines Ambassador to the United States from October 1962

Nasution, General Abdul Haris, Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Army (Chief of Staff of the Indonesian Armed Forces from 1963); Minister for Defense and National Security until March 1962; thereafter Deputy First Minister and Coordinator for Defense

Ne Win, General, Chief of Staff of the Burma Defense Forces; head of the Revolutionary Council after March 1962

Nehru, Jawaharlal, Indian Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs

Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam until November 1, 1963

Ngo Dinh Nhu, brother and political adviser to President Ngo Dinh Diem until November 1, 1963

Nhiek Tioulong, Cambodian Foreign Minister, January 1961-October 1962

Nhu, see Ngo Dinh Nhu

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, January 29, 1961-November 29, 1963

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., Ambassador to Vietnam, May 10, 1961-August 15, 1963

Nong Kimny, Cambodian Ambassador to the United States

Nu, U, Burmese Prime Minister until March 1962

Ohn, U, Adviser to Burmese Prime Minister U Nu

Ormsby Gore, Sir David, British Ambassador to the United States after October 26, 1961

Owens, Henry, member, National Security Council Staff

Palmer, Stephen, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

Parsons, J. Graham, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until March 30, 1961

Pelaez, Emmanuel, Philippines Vice President from December 1961

Penn Nouth, Cambodian Prime Minister, January 1961-October 1962

Peters, Richard B., Regional Coordinator for Far East, Office of Coordination for Mutual Security Affairs, Department of State, until October 1961; SEATO Affairs Officer, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, until May 1962; political-military affairs officer, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, until July 1963

Peterson, Avery E, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs until February 1963

Pickering, Laurence G., Officer in Charge of Thai Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after August 1963

Phoumi Nosavan, General, Minister of Defense in Lao National Government (as recognized by the United States) until June 23, 1962, thereafter Vice Premier and Minister of Finance in the Lao coalition government

Pote Sarasin, see Sarasin, Pote

Puhan, Alfred, Counselor and Consul General in the Embassy in Thailand after April 1962

Pye, Lucian, professor of political science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

de Quay, Jan Edward, Netherlands Prime Minister until July 23, 1963

Read, Benjamin H., Department of State Executive Secretary after August 4, 1963

Rice, Edward E., member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until January 1, 1962; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Romulo, Carlos P., Philippine Ambassador to the United States

Rostow, Walt W., President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs until December 14, 1961; thereafter Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council

Salans, Carl F., Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Saleh, Chaerul, Indonesian Senior Minister for Reconstruction and Development until March 1962; Minister for Basic Industry and Mining until November 1963; thereafter Deputy First Minister for Development

Sambath, Huot, Cambodian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1963

Sarasin, Pote, Secretary General of SEATO until December 1963

Sarit Thanarat (Srisdi Dhanarajata), Thai Prime Minister until December 8, 1963

Serrano, Felixbert, Philippines Foreign Secretary until December 1961

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., President’s Special Assistant

Schiff, Emile L.C., Minister of the Netherlands Embassy in the United States

Schnee, Alexander, Deputy Chief of Mission and Counselor and Consul General at the Embassy in Thailand after June 1961; Charge, May-September 1963

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Head of State of Cambodia; President of the Council of Ministers from January 1961

Sisco, Joseph J., Director, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

Sison, Ferdinando E.V., Philippines Secretary of Finance from January 1962

Smith, Bromley, Acting National Security Council Executive Secretary until August 1961; thereafter Executive Secretary

Snow, William P., Ambassador to Burma until May 4, 1961

Son Ngoc Thanh, Head of Khmer Serei (Free Khmers)

Son Sann, Governor of the National Bank of Cambodia

Souvanna Phouma, leader of the neutralist faction in Laos; Lao Prime Minister, Minister of Defense, Veterans and Social Action after June 23, 1963

Sprouse, Philip D., Ambassador to Cambodia after June 28, 1962

Steeves, John M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until January 7, 1962

Stevenson, Adlai E., Permanent Representative to the United Nations from January 21, 1961

Stevenson, William E., Ambassador to the Philippines from December 15, 1961

Stone, Galen L., Officer in Charge of Swiss-Belgian-Luxembourg-Netherlands Affairs, Office of Western European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State, until October 1962; thereafter Deputy Director, Office of Western European Affairs

Subandrio, Indonesian Second Deputy First Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Economic Affairs until March 1962; Deputy First Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Economic Affairs until November 1963; thereafter First Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Economic Affairs

Sukarno, President of Indonesia

Sullivan, William H., United Nations Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until April 28, 1963; thereafter Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Taylor, General Maxwell D., President’s Military Representative, July 1, 1961-October 1, 1962; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Tengku, see Abdul Rahman, Tunku

Thanat Khoman, Thai Minister of Foreign Affairs

Thanon Kittikachorn, Thai Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister until December 1963; thereafter Prime Minister and Defense Minister

Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Trimble, William C., Ambassador to Cambodia until June 8, 1962

Tunku, see Abdul Rahman, Tunku

Tyler, William R., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until August 20, 1962; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

U Nu, see Nu, U

U Thant, see Thant, U

Unger, Leonard, Counselor of the Embassy in Thailand until July 3, 1962; thereafter Ambassador to Laos

Usher, Richard E., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Van Roijen, J.H., Netherlands Ambassador to the United States

Visutr Arthayukti, Thai Ambassador to the United States until December 1963

Vu Van Mau, Vietnamese Foreign Minister until August 22, 1963

Wallner, Woodruff, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Wallop, Lieutenant General Rochanawisut (Rojanavisudh), Director, Joint Intelligence, Royal Thai Army

Wood, Chalmers B., Officer in Charge of Vietnam Affairs, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until August 1963

Wyatt, Wilson, President’s personal emissary to Indonesia for oil negotiations, May-June 1963

Yost, Charles W., Deputy Representative to the United Nations after February 1961

Young, Kenneth T., Ambassador to Thailand, March 29, 1961-August 19, 1963

Zain, Zairin, Indonesian Ambassador to the United States

Southeast Asia RegionSoutheast Asia Region

1. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Steeves) to Secretary of State-Designate Rusk’s Liaison (McGhee)

Washington, January 18, 1961.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Laos Files: Lot 65 D 169, 320.1 SEATO, Jan.–Feb. 1961. Secret.

2. Brief Prepared in the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, March 28, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Asia 000.1. Secret. Attached to a transmittal memorandum from Major General Robert A. Breitweiser, Director for Intelligence, the Joint Staff, to Secretary of Defense McNamara, which indicates that the U.S. Intelligence Board approved NIE 50–61 on March 28. A note on the memorandum indicates that Lieutenant General John A. Dabney, Deputy Assistant Secretary of ISA, saw it. The full text of NIE 50–61 is in Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 50–61.

3. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 28, 1961, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–2861. Secret; Niact. Rusk was attending the Seventh Meeting of the SEATO Council in Bangkok March 27–29.

4. Editorial Note

5. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)

Washington, June 24, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/6–2461. Confidential. Initialed by Johnson.

6. Editorial Note

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 22, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/8–2261. Top Secret. Repeated to Canberra, Paris, Wellington, Karachi, Manila, London, New Delhi, Rangoon, Saigon, Vientiane, Geneva, CINCPAC, and CINCPACPOLAD.

8. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, September 11, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, SEATO, General, 1961. Secret. Initialed by Rostow.

9. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, September 18, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–1861. Secret.

10. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, September 19, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–1961. Secret.

11. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 26, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–2661. Secret. Initialed by Rusk. For additional documentation, see Documents 433 and 435.

12. Letter From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on Africa, Asia, and Latin America (Bowles) to the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson)

Washington, October 7, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/10–761. Secret.

13. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Thailand (Young) to the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)

Bangkok, October 27, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia, General, 10/11/61–12/31/61. Secret.

14. Paper Prepared in the Policy Planning Council

Washington, November 3, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia, 11/3/61. Secret. An attached transmittal memorandum from George C. McGhee, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, to Secretary Rusk proposed this paper for discussion at the Policy Planning meeting scheduled for November 16. The meeting was held from 12:04 to 1 p.m., but no substantive record has been found. (Johnson Library, Rusk’s Appointment Book) The memorandum and the paper were sent to all the principal officers of the Department as well as Fowler Hamilton, Administrator of AID, and Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA.

15. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, NSC, T–624–71. Secret. Taylor sent this memorandum under a covering memorandum that informed the President that it summarized the current Thai attitude toward SEATO and suggested that the President might wish to look it over before his meeting with Harriman. Kennedy met with Harriman, Taylor, and McGeorge Bundy from 4:15 to 6:20 p.m. The meeting was described as “Off the Record,” and no substantive account of it has been found. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

16. Editorial Note

17. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 10, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/2–1062. Secret. Initialed by Johnson. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw the memorandum.

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, February 12, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1262. Secret; Limit Distribution.

19. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Chron File, 1/62–6/62. Secret. Prepared by Hilsman.

20. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, February 16, 1962, 9:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1662. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Peters; cleared by Rusk, Harriman, Bell, Czyzak, Koren, and James P. Grant, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Also sent to Canberra, Karachi, London, Paris, Wellington, and Manila and repeated niact to Djakarta and CINCPAC for POLAD.

21. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, February 20, 1962, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Canberra, London, Manila, Karachi, Paris, Wellington, CINCPACPOLAD, and priority to Rome.

22. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 21, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Asia 350.09–676, 1962. Secret. Sent to Secretary McNamara under a covering memorandum by Captain Paul L. Stahl, Acting Assistant Director for Processing, DIA, who explained the brief was being sent to McNamara for his information in advance of the regular distribution of the SNIE.

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 6, 1962, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–662. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

24. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, March 10, 1962, 9:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–1062. Secret. Drafted by Peters, cleared by Rice and Koren, and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to CINCPACPOLAD.

25. Memorandum From the Regional Planning Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Usher) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)

Washington, March 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, SEATO. Secret.

26. Department of State Policy Directive

Washington, April 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, Policy Directives. Secret. Drafted by Peters.

27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, April 5, 1962, 10:34 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–3062. Secret. Drafted by Peters and cleared in draft by Czyzak, Salans, Howard Elting, Regional Planning Adviser of EUR, James N. Cortada, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, U. Alexis Johnson, Koren, Rice, and Arthur B. Emmons, Deputy Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs. Also sent to Manila, Paris, and Karachi and repeated to London, Canberra, Wellington, and CINCPACPOLAD.

28. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Staff Memorandum, Bowles, 4/5/62–6/62. Secret.

29. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary General Pote Sarasin

Washington, May 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/4–1862. Personal. Drafted by Johnson with assistance from Peters.

30. Editorial Note

31. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 15, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Laos, General, 5/26/62–5/31/62. Top Secret. Hilsman sent this memorandum to Bundy under cover of an undated memorandum, on which he wrote the following note: “Mac: This says that the U.K. & France would oppose Seato participation in the Thailand Exercise; but might be dragged protesting into an extension of it over the border.” Deputy Director of INR Thomas Hughes sent a copy of this memorandum to Rusk on May 15 explaining that the President had requested it and suggesting that the Secretary might find it of immediate use. (Memorandum from Hughes to Rusk; Department of State, Central Files, 379/4–1562)

32. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President Johnson

Washington, June 5, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice President’s Security File, Memoranda to Vice President from Burris. Secret.

33. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to President Kennedy

Washington, June 13, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries Series, Laos Security, 6/10/62–7/31/62. Secret.

34. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)

Washington, June 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/6–1662. Confidential. Drafted on June 15 by Dexter and cleared by Cleveland and Cottrell, in substance by Koren, and in draft by Harriman and U. Alexis Johnson. Executive Secretary Brubeck sent the draft of this letter to Rusk with the explanation that Johnson, who prepared it under Harriman’s direction, “feels we should move promptly to meet the expressed interest of these Agencies in an ‘umbrella’ Task Force for Southeast Asia. The new group would in no way interfere with our present handling of Vietnam and Laos.” Identical letters were sent to McNamara; McCone; Fowler Hamilton, Administrator of AID; and Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA.

35. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 25, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–2562. Confidential. Drafted by Krause on September 27 and approved by Harriman on October 4.

36. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 28, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/9–2862. Secret. Drafted by Masters and cleared in the White House on October 15. The meeting lasted until 4:42 p.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) A short briefing paper for this meeting prepared by Forrestal and emphasizing U.S.-Thai relations is printed as Document 466. The Department of State sent a more extensive briefing paper to the White House. (Memorandum from Brubeck to O’Donnell, September 27; Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–2762)

37. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

New York, September 30, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–3062. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Manila, Karachi, Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPACPOLAD.

38. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 14, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 8–5. Confidential. Drafted by Salans. The meeting was held at the New Senate Office Building.

39. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Embassies

Washington, March 28, 1963, 1:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Secret. Drafted by Krause and Peters; cleared in draft with Bell and with Hannah, John N. Gatch, Officer in Charge of Pakistan–Afghanistan Affairs, and Rice; and approved by Rusk. Sent to all seven SEATO posts and CINCPAC for POLAD.

40. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Embassies

Washington, April 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 FR (PA). Secret. Drafted by Peters, cleared by Young, and approved by Hilsman. Sent to the seven SEATO posts and Rangoon, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Kuala Lumpur, Djakarta, Hong Kong, Tokyo, CINCPACPOLAD, New Delhi, and Ankara.

1. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Steeves) to Secretary of State-Designate Rusk’s Liaison (McGhee) 1. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Steeves) to Secretary of State-Designate Rusk’s Liaison (McGhee)Source

Washington, January 18, 1961.

SUBJECT

SEATO

In short SEATO is facing a test which if not met in a way considered satisfactory to its most concerned beneficiaries could mean its collapse.

SEATO was formed to serve as an instrument of collective security in situations similar to that which now exists in Southeast Asia. It provides for response to identifiable aggression as well as that which is tantamount to external aggression.

For nearly a year we have been engaged in a near futile exercise of trying to get some of the diffident members, chiefly UK, France and New Zealand, to face up to the possibility of the situation we now face in Laos. They have been unwilling to do so and have attempted to adopt language in the planning concept which would always give them the out by claiming that a condition tantamount to aggression was not taking place. During this process Australia was a stalwart supporter of our view as, of course, were Thailand, the Philippines and Pakistan. New Zealand under Nash was adamant; the French almost as extreme; the British more diplomatic but took approximately the same position. There was almost extreme resistance in these same quarters to the acceptance of Thailand in the appointed-nation position, as well as opposition to the setting up of a standby military command.

During the period of these discussions Thailand has become more and more disillusioned and annoyed at the French and British position. Although she holds France to be the worst offender, even to the extent of believing that she has cooperated with the insurgents, her attitude is only slightly less negative so far as the UK is concerned. With this build-up and the developing of this attitude during the planning conversations, the attitude of Thailand can well be imagined under present circumstances when Laos is actually under communist aggression, including the Soviet airlift. Some of the major members of SEATO refuse to act on the basis that what is happening in Laos is primarily internal fratricidal conflict and does not qualify for action under any type of aggression. The French have gone so far as to say that SEATO is only an organization for the exchange of views in the Lao situation and is not competent to act as a collective security instrument. The recent meetings of the Council Representatives in Bangkok have been very sterile, unproductive and discouraging.

The estimate on the above brief analysis may be severe, but nonetheless realistic. If SEATO fails to act in any helpful capacity in situations such as it now faces in its treaty area, we may well be faced within the next few months either with its dissolution or at least with the threat to withdraw by Thailand.

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Laos Files: Lot 65 D 169, 320.1 SEATO, Jan.–Feb. 1961. Secret.

2. Brief Prepared in the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff 2. Brief Prepared in the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of StaffSource

Washington, March 28, 1961.

NIE 50–61: OUTLOOK IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASIA

This National Intelligence Estimate was approved by the United States Intelligence Board on 28 March 1961. Salient points and significant judgments in the NIE are submitted in brief in the following paragraphs for your advance information.

Serious political crises arising out of foreign intervention, domestic strains and other factors will occur in most Southeast Asian countries in the next year or two. By far the most serious problems are the deteriorating situation in Laos and the mounting Communist threat and precarious governmental situation in South Vietnam.

There is deep awareness among the countries of Southeast Asia that developments in the Laotian crisis, and its outcome, have a profound impact on their future. The governments of the area tend to regard the Laotian crisis as a symbolic test of intentions, wills and strengths between the major powers of the West and the Communist Bloc.

Those countries in close alignment with the US favor stronger measures to assure at least a non-Communist and preferably an anti-Communist, Western-oriented regime in Laos. Burma and Cambodia, as well as Malaya, favor some form of international political agreement to end the crisis, and would be alarmed if Laos were lost to the Communists under conditions which indicated to them that the US position in the area had gravely weakened. They would prefer a neutralist but not a Communist-dominated government. The loss of Laos to the Communists, or even the division of the country, would almost certainly incline the Thai toward accommodation to Communist power in Southeast Asia. A Communist-controlled Laos would vitally threaten South Vietnam’s independence: it would greatly extend the Communist frontiers with South Vietnam; it would bring substantially greater Communist military power to bear on the crucial Saigon defense complex; and it would greatly facilitate Communist infiltration and subversion. In short, the loss of Laos would severely damage the US position and its influence in Thailand and South Vietnam.

The future course of the countries in Southeast Asia would be strongly influenced by the actual circumstance in which the loss or division of Laos had occurred and on local appraisal of attitudes and actions of the US in response to the situation. The extent these countries would go in resisting Bloc pressures and local threats would depend on whether they still believed the US could stem further Communist expansion in the area. They would be keenly tempted to take a neutral position even though they recognized the US is the only country with sufficient power to oppose the Communist Bloc in the area. Although they would be deeply disillusioned regarding US resolution, they would nonetheless welcome demonstrations of US firmness and might in response thereto, modify their appraisal of their own future in due course.

In South Vietnam, the situation of the Diem government seems likely to become increasingly difficult because of rising Communist guerrilla strength and of widening dissatisfaction with Diem’s government. Diem has reasserted his control of the government, made some cautious moves toward government reform, and proceeded with plans for the presidential election to be held in April. He has taken action to improve the anti-guerrilla capabilities of the army and has stepped up military action against the Viet Cong. Nonetheless, the factors which gave rise to the recent coup attempt still exist, and the odds favor another coup attempt by non-Communist elements in the next year or so. The Communists would attempt to exploit any new efforts to unseat the government, and there is some question as to the army’s ability to keep the situation from getting out of hand.

Although the Communist threat to South Vietnam has reached serious proportions, the chances of a Communist takeover in the next year or so are less than they are in Laos. Nevertheless, Peiping and Hanoi attach greater importance to their efforts in South Vietnam than they do to their efforts in Laos. Diem’s policy of close alignment with the US is on trial in the current crisis. If South Vietnam were to fall to the Communists or be forced to swing toward neutralism, the impact upon the other countries of Southeast Asia would be similar in kind but considerably more severe than that resulting from the loss or division of Laos.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Asia 000.1. Secret. Attached to a transmittal memorandum from Major General Robert A. Breitweiser, Director for Intelligence, the Joint Staff, to Secretary of Defense McNamara, which indicates that the U.S. Intelligence Board approved NIE 50–61 on March 28. A note on the memorandum indicates that Lieutenant General John A. Dabney, Deputy Assistant Secretary of ISA, saw it. The full text of NIE 50–61 is in Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 50–61.

3. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 3. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, March 28, 1961, midnight.

Secto 26. Eyes only for President and Acting Secretary from Secretary. Previous tel contains text SEATO Council resolution agreed by all Ministers today.1 This resolution was considered at great length in restricted session and represents widespread satisfaction among Ministers both as to SEATO unity and as to relation of resolution to situation in Laos and to possible negotiations.

First five paras reflect general feeling Ministers that peaceful nature of SEATO arrangement should be emphasized and that broad political objectives should be stated. For the private record Serrano will express some misgivings about the possibility of achieving desired results through chain of negotiations set in motion by British proposals to Soviets.2

Last three paras indicate firm attitude SEATO powers and reassurance to govts and peoples of SEATO members located in the area who consider themselves threatened by Laotian situation.

Despite liveliness of discussion and initial divergences of view, there is gratification among members that unanimity was achieved on a broadly satisfactory resolution dealing with a highly complex problem inevitably viewed differently by members of divergent circumstance and national interest.

You will notice that the word “neutral” does not appear in resolution but see language of third para and the word “unaligned” in fifth para.3 Sharp objections to use of word neutral arose from all Asian members who are highly sensitive to any suggestion that neutrality is a desirable goal and who are anxious about neutrals in this area who appear to be leaning strongly to the left. Home4 and I considered carefully whether public commitments of US and UK policy with respect to “neutral and independent” Laos could be compromised by failure to use specific word but both believe present language adequate to satisfy any Soviet questions on that point. It should be added that Asian members do not object to concept of neutrality for Laos but fear serious public opinion problems of their own if they themselves subscribe to this term. They understand that we shall continue to state our objectives as neutral and independent Laos.

In sixth para,5 we had considerable difficulty with Couve de Murville, who showed some initial nervousness about the policy and then retreated to the difficulty of translating “are prepared” accurately into French. He finally agreed to retention English text but French text will probably read “auraient a prendre”.

The phrase “within the terms of the treaty” in same para was intended to provide for an appeal by Laos under Article 4(3) of the Treaty.6

Info here about seriousness of situation in Vietnam caused us to wish to include at least the warning note contained in seventh para.7

Brief summary attitudes Ministers: Lord Home. Initially suggested much weaker resolution but promptly joined in and worked effectively for present draft. Menzies8 was sturdy throughout and was most helpful in regard peaceful purposes SEATO Alliance and in strong emphasis on collective action; he was particularly anxious to insure that US would not “go it alone” in Laos. Holyoake9 was helpful but offered no major suggestions. Qadir10 was entirely cooperative and constructive and obviously had good influence on his Asian colleagues. Serrano was somewhat bitter about lack of full consultation prior to British proposals, was insistent on strong SEATO position, and deeply distrustful of possibility of a sell-out in negotiations. Thanat showed firmness but wisdom and good judgment and was obviously pleased that Council under his chairmanship could achieve a broadly satisfactory result. Couve de Murville started apathetically, was obviously struggling against views of his govt as well as immediate advisers here but joined ranks in good spirit to maintain SEATO solidarity. I would not send message of appreciation to de Gaulle since his Foreign Minister just might have some explaining to do.

As I study your and other messages from Washington, I am confident present resolution is not only satisfactory but more than we might have expected a few days ago. Since it has been necessary for us to work for solidarity here, it would not be easy for us now to propose minor changes, even though resolution could be obviously textually improved at certain points.

Resolution will be introduced formally by me at ten a.m. Wednesday Bangkok time, and will be released here either separately or as part of final communiqué as Council may decide tomorrow.

Have much appreciated prompt service in getting crucial info to me during these discussions. I do believe this Council meeting has been most productive in achieving understanding of common purposes and in resolving variety of suspicions which were present when we convened.

Suggest Dept circulate text resolution to other posts with discreet digest my comments.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–2861. Secret; Niact. Rusk was attending the Seventh Meeting of the SEATO Council in Bangkok March 27–29.

1 Secto 25 from Bangkok, March 28. (Ibid., 379/3–2861) The text of the SEATO Council Resolution is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 940–941.

2 A British aide-mémoire to the Soviet Union, March 23, proposed an immediate cease-fire in Laos, verification by the International Control Commission, and an international conference on that verification. Text is ibid., pp. 994–995.

3 The third paragraph reads: “The Council desires a united, independent and sovereign Laos, free to achieve advancement in a way of its own choosing and not subordinate to any nation or group of nations.” The fifth paragraph reads: “The Council notes with approval the present efforts for a cessation of hostilities and for peaceful negotiations to achieve an unaligned and independent Laos.”

4 Alexander Frederick Douglas Home, Earl of Home and British Foreign Minister until October 20, 1963.

5 The sixth paragraphs reads: “If those efforts fail, however, and there continues to be an active military attempt to obtain control of Laos, members of SEATO are prepared, within terms of the treaty, to take whatever action may be appropriate in the circumstances.”

6 The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, signed at Manila on September 8, 1954, established the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. Article 4 (3) of the treaty, often referred to as the Manila Pact, reads: “It is understood that no action on the territory of any State designated by unanimous agreement under paragraph 1 of this Article or on any territory so designated shall be taken except at the invitation or with the consent of the government concerned.” The full text of the treaty is in American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents, vol. I, pp. 912–916.

7 The seventh paragraph reads: “The Council also noted with concern the efforts of an armed minority, again supported from outside in violation of the Geneva accords, to destroy the Government of South Viet-Nam, and declared its firm resolve not to acquiesce in any such takeover of that country.”

8 Robert G. Menzies, Australian Foreign Minister until December 22, 1961.

9 Sir Keith Holyoake, New Zealand Foreign Minister.

10 Manzur Qadir, Pakistani Foreign Minister until June 13, 1962.

4. Editorial Note 4. Editorial Note

On May 5, 1961, President Kennedy announced that Vice President Johnson would visit Vietnam, the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, India, and Pakistan May 9–24. See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pages 354–362. Johnson was in Honolulu on May 9, Saigon on May 11, Manila on May 13, Taipei on May 15, Hong Kong on May 15, Bangkok on May 16, New Delhi on May 18, and Karachi on May 20. Briefing materials for the trip are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 1875–1883; ibid., Central File 033.1100–JO; and Johnson Library, Vice President’s Security File, Vice President’s Travel, Visit to Southeast Asia.

On May 23, Vice President Johnson submitted to President Kennedy a report on his trip to Asia in the form of a memorandum, described as Johnson’s “personal conclusions.” The following portion relates to Southeast Asia in general:

“I took to Southeast Asia some basic convictions about the problems faced there. I have come away from the mission there—and to India and Pakistan—with many of those convictions sharpened and deepened by what I saw and learned. I have also reached certain other conclusions which I believe may be of value as guidance for those responsible in formulating policies.

“These conclusions are as follows: “1. The battle against Communism must be joined in Southeast Asia with strength and determination to achieve success there—or the United States, inevitably, must surrender the Pacific and take up our defenses in our own shores. Asian Communism is comprised and contained by the maintenance of free nations on the sub-continent. Without this inhibitory influence, the island outposts—Philippines, Japan, Taiwan—have no security and the vast Pacific becomes a Red Sea.

“2. The struggle is far from lost in Southeast Asia and it is by no means inevitable that it must be lost. In each country it is possible to build a sound structure capable of withstanding and turning the Communist surge. The will to resist—while now the target of subversive attack—is there. The key to what is done by Asians in defense of Southeast Asian freedom is confidence in the United States.

“3. There is no alternative to United States leadership in Southeast Asia. Leadership in individual countries—or the regional leadership and cooperation so appealing to Asians—rests on the knowledge and faith in United States power, will and understanding.

“4. SEATO is not now and probably never will be the answer because of British and French unwillingness to support decisive action. Asian distrust of the British and French is outspoken. Success at Geneva would prolong SEATO’s role. Failure at Geneva would terminate SEATO’s meaningfulness. In the latter event, we must be ready with a new approach to collective security in the area.

“We should consider an alliance of all the free nations of the Pacific and Asia who are willing to join forces in defense of their freedom. Such an organization should: “a) have a clear-cut command authority

“b) also devote attention to measures and programs of social justice, housing, land reform, etc.

“5. Asian leaders—at this time—do not want American troops involved in Southeast Asia other than on training missions. American combat troop involvement is not only not required, it is not desirable. Possibly Americans fail to appreciate fully the subtlety that recently-colonial peoples would not look with favor upon governments which invited or accepted the return this soon of Western troops. To the extent that fear of ground troop involvement dominates our political responses to Asia in Congress or elsewhere, it seems most desirable to me to allay those paralysing fears in confidence, on the strength of the individual statements made by leaders consulted on this trip. This does not minimize or disregard the probability that open attack would bring calls for U.S. combat troops. But the present probability of open attack seems scant, and we might gain much needed flexibility in our policies if the spectre of combat troop commitment could be lessened domestically.

“6. Any help—economic as well as military—we give less developed nations to secure and maintain their freedom must be a part of a mutual effort. These nations cannot be saved by United States help alone. To the extent the Southeast Asian nations are prepared to take the necessary measures to make our aid effective, we can be—and must be—unstinting in our assistance. It would be useful to enunciate more clearly than we have—for the guidance of these young and unsophisticated nations—what we expect or require of them.

“7. In large measure, the greatest danger Southeast Asia offers to nations like the United States is not the momentary threat of Communism itself, rather that danger stems from hunger, ignorance, poverty and disease. We must—whatever strategies we evolve—keep these enemies the point of our attack, and make imaginative use of our scientific and technological capability in such enterprises.

“8. Vietnam and Thailand are the immediate—and most important—trouble spots, critical to the U.S. These areas require the attention of our very best talents—under the very closest Washington direction—on matters economic, military and political.

“The basic decision in Southeast Asia is here. We must decide whether to help these countries to the best of our ability or throw in the towel in the area and pull back our defenses to San Francisco and a ‘Fortress America’ concept. More important, we would say to the world in this case that we don’t live up to the treaties and don’t stand by our friends. This is not my concept. I recommend that we move forward promptly with a major effort to help these countries defend themselves. I consider the key here is to get our best MAAG people to control, plan, direct and exact results from our military aid program. In Vietnam and Thailand, we must move forward together.” (Memorandum from Johnson to Kennedy, May 23; Johnson Library, Vice President’s Security File, Nations and Regions, Southeast Asia)

The memorandum is printed in full in United States–Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, Book 11, pages 159–166.

5. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) 5. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)Source

Washington, June 24, 1961.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asian Regional Planning and Coordination

I refer to your request for information on the foregoing subject.

First, I repeat what I often told visitors in Bangkok—“Southeast Asia” is much more a geographic expression than a political reality. The area is fragmented with a wide diversity of culture, language and religion, further intensified by its division among the powers during the colonial period, and with competitive rather than complementary economies. The individual countries of the area face toward various European powers and the United States much more than toward each other. Our long efforts, most notably SEATO, to find a common denominator to meet the common threat which they face have thus far met with indifferent results. Nevertheless, this does not mean that we have or should stop trying.

In the conviction that any real unity must come from within the area, we have long quietly encouraged incipient movements toward some unity, especially those initiatives that have been taken by Malaya, Thailand and the Philippines. That these efforts are bearing some small fruit is shown by the fact that there was held during this past week in Bangkok a preliminary meeting among the Thais, Malays and Filipinos further to discuss an “Association of Southeast Asian States (ASAS)” which at this stage is directed toward a small measure of cultural and economic cooperation.

Also, as a matter of long-standing policy, we have devoted much energy and effort toward reducing frictions and resolving problems between countries in the area. This has been particularly true in the case of relations between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam and Cambodia and Thailand, where our embassies have long acted as channels of effective communication and often in the role of mediator. Previously it has been the practice for the Ambassadors in Vientiane, Saigon, Phnom Penh, and Bangkok informally to meet about once each six months to discuss regional problems and, where appropriate, make recommendations to the Department. I am suggesting to FE that this practice be continued insofar as practicable.

Apart from such meetings, there is much in the way of informal contact between those four Ambassadors as well as, to a somewhat lesser extent, with Rangoon and Kuala Lumpur, and traditionally there is a wide exchange of communications between those posts.

Another example of the regional approach to problems was the largely successful evacuation of the Chinese Nationalist irregulars from Burma, Laos and Thailand in which all three embassies heavily participated in addition to the embassy in Taipei.

In the field of economic and technical assistance, there is also a well-established policy of cooperation looking toward further regional integration. For example, Thailand is much used for the training of Lao teachers, technicians and military personnel. There is considerable interchange between the Thai and Malayan police. Some efforts have been made to use Thai facilities for the training of Cambodian and VietNamese technicians, but this is much inhibited by language as well as political problems. The road presently being constructed in Thailand from Bangkok to Nongkai (opposite Vientiane) is designed not only to serve Thailand but also to serve Laos. The same was true of the railway extension from Udorn to Nongkai. A telecommunications project serving South Viet-Nam, Laos and Thailand both internally and between each other is now under construction (Cambodia, although invited, refused to participate). You are also well aware of the ECAFE Mekong River project, which the United States inspired and led from the background and to which we are making a major contribution. ICA is financing the engineering and DLF has committed itself to a loan for the construction of a highway in southern Thailand that will not only serve Thai domestic needs but also provide a road connection between Thailand and Malaya. We have also supported the encouraging efforts that ECAFE has been making to stimulate national authorities so to plan and carry out their road construction programs as to provide road connections not only within Southeast Asia but also with South Asia. As an example, because of the stimulation of ECAFE, Thailand and Burma now have under construction a bridge which will connect their two road systems. The establishment in Bangkok of the SEATO Graduate School of Engineering, to which the United States is a heavy contributor and which is open to students from all countries of the area is another example of what has been done.

However, I agree that much more probably can and should be done to encourage regionalism, especially by keeping regional considerations in mind when planning individual country economic programs and in this way building up the physical and psychological base for regional consciousness. While I know that FE has this in mind, I will again stress its importance to FE and the AID organization.

On the organizational side, the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, as well as the FE Bureau, are of course established for and have the responsibility of always keeping in mind regional considerations in day-to-day operations as well as in major political matters. This of course is one of my responsibilities as well.

With respect to specific policy studies and recommendations on this subject, the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs has prepared a paper on Asian regionalism1 which has been discussed with S/P and, in accordance with a discussion at the Secretary’s Staff Meeting, Assistant Secretaries McConaughy and Talbot have been directed to meet with S/P to pursue the matter more deeply and in closer coordination between the two Bureaus.

It is my own impression, with which S/P concurs, that we are not yet at the point at which we have a truly regional task of policy formation which is in sufficiently sharp focus to submit to the special procedures of an inter-Departmental task force. However, I and George McGhee, together with the Bureaus, will continue to give attention to the matter and will recommend such a task force at such time as it would appear to be most useful.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/6–2461. Confidential. Initialed by Johnson.

1 Text of a paper entitled “Regionalism in the Far East” was distributed on July 19, 1962. (Ibid., 379/7–1962) A paper entitled “An ‘Independent Nations Zone’ in Southeast Asia,” August 16, 1961, was sent to Bundy at the White House on August 28. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia: General, 8/29/61–8/31/61)

6. Editorial Note 6. Editorial Note

The Kennedy administration’s examination of policy in Vietnam led to an overall consideration of the related situation in Southeast Asia. Much of the documentation on this policy formulation is printed in Volume I. On July 18, 1961, General Maxwell Taylor, Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson, and Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs Walt Rostow discussed the “interconnection between various elements in Southeast Asia,” and Johnson agreed to design a “general set of guidelines for policy in Southeast Asia.” (Ibid., pages 231–233) On July 26, Taylor reported to President Kennedy that he was becoming aware of the need for a “rational analysis” of military forces not just for South Vietnam, but for Laos and Thailand and the need for a “strategic plan for the entire Southeast Asia area.” (Ibid., pages 243–244) Taylor and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs John M. Steeves prepared papers for the President prior to his meeting with his principal advisers on Southeast Asia. (Ibid., pages 248–251)

The meeting was held on July 28 at the White House. The participants discussed the situation at length and raised the possibility of a new alternative military strategy of holding southern Laos with joint U.S.-South Vietnamese-Thai-Royal Lao Government forces. No decisions were taken at the meeting, but the President expressed reluctance to go into Laos at the time. He favored pressing forward with negotiations at Geneva and suggested that someone close to him should go to Vietnam to look at the Southeast Asia situation. (Ibid., pages 252–256) On July 29, Rostow and Taylor suggested to the President the terms of reference for a military mission to Vietnam, Thailand, and Laos. They stated, however, that until the administration was further along in its planning, it would be premature to send such a mission to Southeast Asia. (Ibid., pages 256–257)

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 7. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, August 22, 1961, 9 p.m.

274. Geneva for FECON. SEATO. Reference: Deptel 181;1 CA–49,2 and Embtel 275.3 This message contains my general assessment of SEATO’s status as requested of me by Dept. I submit it in advance of hearing FonMin Thanat’s detailed views since at last meeting he avoided my cues to discuss subject and in any event I believe major trends of Thai current thinking already revealed by Thanat (my 172)4 and Pote Sarasin (my 237).5 Specific recommendations for reviving SEATO are being submitted separately in my 275.

1. But for Berlin and Lao crisis during coming months, I would recommend either fundamental reorganization of SEATO or substitute replacement. Since inception, in which I participated, SEATO has been unnatural hybrid organization. Its internal inconsistencies and basic antagonism, particularly between French and Asian members, have finally erupted over Laos. Even if organization and treaty obligations applied only to member countries, there still would be great doubt in my mind whether this organization is best feasible security arrangement for this area of world. I question value of its mil plans on paper and believe it has become engaged in a wide variety of peripheral and marginal activities not all of demonstrated value. It has been downgraded by inaction and contempt to point of sterility and futility. In Thai view it also presents obstacle to growth of more organic regional association, such as now seen in embryo as ASA.

2. However, with Soviets threatening hostilities in Europe and with strong possibility of their resumption in Laos, in view of impasse at Geneva and mil buildup in South China, North Viet-Nam and Laos, this is no time to throw SEATO away or talk it to death. Despite SEATO’s many and obvious short-comings, I can see no immediate alternative which would not entail unacceptable risk of future serious decline in US prestige and increased weakening of Southeast Asia. Besides, changing or disturbing SEATO might have serious repercussions on our whole collective security structure, particularly in the vital Western Alliance, which we certainly cannot afford at this time. Rather we should grasp what assets SEATO has—mainly legal framework of US commitment to def of SEA and relatively cooperative attitudes of Asian and Pacific members—to brace ourselves for upcoming threats.

3. Therefore I concur in Dept’s gen pol stated in CA–49 and Deptel 181 that we are not proposing, for time being at least, to undertake major change in SEATO or drop it in favor some alternative. However, I fear we cannot leave it at that. Mere statements of US support for SEATO are not enough, at least in Bangkok.

4. Present state of affairs is reflected accurately and without exaggeration in Pote Sarasin’s remarks reported my 237. I have been struck by lifeless immobile meetings of Council Reps. Disillusionment and apathy in SEATO have become self-generating and threaten to lead to organization’s disintegration unless strong and positive action is taken to stop the decline. We cannot expect any other country to take this action. Australia’s current efforts alone (to strengthen SEATO in countersubversion field) cannot be expected to have noticeable effect. In Asian eyes US prestige is closely associated with SEATO. Whereas much of blame for its present plight might ostensibly be heaped on British and French reluctance to risk major engagements in SEA, SEATO is viewed as reflection of US, its successes as direct result of US effort, its failures as result US indecision or weakness. It possibly of interest to note that as of moment our efforts on bilateral plane to strengthen Thailand have not as yet had major impact in terms revived confidence in US. I fear that as long as we neglect actual and inferred US commitments in SEATO, value of these bilateral efforts will be diluted.

5. If SEATO to remain “effective instrument of US and free world policy,” even for time being, and if we to get full value from other US efforts, it is essential that US promptly take initiative. Current state of SEATO understandably makes us reluctant to commit US more deeply and it possibly already too late to pump real life and nerve into organization. However I believe we must try. We cannot continue to drift in manner of past months since Bangkok Council meeting. We cannot afford delay for months in making decisions on such matters as pol consultation, countersubversion, agricultural research, etc. But even more than doing our routine work promptly, we must take vigorous and imaginative initiative to salvage and if possible enhance value of few assets SEATO offers. I believe next six months of crucial importance and thus US should act promptly for short-term as well as long-term gains.

6. Attempt to put some nerve into SEATO must deal with at least four major related issues: new action program, French schism, defensibility Southeast Asian rim, and Laos.

7. Inherent basic weakness in Alliance is French membership. Without recounting intense Thai distrust and dislike for French participation, which other Asian members also reflect, I feel we must deal with this issue to make SEATO viable. Question is whether French would tactfully disengage from SEATO as some French officials seem to be getting at.

Otherwise we must have explicit understanding French will not veto operations even if they cannot join them. Some such arrangement would help restore some Thai confidence in depending on SEATO alliance for Thailand’s security.

8. Inherent basic deficiency in SEATO is its inability cover defensibility all Southeast Asian rim from NE India to free Viet-Nam. There are many cracks along that mountain belt which we cannot now plan for internationally. We must find comprehensive new social def system to hold back Chinese, as we discussed at New Delhi with Under Secy and Asst Secy Talbot. SEATO is only part of this overall problem, and may under present arrangements even be a handicap to coordinated planning and cooperative action in series of vulnerable border areas from NE India corner to Vietnamese high plateau. As SecGen Desai said to me in New Delhi, “Chinese chauvinism” is what endangers Asia and must be held back by one means or another. I believe new def system must include new strategy for linking rural development in depth, as well as mil forces across this belt. We are all groping for some suitable system out here in each Southeast Asian country, e.g. by new program for Thailand. What we need now is overall concepts, [garble] and tactics for combining these piecemeal efforts into integrated strategy for long-term defensibility Southeast Asia against inevitable Chinese push to Indonesia and Australia

9. I opt now for prompt invigoration of SEATO not merely for sake of salvaging alliance to which US prestige deeply committed, although this reason enough under present conditions. More immediate and tangible purpose would be planning for mil def perimeter against Chinese extending from Viet-Nam westward through Lao panhandle and Mekong Valley to Burmese border and, for time being, indirectly through Burma and NE India to east Pakistan. Burmese and Indian sectors would be covered bilaterally by SEATO members such as UK, Australia and US. Believe clear delineation of and commitment to such line would serve bolster free world bargaining position in pol fencing with Chinese over Laos. Moreover, it would constitute basis we now lack for recourse if necessary to retention of southern and NW Laos along lines Pote Sarasin’s proposition reported my 254, and for recourse joint actions in critical India-Burma and Burma-Laos-Thai areas when necessary.

10. I continue to believe that retention of our control over at least these areas of Laos is rightfully viewed as vital by Viet-Nam and Thailand. Thais derive no comfort from assurances of US or SEATO support for def of Thailand without mention of Laos. They are strongly affected and frightened by traumatic experience, should their long and vulnerable NE frontier become front line against historic Chinese enemy in East-West conflict. Without insurance of some Lao buffer area, Thailand is tending lose faith in free world security arrangements and may take out some insurance with Communist bloc. Stemming this tendency quickly before it goes beyond point of no return and protection of Viet-Nam are in my opinion strongest specific reasons for immediate US action to revive SEATO. Laos is crucial now for SEATO. If Communists take country, SEATO will wither out.

11. Recommendations in fol Embtel 275 are addressed directly to immediate new action program for salvaging SEATO within next six months.

12. Would appreciate reaction from Dept and other addressees to foregoing assessment and recommendations which follow.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/8–2261. Top Secret. Repeated to Canberra, Paris, Wellington, Karachi, Manila, London, New Delhi, Rangoon, Saigon, Vientiane, Geneva, CINCPAC, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 181, August 10, the Department requested the Embassy’s views on the future of SEATO, authorized Young to exchange ideas with Thai Foreign Minister Thanat, and expressed its own serious concern about SEATO’s future. (Ibid., 379/8–561)

2 In this circular telegram, July 20, the Department requested the recipients to try to counteract among officials of their host countries the “widespread expression disillusionment with SEATO which has led in some cases to disparagement of the organization as an effective instrument.” The Department provided lines of arguments to demonstrate that SEATO, despite its reverses in Laos and inherent shortcomings, was both effective and necessary. (Ibid., 379/7–2061)

3 In telegram 275, August 22, the Embassy suggested immediate steps to revive and strengthen SEATO. Included in the recommendations were the selection of a U.S. official to serve on the Countersubversion Experts Committee, a visit by a Presidential emissary to the SEATO Council in September, reorganization and review of military planning and political consultation, and establishment of a command structure. (Ibid., 379/8–2261)

4 In telegram 172, August 5, Young reported that Thanat stated that the Thai Government planned to make a fundamental decision about SEATO in the next 2 or 3 months, examining a range of possibilities including “scrapping” SEATO, changing its present set-up, leaving it as is, or some combination of these alternatives. (Ibid., 379/8–561)

5 In telegram 237, August 16, Young reported that SEATO Secretary General Pote Sarasin told him that only a U.S. initiative could “salvage” SEATO, which had reached “rock bottom and could fall no further.” Unless something was done quickly, Pote Sarasin thought SEATO would “crumble.” (Ibid., 379/8–1661)

8. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 8. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, September 11, 1961.

SUBJECT

SEATO

Attached are the following papers relating to SEATO received during the last couple of weeks:

a. Bangkok telegram No. 2371 reporting the views of Pote Sarasin, SEATO Secretary General, on the moribund state of SEATO.

b. Bangkok telegrams 274 and 2752 containing Ambassador Young’s assessment of the present status of SEATO and his recommendations for action to strengthen it.

c. Messages from CINCPAC, London and Paris commenting negatively in varying degrees upon Ambassador Young’s views.3

d. A further Bangkok telegram4 proposing the strengthening of bilateral U.S.-Thai relations rather than the strengthening of SEATO.

e. Bangkok telegram No. 329 reporting the most recent views of Thanat on the subject of SEATO.5

f. A planning paper on SEATO prepared by Ed Rice of S/P and discussed at the planning luncheon on August 29.6

This memorandum will comment briefly on the above papers.

Ken Young’s telegram of August 227 proposes a rather grand concept for SEATO involving the development of plans to protect the entire Southeast Asian rim from Northeast India to South Viet Nam. However, his concrete suggestions in telegram No. 275 are most limited in scope. The major proposals in this telegram include: (a) the designation of a top-flight U.S. representative to serve on the experts committee on counter subversion recently established by SEATO (I have the telegrams bearing on this action if you have not seen them and are interested); (b) visit by a Presidential emissary to a meeting of SEATO Council representatives in September; (c) preparation for prompt action on a Thai/SEATO community development project; (d) acceleration of SEATO military planning, including reorganization of the SEATO military planning office, designation of U.S. military units in Thailand and joint development of new weapons and techniques; (f) eventually, establishment of a SEATO force in being in Thailand; and (g) various political measures.

This telegram from Young was received in the midst of work on a Southeast Asia Task Force report. No reply has, as yet, been sent. (Action is going forward on the weapons development center which Young proposed in an earlier telegram.)8 On September 2 Ambassador Young sent a very different kind of telegram suggesting that the urgent need is to “bilateralize” our relations with Thailand. To this end he has suggested the negotiation of a bilateral defense pact, stationing of U.S. troops in Thailand or rotational training of U.S. forces in Thailand and public earmarking of U.S. forces in Okinawa. Sentiment in the FE Bureau of State favors initiation of action to negotiate a bilateral defense agreement with Thailand. State is also prepared to explore the possibility of rotational training of U.S. troops in Thailand. CINCPAC favors such a proposal. We would, of course, have to ascertain whether, as Thanat’s recent comments suggest, Thailand’s opposition to the introduction of U.S. troops has now dissolved.

The series of Young telegrams on this subject demonstrates that it is very difficult for an ambassador concerned with the urgent problems of his own country to approach the problems of a multilateral institution like SEATO in a way which is divorced from those immediate country concerns. Ed Rice’s paper seems to me a good attempt to look at the problem in a more rounded way. It suggests two alternatives: (a) turning SEATO attention toward the counter-subversion problem, or (b) finding a wholly indigenous substitute for SEATO which would, however, be supported by various U.S. and international actions and undertakings.

Since the current disillusionment with SEATO arises from its failure to act in the Laos crisis, it is quite possible that the initiation of SEATO military action in Laos would prolong the life of the organization considerably. In view of all of the potentialities for difficulty in such action, however, it is also possible that the existing differences of view within SEATO would be exacerbated by such military action and that its breakup would be hastened.

In the absence of SEATO military action in Laos and in the absence of a thorough review of our objectives in SEATO, we are likely to attempt to continue to hold the organization together with chewing gum and baling wire until it comes completely apart. SEATO is very vulnerable to disintegration because of the fact that it has only one member on the Southeast Asia mainland. If the government in Thailand should change—or the policies of the existing government should change, as it shows some signs of doing—SEATO could be done in overnight. It is impossible to conceive of a meaningful organization with the Philippines and Pakistan as its sole non-white Asian members. In this sense Ken Young is right in thinking of changes in bilateral U.S. policies toward Thailand as being interchangeable with changes in SEATO. I think that we ought to give serious thought now to the possibility of an all-Asian organization of the sort Ed Rice suggests before SEATO disintegrates.

SEATO was conceived as a conventional alliance designed to protect the members against external aggression. But we now realize that the principal problem is one of subversion and guerrilla warfare rather than overt aggression. If we continue to view SEATO as a conventional alliance with a primary mission of resisting external attack—and there is some limited value in preserving it for that purpose—the questions of the British and French “veto” may be of some importance and perhaps, as Young and Thanat have suggested, we might attempt to revise SEATO arrangements, either through change in the treaty or otherwise, to eliminate this veto. The real question is not, of course, one of the formal treaty provisions or voting arrangements; it is the question of whether we are prepared to take military action in Southeast Asia in the face of unwillingness by the British and/or the French to support such military actions.

If we view SEATO as having potentially important countersubversion functions, other problems emerge. The fact that Thailand was the only SEATO member on the Southeast Asian mainland was partially remedied under the Treaty by the concept of the “Protocol Area” which brought non-members under the umbrella of SEATO protection. However, when the task becomes one of dealing with subversion, the fact that Thailand is the only SEA mainland member poses serious difficulties for, as we know, to deal with subversion and guerrilla warfare requires the cooperation of other states such as Cambodia, Malaya, South Viet Nam and Burma well in advance of any immediate threat to them. The limited membership of the organization inhibits joint planning on this problem. The fact that Thailand is a SEATO member makes cooperation between it and the neutrals very difficult. The membership of the Philippines and Pakistan contributes little or nothing to the solution of the SEA mainland problems.

Moreover, countersubversive programs often turn out to be variations on military and economic aid and OISP programs in which we are already involved. To give SEATO responsibilities for countersubversive activities will inevitably be viewed by the members primarily as a device for obtaining increased U.S. aid. Since the U.S. can generally deal with aid problems most effectively within the context of its total relations with each country and its over-all programs in the country, we have been, and are likely to continue to be, very reluctant to make available any large amount of aid for specifically SEATO programs. In the absence of such aid, the countersubversive exercise may, in the long run, be viewed as rather futile by the other members.

The possibility that a new, wholly Asian, organization may be established can be viewed from either one of two perspectives: (a) as a rather likely development and one that, in any event, is to be preferred to no regional security organization; or (b) as a positively desirable development offering a better answer than SEATO to the problems that these countries face.

Such an organization would permit the U.S. to preserve flexibility in its aid programs and, if successful, would provide a framework within which meaningful assistance for countersubversive, counterguerrilla purposes could be provided. The most obvious advantage of such an organization would be its comprehensiveness. But the most serious doubt about it also arises from this comprehensiveness. That is the doubt as to whether such a grouping would possess enough community of purpose among its members to permit effective cooperation. Our bilateral arrangements with the SEATO countries are the present source of much of the strength that SEATO possesses. The strength and resources of any new organization are also going to have to come from outside in some large measure—and that means basically from the United States. At the present time in history Indian and Japanese support (par. 18) will be viewed, at best, as a mixed blessing by the Asian states and may, in fact, be rejected by them. The idea, for example, that India has a leading role to play in this part of the world, though increasingly popular in the West, has yet to be accepted in the area. This is not to say that an effort should not be made to associate India with such a project.

The question of the political vulnerability of a neutral bloc in Southeast Asia needs careful consideration. In the short run it is simply the question of whether Thailand will be less vulnerable outside the SEATO alliance than within it. The Thai leadership is clearly beginning to think that it might be less vulnerable out of SEATO.

The weaknesses of an all-Asian grouping must be weighed against the weaknesses of SEATO. If SEATO had more potential than it now appears to have, I would be somewhat reluctant to abandon it. But because it seems such a weak reed I think we need to give serious consideration to an all-Asian alternative of the kind proposed by Rice. Moreover, if real pressure begins to develop from the Thai leadership for such an organization, it will be important that we not be dragged along by the heels but that we exercise sufficient leadership so that the organization will be shaped in a way that is compatible with our interests. One of the most difficult problems that we shall have to solve if we go this way will be how to extend, as Rice proposes (par. 18(a)), unilateral guarantees to the countries which are presently within the protocol area of the SEATO treaty.

What is the next step? I would like to see the Southeast Asia Task Force consider the Rice paper. I think it would be most difficult, however, to get serious consideration until we are sure that SEATO is not going to be the instrument of military intervention in Laos. I don’t see quite how you can trade SEATO off for a Laos settlement as Rice suggests. I would, therefore, favor a look at this proposal at the point when we have at least an interim resolution of the Laos problem. You will note that Ambassador Young suggested to Thanat (No. 329 of September 1) that he discuss this subject when he meets with the President this month. I don’t see how we can have a view of the matter at that time. I would think that our posture then would be to encourage Thailand to think concretely about the problems involved in an all-Asian grouping, but not to initiate any action until the Laos situation clarifies.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, SEATO, General, 1961. Secret. Initialed by Rostow.

1 See footnote 5, Document 7.

2 See Document 7 and footnote 3 thereto.

3 Not further identified.

4 Telegram 333 from Bangkok, September 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–261)

5 In telegram 329, September 1, Young reported that Thanat considered SEATO “useless and inoperative,” feared for Thailand’s security if Laos fell to the Communists, but stated that Thailand did not want to throw SEATO away without making one more effort to reorganize the structure. (Ibid., 379/9–161)

6 Rice’s planning paper and the discussion of it have not been found.

7 Telegram 274, Document 7.

8 Not further identified.

9. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 9. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source

Washington, September 18, 1961.

SUBJECT

Memorandum to the President on SEATO

Attached is a copy of the memorandum which Mr. Steeves took for the Secretary’s signature last night.

John called this morning. The Secretary has reservations about the action but thinks that the memorandum is an excellent presentation of the problem. He wants to postpone decision on it until he has seen Foreign Minister Thanat at 12:30 today.1 (The Secretary’s appointments on Far East matters are shown on the attached sheet.)2 His strongest reaction, according to John, was that Senator Fulbright will not be amenable. John reports that laughingly the Secretary appended to that observation the comment that the difficulty is that the move is insincere since the basic question of U.S. military action itself has not been decided.

RBP

Attachment3

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman is expected in Washington for discussion of substantive issues affecting Thailand within the next two weeks. He will meet with you and with me. To cope with his assertions that SEATO is not effective as presently constituted and needs to be changed, I believe it may be desirable to explore with him a change in the organization’s voting formula.

In substitution for the present rule of unanimity, under which any member of SEATO can prevent action by the organization, we might propose an arrangement similar to that applying under the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Pact).4 Major decisions would then be taken by vote of a majority of the members, but no member would be required to use its armed forces without its consent. Whether to favor a majority vote (5 of the 8 members) or a three-fourths vote (6 of the 8 members) is a matter for further discussion.

The Government of Thailand is concerned that France and the United Kingdom may prevent SEATO military action which other members of the organization would be ready to undertake, and wants assurance that this will not occur. This sentiment underlies Thailand’s desire for a bilateral defense treaty with the United States. Foreign Minister Thanat has already warned that his government is prepared to request that one of two changes in SEATO be made not later than the next Council meeting of foreign ministers in April 1962. These are: (1) withdrawal of “those countries unwilling to defend Southeast Asia”, or (2) a change in the rule of unanimity.

Although there are indications of some exaggeration by the Foreign Minister, our assessment is that Thailand is genuinely concerned, in the light of developments in Laos, that if the need arises, SEATO would be paralyzed by French and British unwillingness to take military action in defense of Thailand. This concern will be heightened if the Harriman–Souvanna Phouma talks result in a decision by the United States to accept Souvanna Phouma as Prime Minister of Laos—a move about which Thailand has expressed grave reservations and which it has consistently opposed. Although our immediate problem is with Thailand, Pakistan and the Philippines have also openly criticized British and French restraints in SEATO. Even the Australians have informed us privately of their concern with British policy in the organization.

If Thanat should feel that we are unwilling to consider any change in SEATO, he will probably take his case against the British and French to the press, and increase his pressure upon us for a bilateral defense treaty. Failing satisfaction in these moves, I foresee that Thailand will withdraw from SEATO in favor of a neutralist policy. Strong pressures toward this are already being exerted by the USSR through its Ambassador in Bangkok. If Thailand withdraws, we will be confronted with the dissolution of SEATO, which could only be interpreted as a major defeat for the United States at a critical juncture in history, and the possible negotiation of some new treaty arrangement in the Pacific area.

On balance, therefore, I conclude that the change in the voting formula is the least troublesome of the prospective developments before us. It would lessen Thai pressure for a bilateral treaty by otherwise providing Thailand the security assurances it seeks in a form to which it could refer publicly as it cannot do with our highly classified unilateral assurances. It would allow the British and the French a means to avoid involvement of their forces in Southeast Asia without preventing action by other members of SEATO in the name of the organization. Finally, Senate action would not be required since the voting procedure is governed by Terms of Reference adapted by the Council of Foreign Ministers and is not stipulated in the treaty itself.

I must emphasize, however, that if British and French restraint were thus eliminated, the burden of responsibility for decision in respect of military action will fall almost entirely upon the United States. We know, at the same time, that we have the staunch support of Australia.

We distinguish between the SEATO policies of France and the United Kingdom. Although the United Kingdom SEATO policy is undoubtedly one of restraint, we believe that it would ultimately commit its forces if the United States were going to do so in any event—at least under conditions consonant with our bilateral discussions. DeGaulle, however, has made it clear to you that France has no intention of committing any French forces in Southeast Asia no matter what the circumstances. In any event, it seems unreasonable that either should insist upon the right to oppose military action by SEATO which others are prepared to take if they should decide not to commit forces and are free from obligation to do so.

Before discussing this solution with Foreign Minister Thanat, we believe it proper to consult with the Australians, the British, and the French. Because the rule of unanimity was discussed at some length in the Senate hearings when the treaty was adopted, we also believe it essential to inform the foreign affairs committees of the Congress in advance of our discussions with the Thai Foreign Minister.

In summary, we propose to acquiesce in a Thai initiative to change the rule of unanimity proposing instead that decisions be taken by majority vote with no member obligated to use its armed forces without its consent. If this is agreed, in preparation for Foreign Minister Thanat’s visit here within the next week or two, we will proceed immediately to talk with the Australians, the British, the French, and the foreign affairs committees of the Congress.

Dean Rusk5

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–1861. Secret.

1 Rusk’s discussion with Thanat concerned Chinese representation at the United Nations and Laos. (Memoranda of conversation, September 18, 12:30 p.m.; ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

2 Attached but not printed.

3 Secret. Drafted by Peters on September 17.

4 The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, signed September 2, 1947; for text, see American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 789–795.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

10. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 10. Memorandum From the SEATO Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Peters) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source

Washington, September 19, 1961.

SUBJECT

Memorandum to the President on SEATO

John Steeves telephoned this morning to say that the Secretary has decided against signing the memorandum to the President on SEATO,1 on the ground that it would be unacceptable to the British and the French and would, in any event, be turned down on the Hill. When John asked what we do instead if Thanat presses the point, the Secretary seemed to have no specific idea for the immediate future. Accordingly, John thought that we could only repeat our previous reassurances, reaffirm our support of SEATO and otherwise listen to what Thanat has to say. John is having dinner with Thanat tonight (Tuesday) at the latter’s request and believes he will then ascertain what he has in mind.

John reports that in discussing the subject the Secretary again expressed interest in finding a way to dismantle the organization in lieu of a regional grouping by the nations of the area. He suggested that we might offer as an inducement to dissolve SEATO after they had formed a regional association. He seemed to be thinking in terms of a grouping for economic purposes, their security being assured by bilaterals from us and perhaps some overall guarantee under which we would play a secondary role. (This, of course, is the independent nations zone idea. John told the Secretary that we have explored this ground, know its advantages and pitfalls, and that thus far we have felt that any move to dissolve SEATO at this juncture would constitute an unacceptable defeat for U.S. policy.)

John said that Sihanouk independently had discussed his proposal along these lines when they met him yesterday.2 He described the conditions under which he would be an active promoter of regionalism which he said was incapable of realization so long as SEATO exists.

RBP

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–1961. Secret.

1 Attachment to Document 9.

2 No other record of the Sihanouk–Steeves conversation has been found. Sihanouk was in the United States to attend the U.N. General Assembly session.

11. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 11. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 26, 1961.

SUBJECT

Talk with Thai Foreign Minister

Following are the principal points made by Thanat in a long private conversation I had with him Saturday1 night: 1. Thailand is determined to make the attempt to “do something” about SEATO. Government and public dissatisfaction is increasing. Their first preference would be for withdrawal of France and, secondly, that of the U.K. However, they realize that this is probably not practical politics. Their next preference would be for a change in voting procedures so as to permit decisions by majority or three-fourths vote.

2. If neither of the foregoing can be accomplished by the time of the next SEATO Council meeting, Thailand will, in all probability, announce its withdrawal from SEATO.

3. If changes necessary to make SEATO an effective organization cannot be accomplished and Thailand thus withdraws, it hopes very much to enter into a bilateral defense pact with the United States. The possibility of withdrawal from SEATO should not be interpreted as forecasting an attempt on the part of Thailand to recast its policy towards neutralism. It wants stronger rather than weaker defense arrangements.

4. SEATO does inhibit the strengthening of Thai regional relationships, not so much because it is SEATO but because of, first, French, and secondly, U.K. membership in SEATO, arising from those two countries’ previous colonial associations in the area. A bilateral defense pact with the United States would not inhibit the growth of Thailand’s regional associations.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/9–2661. Secret. Initialed by Rusk. For additional documentation, see Documents 433 and 435.

1 September 23.

12. Letter From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on Africa, Asia, and Latin America (Bowles) to the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson) 12. Letter From the President’s Special Representative and Adviser on Africa, Asia, and Latin America (Bowles) to the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson)Source

Washington, October 7, 1961.

Dear Adlai: I would like to have you see the memorandum which I wrote to the Secretary on Southeast Asia.1 In my opinion, the situation in Vietnam is deteriorating very rapidly, and with a wobbly political structure, I do not see how we can readily stiffen it.

As Vietnam becomes weaker, the tendency will grow in Thailand for a quick switch to neutralism, and we will suffer a severe setback in an area where we have already made mistakes which have resulted in our present overcommitment.

It seems to me that whatever hope we may have for coming out of this dilemma intact would be to work not only for an “independent and neutral Laos” but also for an “independent and neutral Southeast Asia”, guaranteed not only by the Soviet Union and the United States and other directly interested parties but also by the United Nations.

We could then go on to propose the development of the Mekong River Valley with the participation not only of the United States and the USSR but also Japan and India which would provide a unifying force for the entire area, as well as broadening the basis for our commitment to the independence of the area.

I do not suggest that this is easy. Indeed, it may be impossible but at the moment it seems we are headed full blast up a dead end street.

The general response to my proposal, as might be assumed, was a negative one, although George Ball and Averell were in agreement with me. In any event, I did want you to know the effort I have made and perhaps we can talk about it when I return from Latin America on the 21st of October.

With my warmest regards,

Sincerely,

Chester Bowles2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/10–761. Secret.

1 Dated October 5, attached but not printed.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

13. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Thailand (Young) to the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) 13. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Thailand (Young) to the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Bangkok, October 27, 1961.

SUBJECT

Defensibility of Southeast Asia and United States Commitments

I believe denial of Southeast Asia to Viet Cong, Chinese or Russian control is indispensable for United States interest and purposes in the whole world. I believe we can construct a strategy to make Southeast Asia defensible not just in the short run but for a decade or more. I am convinced that the United States must undertake this responsibility in terms of putting U.S. combat elements “on location” in Southeast Asia as well as putting more funds, technical assistance, and diplomatic effort into this area.

Southeast Asia will not be an area of additive strength like Western Europe for many years. It will take our resources rather than add to them. In terms of power, Southeast Asia is a deficit area for us. But equally, or more than Western Europe, Southeast Asia is the critical bottleneck stopping Sino-Soviet territorial and ideological expansion—territorial in Asia, ideological in the whole world. Southeast Asia is somewhat like the hub of a wheel; lose the hub and the wheel collapses. And Laos, plus South Vietnam, is the cotter-pin holding the hub. If we let Laos-South Vietnam go, the Viet Cong and Chinese Communists will soon dominate all of Southeast Asia, including Indonesia. The United States will be forced off the mainland of Asia, Australia will be surrounded and actually flanked, while India and Japan will be permanently separated. All of this is what the Communists are trying to do in Asia. Their success there will intensify their impact in Africa and South America.

Thailand is now an unofficial and disguised base of operations for the United States in Southeast Asia. The Thai Government is allowing us to carry on an increasing number of operations in and out of Thailand which we could not conduct from any other piece of real estate in Asia. If we lose this base of operations we will have to retreat to the island chain and depend solely on sea and air power. I will not repeat the long list of activities we are carrying on here, some of them of a highly sensitive nature. I just wish to stress that Thailand is a growing asset of great value strategically for United States interests and purposes. We have no treaty, formal agreement or any kind of institutional arrangements sanctioning these activities and operations except indirectly under SEATO. The self-interest of the Thai Government, its desire to cooperate with the United States, the goodwill we have here in Thailand, and the friendliness of the Thai people towards Americans are our guarantees for continuation of this base. But the sine qua non is continued economic and military assistance.

Therefore, our long-run problem is to devise a strategy to assure the defensibility of Southeast Asia against Communist small-scale, rural aggression. I do not feel that we now have such a strategy or that the organization and plans of SEATO provide for this. May I suggest to you the following elements for the regional defensibility of Southeast Asia.

1. Increased regionalization of United States operation. As you can see from your trip, the American agencies out here in the various countries have very little to do with each other, with the exception of Bangkok and Vientiane. Ever-since I took over responsibility for Southeast Asia in 1954 I have been trying—so far unsuccessfully—to encourage much closer liaison where it could accomplish something practical. So I now repeat the following suggestions: a. Quarterly meetings of Chiefs of Mission and their principal officers in this area.

b. Separate meetings of MAAG Chiefs, USOM Directors, etc.

c. Establishment of a regional operations center as a clearing house to synthesize intelligence and information bearing on Country Programs. This would be a staff agency and not command, to give each Chief of Mission reports and suggestions provided from a regional viewpoint.

d. Establishment of an American Southeast Asian Unified Command under CINCPAC. What we need is a United States commander here in Thailand with small combat teams in upcountry Thailand, South Vietnam and Laos. This would be an outgrowth of MAAG operations, rotational training, and the command structure now being set up for the various SEATO plans.

e. A meeting of Southeast Asia Chiefs of State with the President out here. But for the difficulties of arranging such a meeting, I would put this first in importance on this list. If the President could schedule such a meeting during the next six months it would be the best single thing that could happen out here, assuming it were carefully prepared in advance. Calling for a Southeast Asia Summit Meeting on a casual basis will prevent it from happening.

f. Encouragement of Thai-Vietnamese collaboration. I wish the White House and the Department would help Ambassador Nolting and me try to get President Diem and Prime Minister Sarit together as well as help us bring the civilian and military officials of both countries to work together on specific projects, such as I have discussed with you.

2. A new strategy. Over and beyond the conventional military planning to counter overt aggression from China or North Vietnam we need a new strategy against “aggression by seepage”. Our activities and much of our planning are piecemeal in each little country. But the United States has to look at Southeast Asia as a region, from the northwest corner of Burma, across Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, to the south of South Vietnam.

3. I am very much given to a strategy that I call “honeycomb leapfrog belt”. It is social, economic and military. The essential elements are these: a. The establishment of village strong points and development centers linked together in the frontier areas of these five countries. In five years we could fill villages and empty spaces like a honeycomb with vital roads, sod strips, schools, home workshops, new farms, all on a small scale that would provide the social defense against Communist seepage. I am convinced that defense against Communist pressure must go on in the villages and in the minds of the village people and the rural administrators. We concentrate so much effort in the capital area we forget where the battle really is going on.

We have begun here in Thailand to develop this kind of strategy of social defense. We call it an “Agrimetro” plan. The Thai Government has heartily approved this concept and has designated some centers in northeast Thailand for such development. USOM is preparing a feasible study for this. I am attaching a picture of what the agrimetro strategy would be like.1

b. A leap-frog strategy would be arranged under our control in Laos, North Vietnam and possibly Communist China by covert or other means, even through attack. Thus we could leap-frog from Thailand, Laos, South Vietnam, or even Taiwan, on a hit-and-run basis or to establish small areas of operation in the mountains or remote spots. This would give initiative and dynamism to the honeycomb strategy, which is more or less static once in place. I have discussed with you a plan for South Vietnam and Laos. I think we should consider extending it to North Vietnam, and possibly mainland China. The frontier of Thailand and Laos and the dangerous one of Vietnam and Laos might be guarded better if we had bases of operations with American combat trainers for security and local ranger units to do the patrolling and attacking of Communist guerillas outside of these bases. In other words, the local rangers would leap-frog in any direction, depending on their mobility.

3. [sic] Finally, our basic aim should be to promote as much consensus in the Asian area as possible in order to create a common view for dealing with the menace of Communist China. Never in history have these countries dealt with China on an equal or equitable basis: they have always been treated as tributaries. Now we should seek to boost what unites the other Asians and to muffle what divides them. Their acknowledgement of a common interest and their acceptance of a common action backed by American power should be our strategy in Asia for heading off neutralism, Communism, or chaos.

I think a multilateral organization for economic and political purposes of the Asian nations would eventually be better than SEATO if we backed such an organization with our power and bilateral treaties with Thailand, etc.

4. The placing of small American combat training units in Thailand and Vietnam would reverse the trend of doubt, discouragement and despair in Southeast Asia. I know they would be welcome. I think we should beat the Communists at their own game by doing better in rural areas. We have opportunities in education, the technical fields, rural development, new military hardware and organization tailored for Southeast Asia, and our great production capacity which they cannot meet. China and North Vietnam are now weak, unpopular, hated and feared. We can seize the initiative and hold it if we adopt new tactics, techniques and equipment geared to Southeast Asia.

5. This is what the New Program in my memorandum to the Prime Minister of July 28 seeks to do.2

Kenneth T. Young, Jr.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia, General, 10/11/61–12/31/61. Secret.

1 Not printed.

2 See Document 414.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

14. Paper Prepared in the Policy Planning Council 14. Paper Prepared in the Policy Planning CouncilSource

Washington, November 3, 1961.

US POLICY IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

Problem

The problem is to assess over-all US policies in Southeast Asia to see if any better alternatives can be devised.

[Here follow almost 10 pages of discussion.]

Conclusion

In view of the limitations, difficulties of realization and grave risks for the future involved in a continuation of present US policies for Southeast Asia, it is recommended that, without decreasing present efforts, explorations be begun to determine whether or not better alternative policies cannot be found. There is no assurance that there are acceptable alternatives; however, the line of exploration embodied in the following recommendations is believed to offer the best possibilities. It is, therefore, recommended that they be explored as a matter of urgency.

Recommendations

1. Concurrent with efforts to maintain and where possible strengthen US capability of carrying out existing policies in Southeast Asia, exploration should be begun, as a matter of urgency, to determine whether or not there may be developed better alternative policies along the lines of the following recommendations.

2. Every effort should be made, in the meantime, to normalize and improve the relations between the free states of Southeast Asia, particularly those between Cambodia and her neighbors. Progressively as it becomes a feasible objective, every effort should be made to stimulate increased unity and cooperation among the states of the area through the Mekong River development projects, ECAFE, increased trade and other constructive mutual involvements.

3. The general concept embodied in the following recommendations should be discussed at an early date with the British, and with such other SEATO allies as seems desirable.

4. At an early date Mr. Nehru should be sounded out on his general views as to the situation in Southeast Asia, what alternatives he would recommend and what role, if any, India is willing to play. Similar soundings-out should be made, as practicable, with the governments of Japan and the free Southeast Asian states. Although we might point out in these soundings the dilemma posed by the present situation, we should not indicate any lessened determination to assist the free Southeast Asian states to maintain their independence. We should not at this stage tip our hand as to any impending change in U.S. policies.

5. If justified by preliminary soundings, discussions should be initiated, possibly by Thailand, among the free states of Southeast Asia, examining the possibility of creating there what might be termed a Southeast Asia Independent Nations Group. Members of such a group should, as a minimum, share the determination to preserve their independence and to undertake collective responsibilities to assist each other towards this end. As a minimum the group should include Burma, Thailand and Malaya; as a maximum there would be added Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam. The Group would come into being only when a real basis for it existed. Its inauguration would be attended by the withdrawal of Thailand from SEATO, and conversion of SEATO to another form as indicated in 8.

6. Pending the inauguration of a Southeast Asia Independent Nations Group, steps should be taken to stabilize SEATO, and no intimation should be given that SEATO is to be dissolved before something of comparable strength is created.

7. If justified by previous soundings-out, an approach should be made to other free Asian nations, particularly Japan and India, with a view toward obtaining their agreement to sponsor a Southeast Asia Independent Nations Group, and underwrite it at least morally.

8. The US should then enter into definitive discussions with the other SEATO members looking toward the conversion of SEATO, in accordance with a definite plan. This would involve change to another organization with another name, consisting entirely of states outside the area. These states would declare their willingness to assist the states of the area on request with military assistance and advisers, and, without any reciprocal obligations, would offer to assist them in case of aggression from the Communist states. The possibility exists that some of the existing SEATO states, i.e., France, would not undertake the new commitment and that others might be added.

9. If there is general agreement on this proposal and the other necessary pre-conditions have been met, an announcement would be made that the Southeast Asia Independent Nations Group would be created and that SEATO would be converted as of a given date.

10. The foregoing should be accomplished, at each stage, in accordance with a definite plan. No phase of the plan should be undertaken until positive evidence existed that it is likely to be successful. It is important that no impression be given at any point that there is any lessening of interest on the part of the United States or other SEATO members in assuring the continued independence of the free Southeast Asian states. Any change in the present SEATO arrangement, including any withdrawal of Thailand or conversion of SEATO to another form, must clearly be represented as part of a broad plan calculated to increase the security of the free Southeast Asian states.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia, 11/3/61. Secret. An attached transmittal memorandum from George C. McGhee, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, to Secretary Rusk proposed this paper for discussion at the Policy Planning meeting scheduled for November 16. The meeting was held from 12:04 to 1 p.m., but no substantive record has been found. (Johnson Library, Rusk’s Appointment Book) The memorandum and the paper were sent to all the principal officers of the Department as well as Fowler Hamilton, Administrator of AID, and Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA.

15. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 15. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, January 12, 1962.

THE THAI POSITION ON SEATO

Thailand has become the focal point for growing dissatisfaction with SEATO. The other Far East members share this concern in varying measure, but the proximity of Communist-backed insurgency in Laos and SVN gives the matter a more immediate flavor for the Thais. A prime source of anxiety has been the failure of SEATO to act strongly in Laos in early 1961, a fact that has been aggravated in the Thai view by the subsequent U.S. policy to establish a “neutral” Laos. The Thais and South Vietnamese are convinced the latter task is not practicable, particularly when based on a government led by Souvanna. The Thais have been subjected to Soviet political pressure in the past few months which has focussed in their minds the need for an unambiguous countervailing power which they see as SEATO or, bilaterally, the U.S. Underlying the entire complex of tendencies is the genuine fear of Communist China.

The Thai search for protection has concentrated naturally on the existing SEATO formula. In the Thai view, the main weakness of this organization is an imbalance of member interest when the Treaty area is threatened. If there is a less than clear overt threat, Thai concern with their territorial integrity is not matched by the member states (particularly France and UK) whose national interest is in large part influenced by events and power relationships outside SEA. The Thai approach to the problem has been twofold: first, to modify voting procedures so that Treaty action is not pre-empted by a minority and, second, to expand organizational activity so that member interdependence is based on more than pure power parameters of resisting external aggression. Both objectives of the Thais would have the effect of placing greater emphasis on the Pact’s responsibilities towards threats “other than by armed attack ... which might endanger the peace of the area.”

The Thai voting proposal calls for a three-fourths majority vote of members within a specified time limit on all issues except procedural questions which would be decided by a simple majority; absence of reply by any member government by the target date would be considered as an abstention. The target date would be adopted on the basis of a simple majority in the Council Representatives. The proposal eliminates the unanimity rule (established as a U.S.-sponsored procedure as a matter of record in the 1955 Council meeting; it is not part of the Manila Pact text) for which there is broad support. A key question is whether those who cast a negative vote or abstain would be required to go along with the majority decision. The U.S., U.K., France, Australia, and New Zealand would insist on non-participation in any action for which they did not vote. The Thais have stated informally their concurrence with this principle.

The opposition to the Thai proposal, caused by the elimination of the unanimity procedure, is centered in France, Australia, New Zealand, and the U.K. The latter strongly opposes any discussion of the SEATO Pact because of fear of adverse consequences on the Laos negotiations. A U.S. consideration is the desirability of maintaining the unanimity principle in collective security arrangements wherever possible (the Rio Pact is an exception; majority vote is used on stipulated issues). A divergence in SEATO might have repercussions in CENTO and NATO. Legally, favorable SEATO action on the Thai proposal would not affect our Treaty obligations. The Treaty would not require amendment nor would we need secure the advice and consent of the Senate.

If we decided to support the Thai view, Australia and New Zealand would probably follow. The British and the French probably would not and the alternatives in a showdown might be:

a. Dissolution of SEATO, or

b. Withdrawal of the French and British.

While the latter possibility might clear the air as to the exercise of military power, it would strip SEATO of a large part of its non-military support. The dissolution of SEATO would leave us without a security arrangement in Thailand except through the UN; it would require reconsideration of a bilateral pact which might cause adverse reactions in the Congress. Further, the U.S. strategic position built up in Thailand (bases, storage, airfields, communications) would be in jeopardy pending some other political arrangement.

For these reasons, it seems desirable to seek an alternative to the Thai proposal. Such an alternative has been presented by the Australians. In this procedure, an important issue would carry if, by an agreed target date, there had been six affirmative votes and no negative votes. Countries which had not registered an expression would be considered to have abstained (precedent in the UN establishes the premise that an abstention is not a veto). No country would be obliged to participate in an approved action unless it had voted affirmatively or subsequently associated itself with the action. Target dates would be agreed on the basis of a three-fourths majority (this exception to unanimity is justified on the grounds that this is a procedural matter). The target date is intended to assure that issues are not postponed by “lack of instructions.” Whenever members agree to the establishment of a target date for voting, the issue becomes “important.”

The French have indicated support for the Australian abstention proposal; New Zealand concurrence is likely. If the U.S. decided to back this solution, some sort of prior mutual understanding with France and the U.K. would be required before negotiating the issue within SEATO.

Ambassador Young has suggested the possibility of the Thais dropping their proposal in favor of the Australian idea if the U.S. makes its preference clear. The Thais have indicated they want a decision on their proposal by 12 March; they have threatened non-attendance at the 26 April Council meeting in Paris if their concern is not met, and have implied serious thought to some sort of future “neutralism.” To allay Thai misgivings about SEATO viability, the U.S. has emphasized its willingness to act singly under the provisions of the SEATO Pact to defend Thailand against armed attack; in the case of ambiguous aggression we have pointed to SVN as an example of our intent. It is paradoxical that our unilateral action in SVN, as well as the policy in Laos, is the source of much of the Thai apprehension that SEATO is useless. The Australians, New Zealanders, and Filipinos share their concern. If Thailand, as the seat of the organization, continues to attract Communist abuse, it is possible that an inactive SEATO will appear to be a liability rather than an asset.

Thus the immediate problem is to find a solution to satisfy the Thai insistence on improved voting procedures. The problem beyond is to decide on whether to support SEATO strongly, find some other alternative security arrangement, or withdraw from regional commitments in that area.

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, NSC, T–624–71. Secret. Taylor sent this memorandum under a covering memorandum that informed the President that it summarized the current Thai attitude toward SEATO and suggested that the President might wish to look it over before his meeting with Harriman. Kennedy met with Harriman, Taylor, and McGeorge Bundy from 4:15 to 6:20 p.m. The meeting was described as “Off the Record,” and no substantive account of it has been found. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

16. Editorial Note 16. Editorial Note

On January 27, 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff requested that Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara bring to the attention of President Kennedy a memorandum they had prepared for McNamara on January 13, JCSM–33–62, “The Strategic Importance of Mainland Southeast Asia,” with an appendix, “Military Appraisal of the Strategic Importance of Southeast Asia.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 SE Asia 62) The memorandum as sent to McNamara but without the appendix is printed in United States–Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, Book 12, pages 448–454. In it, the Joint Chiefs of Staff argued strongly for the strategic importance of Vietnam in relation to Southeast Asia and suggested that the loss of South Vietnam would have a widespread and disastrous effect on U.S. policy in the rest of Southeast Asia.

On January 27, McNamara sent the memorandum without the appendix to the President, explaining the Joint Chiefs’ wishes but noting that he was “not prepared to endorse the views of the Chiefs until we have had more experience with our present program in Vietnam.” McNamara also noted that the memorandum called for no action by the President for the time being, but was merely meant to alert him to a deteriorating situation. As retyped and sent to the President, this memorandum had two omissions from the version sent to McNamara on January 13: one eliminated a reference to the appendix and the other took out a sharp criticism of the Diem government’s use of U.S. support and its unwillingness to make reforms. (Memorandum from McNamara to Kennedy and attached memorandum, January 27; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia, General, 1/62–12/62)

17. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 17. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, February 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Attached Memorandum on SEATO Voting Procedures

The attached memorandum from FE is a good analysis of the present situation, technical and legal problems with respect to SEATO voting procedures. Insofar as Thailand is concerned, cutting through all the verbiage, I am confident that the following are the actual facts: 1. Thailand feels that, not only does the presence of the French and the U.K. in SEATO act as a brake upon the United States, but, very importantly from Thailand’s standpoint, Thailand’s association with the very unpopular former colonial power in the area, France, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, the U.K., inhibits the development of closer relations with its Asian neighbors. Through SEATO, Thailand is identified with the former colonial powers of France and the U.K. and is not considered by its neighbors to be really an “Asian country”. Association with the United States does not, in Thailand’s view, carry with it any of the same onus and thus, in fact, what Thailand is really seeking is disassociation from France and the U.K. From Thailand’s point of view, this would most happily be accomplished by the withdrawal of France and the U.K. from SEATO. If this cannot be accomplished, the next best would be a “neutralization” of France and the U.K. through a voting procedure which would enable Thailand to say that France and the U.K. have really been divorced from SEATO.

2. Although Thailand is seeking a rectification of the situation as it perceives it within the framework of SEATO by a change in the voting procedure, in fact it would be happiest if a bilateral relationship with the United States, or a trilateral relationship with the United States and Australia, could be substituted for SEATO. In spite of the statements which he made in his formal talks while here, I know that Foreign Minister Thanat was deeply disappointed that we did not suggest a bilateral treaty with Thailand. This is what he was really seeking and what the Thais would eagerly welcome.

3. We have authorized Ken Young to give broad and categorical assurances to Thailand and have offered to confirm in writing that we would carry out our obligations under Article IV(1) (overt aggression) of SEATO without regard as to what the other members of SEATO may do.1 (This would be, in effect, an unconditional extension of the assurances that you gave privately to the Prime Minister at the time of the last SEATO meeting.) We have not yet heard whether Ken Young has done so. In any event, I am confident that the Thais will insist that, to have any value, these assurances must be formal and public. I am not clear on what problems this may present us here, but, in any event, it will probably require prior consultation with the Hill.

4. While such assurances may be of some help in reassuring the Thais that we will not permit our actions to be blocked by the French and the British, they do not meet one of the basic Thai concerns as set forth in paragraph 1 above; that is, our identification with the “colonial powers” of France and the U.K. There is also a certain amount of “theology” involved in this which no amount of logical argument is really able to overcome in the Thai mind. To the Thais, “SEATO” is not just the sum of the nations who are members, but an entity of its own. This entity is personified to them by the headquarters building on Rajadamnern Avenue there in Bangkok, with a Secretary General, civilian and military staffs. If the United States does something “pursuant to its SEATO obligations”, this emanates, in the Thai mind, from Washington rather than from Rajadamnern Avenue, and, rather than proving the value of “SEATO”, proves that “SEATO” is impotent and that they really have to depend on the United States.

The implications of the foregoing from the standpoint of our relations with Thailand are that: a. In spite of the strains it would impose on our relations, we attempt to “write France and the U.K. out of” SEATO by pushing the Thai proposal for a change in the voting procedures;

b. Without pushing a change in the voting procedures, we publicly announce and place emphasis on our unilateral assurances to Thailand “pursuant to our SEATO obligations” while gradually deemphasizing the SEATO organization and its peripheral economic and other non-military activities, or;

c. Without formally dissolving SEATO, enter into a bilateral defense treaty with Thailand while keeping SEATO “on the books” for what value it may have in validating our activities elsewhere in the treaty area.

I suggest that we should have a thorough discussion of this with you at an early opportunity.

Attachment2

Washington, February 9, 1962.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State Rusk

SUBJECT

Voting Procedure in SEATO

The President desires that we come to a decision on our position regarding SEATO voting procedure as promptly as possible.

During his visit to Washington last October, Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman was assured by American officials, including the President, that we would give serious consideration to his proposal that the voting procedure be changed (Tab A).3 He has also been informed that we will need to consult Congressional leaders in reaching a decision on an issue of this kind. Thailand has since tabled a formal proposal to change the present rule of unanimity in favor of decision by three-fourths majority vote on all issues except procedural questions which would be decided by a simple majority (Tab B).4 Several SEATO Governments have expressed opposition to such a change. In the meantime, Australia has informally advanced an alternative proposal involving abstentions which appears to provide a basis for compromise (Tab C).5 It is particularly appealing because abstentions could be allowed without derogating from the principle of unanimity.

Thailand has not elaborated its proposal, and in view of opposition to it among other member countries its details and implications have not thus far been explored. It is entirely possible that Thailand itself has not considered the matter in all its details. A principal question is, however, whether Thailand would expect a country which had voted against an action approved by the majority to participate in and help finance the action. The United States would hold that no member country should be required to participate in an action it had voted against. The U.K., France, Australia and New Zealand would probably take a similar view. Since Thailand is heavily motivated by concern that the U.K. and France would veto military action by SEATO in defense of Thailand, and is seeking a means of assuring SEATO action despite negative votes, it probably would accept this view.

The rising volume of bitter criticism of SEATO by the Thai Foreign Minister and Prime Minister (Tab D)6 compels an immediate decision within the U.S. Government on this issue which has, in any event, been before us for several months. While demanding adoption of the Thai proposal, Thanat Khoman has threatened to withdraw from SEATO and not to go to the SEATO Council Meeting in April unless a decision to accept Thailand’s proposal is reached by early March.

It is entirely possible that the Thai proposal would not carry even if the United States should decide to support it. The U.K., France, Australia and New Zealand all take a negative view, though they have not rejected it. (See the British Ambassador’s letter at Tab E.)7 For this reason, because of the desirability of maintaining the principle of unanimity in our collective security arrangements wherever possible, and because of potential repercussions in CENTO and NATO, we should in the first instance seek a change along the lines of the Australian abstention formula in lieu of the change desired by Thailand, and seek to persuade the British to accept this view. Thanat Khoman called the Australian proposal “preposterous” in a recent outburst, and there are some reports from Bangkok that Thailand will oppose any solution which permits just one or two members to block an action. I believe that chances are good, however, that in a showdown Thailand would accept the abstention formula when confronted with firm opposition to its proposal from other members and with the full force of our argument that it would lose the U.S. commitment to defend Thailand which it now has if it should destroy SEATO. Prompt action before the Thai position hardens further is, however, essential.

Our course of action if Thailand should fail to accept the Australian formula, and if acceptance of the three-fourths majority proposal becomes the only alternative to Thailand’s withdrawal from SEATO, would depend heavily upon the attitude of Congress and our SEATO allies. It is unlikely, however, that we can obtain any reliable advance indication of the prospective reaction of our SEATO allies to that eventuality until an effort has been made to negotiate the Australian solution.

In the Rio Pact, the United States has a precedent for decision by majority vote on stipulated issues in an alliance. In the Legal Adviser’s judgment, so long as an abstaining member is not required to act pursuant to a decision it has voted against, a change to the three-fourths majority vote arrangement would not extend our treaty commitments and it would not, therefore, be necessary to amend the treaty and secure the advice and consent of the Senate. Final judgment on the Thai proposal should, however, be deferred and should take account of the views of Congress and our SEATO allies.

In a showdown, Australia and New Zealand would probably accept a change to the three-fourths majority vote if the United States accepted it. If the British and French should remain in opposition at that point, the decision would be between (1) dissolution of SEATO and (2) withdrawal of the British and the French. Our decision at that juncture could only be made in the light of the circumstances then prevailing.

The Australian abstention formula would allow a proposal to carry if, by an agreed target date, there had been six affirmative votes and no vetos. Countries which had not registered an expression would be considered to have abstained. Abstaining countries could subsequently associate themselves with the action if they desired. On the other hand, no country would be obligated to participate unless it had voted affirmatively or subsequently associated itself with the action. Target dates would be agreed on the basis of a three-fourths majority. (This single exception to the rule of unanimity could be justified on the ground that it involves a procedural rather than a substantive matter.) The target date is considered necessary to assure that issues are brought to a vote and a decision. Without some such arrangement, decisions can be postponed indefinitely by the failure of governments to provide instructions for their Council Representatives, presently a common occurrence.

The abstention formula would apply only to important issues. An issue would be considered “important” whenever members agreed to the establishment of a target date for voting upon it.

A question again arises as to whether a member who had not voted affirmatively would be obligated to help finance an action approved by the majority, except perhaps for expenditures from a previously approved common budget. As a practical matter this probably would not pose insurmountable difficulties since most SEATO expenditures are financed from the common budget approved annually at the Council Meeting and under the Australian formula financing of extraordinary actions would be dealt with on an ad hoc basis. The United States would hold that it would not be obligated to make contributions toward the financing of such extraordinary actions when it had abstained. (See paragraph 3(e) of Tab C.)

Continuing freedom to vote against any proposal for SEATO action which we might oppose, and the stipulation that abstaining members are not bound to participate in proposed actions, appear to afford full protection to U.S. interests.

Current practice in the UN Security Council and in the OECD supports a conclusion that an abstention is not a veto and, therefore, that the proposed change would not derogate from the principle of unanimity.

There is no express provision in the Manila Pact requiring unanimity of decision. During the negotiation of the treaty, the United States rejected a Philippine proposal that decisions of the organization be taken by a three-fourths vote as wholly unacceptable without United States consent. We proposed instead that a unanimity requirement be written into the Terms of Reference of the SEATO Council and this was done. (Tab F)8

As in the case of a change involving decision by majority vote, an abstention formula which did not extend our treaty commitments would not require amendment of the treaty and the advice and consent of the Senate. All canons of good Congressional relations, however, require that there be advance consultation with appropriate Congressional leaders.

It would, therefore, seem appropriate that this matter be discussed immediately on a confidential basis with the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. While outlining both the Thai proposal and the abstention formula, we would explain our preference for abstentions and our belief, in view of the prevailing Thai attitude, that we must seek acceptance of this solution. We would, however, ascertain his reaction to the three-fourths majority proposal. If Senator Fulbright reacts favorably to the abstentions arrangement, his view may be sought as to what further steps, if any, may be desirable by way of informing the Congress of our proposed action. If his reaction is negative, we would have to reexamine our position in the light of his attitude.

Assuming a favorable reaction from Congressional leaders, further bilateral discussions with the British, and perhaps with the French, may be necessary in seeking their agreement to the abstention formula.

The change would be effected by amendment of the Terms of Reference. Details of the revision would be the subject of further negotiation among Council Representatives in Bangkok where the question is currently an active issue. The formal change could properly be made an item of business at the SEATO Council Meeting in April. The amendment would, of course, require the concurrence of all eight SEATO members.

Recommendations:9

1. That we accept an alteration of the voting procedure to allow for abstentions along the lines of the Australian proposal, subject to consultation with Congress, and seek to persuade the British to accept this solution.

2. That we ascertain the views of Congress and our SEATO allies on the three-fourths majority proposal of Thailand, but defer final judgment pending the outcome of attempts to negotiate the abstention formula, and in making a decision take account of the views of Congress and our SEATO allies.

3. That this matter be discussed promptly with Senator Fulbright.

4. That you authorize me, in consultation with the Legal Adviser and other interested bureaus, to approve any minor adjustments of the Australian proposal not having major effect on the substance thereof during further negotiation among the SEATO member countries (New Zealand, for example, presently prefers that target dates be fixed only on the basis of unanimous agreement).

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/2–1062. Secret. Initialed by Johnson. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw the memorandum.

1 The assurances were authorized in telegram 1134 to Bangkok, February 4, Document 427. Article IV (1) of the Manila Pact stipulated that an attack on one party to the treaty constituted an attack on all parties and obligated them to act to meet the common danger.

2 Secret. Drafted by Peters, Salans, and Jones and concurred in by Rice, Chayes, Czyzak, Cleveland, and John P. White of the Bureau of Congressional Relations; James D. Bell, Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs; James N. Cortada, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Regional Affairs; and William C. Burdett, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs.

3 Not attached, but Tab A is Document 420.

4 Not attached, but Tab B was telegram 1124 from Bangkok, February 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–362)

5 Not found.

6 Not attached, but Tab D was telegram 1098 from Bangkok, January 31. (Department of State, Central Files, 379/1–3162)

7 Not attached, but Tab E was a letter from the British Embassy, February 6. (Ibid., FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, SEATO)

8 Not attached, but Tab F was the Terms of Reference for the SEATO Council. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, FRC 71 A 6682 (Department of State, EA/RA/SEATO Files: Lot 67 D 143), SEATO Organization and Administration, 1954–1963)

9 There is no indication of approval or disapproval of any of these recommendations.

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 18. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, February 12, 1962, 8 p.m.

1179. Personal for Secretary and pass Asst Secretary Harriman. SEATO. I am sending this brief comment to you in your capacity SEATO Council Member. In view Sarit’s sharp criticism of SEATO in conversation today reported my 1177,1 I wish to call your attention my analysis and proposal in Embtels 11672 and 1168.3 I would much appreciate your advice and counsel at this critical turning point for SEATO.

Believe we are reaching fork in road. We can choose one of two tracks: a) go through with strong démarche such as proposed messages from you and CINCPAC to keep Thais in SEATO and SEATO in being with some procedural changes, or b) without such campaign concede SEATO for Thailand cannot be revived, must be replaced or will threaten real split with Thais and perhaps other Asians is insists on status quo [sic].

I recommend we go ahead with letter from you proposed my 1168 which should help clarify Thai position. Nevertheless we must recognize that despite effort sustain SEATO with a major effort, we may not succeed and will have seek alternative. Paragraph 8 draft letter leaves way open explore such possible alternatives and not back ourselves into corner by insisting SEATO all or nothing. While I believe we should try keep SEATO generally intact, in view unpredictable situation in Laos and Vietnam and threats to Thailand we must have Thais realize we are not closing door to other options for them if after serious consideration they reject SEATO as now constituted. I also fully realize that views are important but not our exclusive concern nor unique in SEA complex.

In my personal opinion I recommend Dept continue formulate feasible alternatives to SEATO if we must follow that track. As SEATO crisis is real crisis I would strongly like to return on consultations as soon as practicable to discuss SEATO with you before April Council meeting.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1262. Secret; Limit Distribution.

1 See footnote 4, Document 427.

2 In telegram 1167 from Bangkok, February 10, Young reported that Thai dissatisfaction with SEATO “runs deep and pervades political and military leadership.” Sarit had told Young: “SEATO with no veto or no SEATO.” Young recommended that “we now put on the brakes to stem ill-considered undermining of SEATO” by sending messages from Rusk in his capacity as SEATO Council member and Felt in his role as U.S. military adviser to Thailand, before Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s upcoming mid-February visit to Thailand. The ultimate aim was to force the Thais to consider carefully if SEATO was worth the effort. If not, it would at least persuade the Thais not to throw SEATO out until they had something with which to replace the organization. (Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1062)

3 Telegram 1168 provided a draft of the message from Rusk to Thanat. (Ibid.) The letter as approved by the Department of State was transmitted to Bangkok in telegram 1230, February 16, Document 429.

19. Memorandum for the Record 19. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, February 13, 1962.

The Secretary’s Meeting on the State of SEATO1

After much discussion in which INR contributed heavily to the discussion and had several of its recommendations adopted, it was decided that the United States would propose postponing the SEATO meeting, substituting a military briefing of the Military Committee of the SEATO at CINCPAC. The Secretary would also like to postpone the CENTO meeting.

The United States will make a written commitment to Thailand giving them bilateral assurances along the lines of those contained in the Military [Manila] Pact and similar to those in the Military Assistance Agreements with Pakistan.2

This will be delivered immediately so as to coincide with Bobby Kennedy’s visit.

The letter3 will end with an invitation to Thanat to come to the U.S. because the President wishes to make this new bilateral commitment to Thailand public and Thanat’s visit would provide a suitable occasion.

The letter will be delivered by the Ambassador, and Bobby Kennedy will then reiterate and strengthen the commitment by expressing the President’s wish that Thanat come to the U.S. so that the bilateral commitment can be made public with emphasis.

The letter will mention the postponement of the SEATO meeting; it will make commitments along the lines of the Pak Military Assistance Agreement (at INR’s suggestion), it will make the point that SEATO still has some utility and that the most effective way of deemphasizing SEATO and reemphasizing the U.S. bilateral commitment would be not to tamper at all with the voting procedure (at INR’s suggestion).

It is Harriman’s view to which all agreed that SEATO is important today as a device to get Asian people participating if real trouble comes in Asia. We will, however, reduce its political and economic role since it is not broad enough for these tasks. We will leave it with a military planning role in the event of a major war. All this was a result of a suggestion by Alexis Johnson that we might want to consider phasing SEATO out—i.e., this suggestion was rejected.

To implement the above, the following steps will be taken but without mentioning our phase-down intentions to any of our allies.

1. After Council Meeting, gradually decrease scale of Headquarters and other non-military activities.

2. But leave intact the Treaty itself. Continue, perhaps increase, military exercises.

3. Let Headquarters Bangkok eventually have only Military Planning Office, Countersubversive Section (Advisory Services Only) and perhaps a Secretary General.

4. After above steps have been taken British and French may find it easier to withdraw from SEATO without loss of face.(Such withdrawals would not materially weaken SEATO as a deterrent or an instrument for action; the repercussions, if any, would be largely within the Atlantic Community.)

5. To reduce Headquarters activity: a. Council Representatives meet in Bangkok less frequently (now every 10 days).

b. Consider turning economic projects over to ASA, ECAFE or other regional auspices.

RH

* Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Chron File, 1/62–6/62. Secret. Prepared by Hilsman.

1 Rusk’s Appointment Book indicates that the Secretary met at 5:35 p.m. on February 13 with Harriman, U. Alexis Johnson, Cleveland, Rice, Peters, Chayes, and Hilsman to discuss SEATO and Laos. Rusk’s next appointment was at 6:10 p.m. (Johnson Library)

2 Apparent reference to the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement, signed at Karachi on May 19, 1954 (5 UST 852), and the Defense Support Assistance Agreement, signed at Karachi on January 11, 1955. (6 UST 501) The United States also committed to the defense of Pakistan by the terms of the Agreement of Cooperation, signed at Ankara on March 5, 1959. (10 UST 317)

3 See footnote 3, Document 18.

20. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 20. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, February 16, 1962, 9:18 p.m.

1231. Djakarta for info Attorney General and Unger.1 SEATO. In delivering message on postponement SEATO Council Meeting to Foreign Office (see separate tel)2 you should explain that unresolved question voting procedures one of main reasons prompting our proposal. You should then note that we are undertaking to convince Thais change in voting procedure is neither necessary nor desirable. You should not, of course, reveal extent of Secretary’s letter to Thai Foreign Minister or its detailed contents (Deptel 1230)3 but you may draw upon pertinent parts in discussing our view that change voting procedures made unnecessary in satisfaction Thai problem in view our interpretation that each nation has commitment to act individually under Article IV-1 of Treaty regardless of action taken by others.

Regarding postponement Council Meeting, fortunate that scheduling of meeting April 26–28 not yet announced publicly. Announcement of postponement obviously, therefore, should not be volunteered. If press queries or comments nevertheless arise, we propose play issue down to extent possible. We would say that close consultations we have had on continuing basis with our SEATO allies on Laos and Viet-Nam, main problems of Treaty area, and regular meetings Council Reps, make Council Meeting unnecessary at this time when schedules Foreign Ministers already heavily engaged. Regular meetings Council Reps would be stressed. Suggest other Governments follow this line.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1662. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Peters; cleared by Rusk, Harriman, Bell, Czyzak, Koren, and James P. Grant, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Also sent to Canberra, Karachi, London, Paris, Wellington, and Manila and repeated niact to Djakarta and CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 Robert Kennedy stopped in Bangkok on February 19 during a trip to Indonesia, Japan, Iran, Italy, and West Germany February 12–24. For a record of his discussion with Thai Government officials, see Document 431.

2 Telegrams containing messages to SEATO members’ Foreign Ministers, all February 16, are in Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1262.

3 Document 429.

21. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 21. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, February 20, 1962, 11 a.m.

1236. Rome for Attorney General Kennedy. Attorney General made courtesy call on SEATO SecGen Pote Sarasin mid-afternoon Feb. 19. In response Attorney General’s query Pote said main needs of SEATO were emphasis on unity and US leadership. Added that SEATO had served deter overt aggression but must now address itself to subversive threat. Said he convinced non-SEATO Asian countries also recognize their freedom depends on US support. Inquired whether US considers SEATO important in context overall US strategy.

Attorney General acknowledged certain drawbacks inherent in democratic association free nations; noted US had differences with allies here also and could not dictate to them as could leader Communist bloc. Said he realized some SEATO members have smaller stake in SEA than US; however such drawbacks more than offset by military, economic and psychological advantages of collective action. Thus US regards SEATO as important, but at same time will fulfill its commitments under treaty irrespective of actions of other members.

Attorney General agreed US called on provide leadership. Said President and administration realize US support needed by many countries and fully prepared to provide it particularly where will of people and government to help themselves provides basis for effective US assistance. Explained that in case Laos apparent absence such basis and extremely difficult logistic situation weighed more heavily in US decision seek peaceful settlement than did caution of certain allies. (Contrasted conditions in Vietnam where US able give effective help and is determined to win. Expressed confidence conditions in Thailand would permit similar US support if need should arise.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Canberra, London, Manila, Karachi, Paris, Wellington, CINCPAC POLAD, and priority to Rome.

22. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency 22. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, February 21, 1962.

SNIE 10–62: COMMUNIST OBJECTIVES, CAPABILITIES AND SHORT TERM INTENTIONS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA1

This Special National Intelligence Estimate was approved by the United States Intelligence Board on 21 February 1962. Significant judgments of the Estimate are as follows:

The long-range Communist Bloc objectives in Southeast Asia are to eliminate U.S. influence and presence and establish Communist regimes throughout the area. Although there are differences of view among the Communist powers as to tactics and priorities and the risks to be run in pursuing their objectives, thus far they have maintained a basic unity of ultimate objectives and a high degree of policy coordination with respect to Southeast Asia.

The Communist powers do not intend to attempt to achieve their objectives in Southeast Asia by large-scale military aggression. They intend to continue to pursue these objectives primarily through subversion, political action, and support of “national liberation” struggles, so as to minimize the risks of Western, particularly U.S., military intervention.

Laos and South Vietnam are now priority Communist targets. The Communists do not intend to initiate an all out military effort to seize Laos. If, however, a military showdown between the Laotian government forces and the Communists does develop, the Communist side would win out, bringing additional forces from North Vietnam if necessary. Nevertheless, the Communists are unlikely to pursue actions involving substantial risk of direct U.S. military involvement so long as they continue to believe that they have a good chance of achieving their objectives in Laos by legal, political means.

In South Vietnam there will be no significant change over the short run in the current pattern of Viet Cong activity, although the scope and tempo of the Communist military and political campaigns will probably be increased.

In Thailand, the initial effort of Communist China and North Vietnam will probably be to increase their subversive potential, particularly in the northeastern frontier area. Concurrently, the Soviets will continue to employ a combination of political pressures, military threats, and economic inducements to persuade the Thai Government to seek accommodation with the Bloc and adopt a more neutral policy. As neutralist positions of Cambodia and Burma are acceptable to the Communists for the time being, Communist activity probably will be kept at low key.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Asia 350.09–676, 1962. Secret. Sent to Secretary McNamara under a covering memorandum by Captain Paul L. Stahl, Acting Assistant Director for Processing, DIA, who explained the brief was being sent to McNamara for his information in advance of the regular distribution of the SNIE.

1 Dated February 21. (Department of State, INR/EA Files: Lot 90 D 110, SNIE 10–62)

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 23. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, March 6, 1962, midnight.

1341. Saigon for Admiral Felt. On Monday morning, March 5, Admiral Felt and I called on PriMin Sarit. Other participants: Acting FonMin Bun Charoenchai, Minister Martin, CHJUSMAG Gen Johnson, Air Marshal Dawee, Generals Chalermchai and Ekasak.

I opened meeting referring to news of discussions Washington with Thanat,1 although PriMin said he put emphasis on basic understanding between two countries more than on public statements, Minister Bun said he felt proposed communiqué was in general “good”.2

Admiral Felt then spoke about continued importance of SEATO from military standpoint. He emphasized importance to Thailand of US military bases in member countries such as those in Philippines. PriMin replied that in his opinion SEATO has not been useful; people continually in doubt about its role. Felt urged usefulness SEATO not be judged on basis events in Laos; this should not be taken as indication our readiness take action help defend Thailand. According Sarit, people Thailand have come to believe SEATO used as mask to blind or deceive them. Felt replied this is political question but SEATO still has military role play, went on to describe usefulness of central military planning done Bangkok. PriMin said that only plans were being made but no action taken. Adm Felt also referred to his forthcoming appearance before congressional committees on MAP, emphasizing significance attached by these groups to collective security efforts.

In reply Adm Felt question about Laos situation PriMin explained in his opinion if we neglect Laos we are giving Vietnamese and Chinese an opportunity intervene in whole SEA, allowing them enter South Vietnam more easily; also, both northeast and north Thailand would be in danger.

Admiral Felt then said he had been instructed by Pres Kennedy deliver personal message to PriMin and he read from notes substantially text of message from Pres Kennedy transmitted Feb. 28.3 Concluded by asking for PriMin’s views on message. PriMin replied most important consideration is whether Souvanna Phouma truly neutral. Admiral Felt stressed it important to try to get Souvanna Phouma on our side and make sure he doesn’t go over to Commies. After further discussion of possible formulae for coalition, Adm Felt again emphasized importance of keeping Laotian Army intact, noting if Phoumi will cooperate with Souvanna Phouma, possibility of accomplishing this greatly increased.

Sarit said he felt little possibility Souphanouvong entering into any cooperative, reasonable coalition arrangement, but that other two (Phoumi, Souvanna) might be able to get together. Said he had secret report, unconfirmed, indicating Souvanna Phouma considering breaking with Pathet Lao. May be one reason for lessening intensity of fighting at Nam Tha. Sarit also went on to say radio monitors had heard orders being given in Chinese around Nam Tha. Added that Phoumi had personally informed him that firing orders were being given in French for enemy artillery batteries; I suggested perhaps French was being used as common language for Pathet Lao and Vietnamese.

Admiral Felt requested that all such intelligence on Chinese activities be relayed to US. PriMin mentioned CIA working closely with Thais, especially Gen Wallop. Felt then referred to problem of coordination of intelligence which has existed South Vietnam and made more difficult problem restoring security. Stated efforts must be made provide means to coordinate all intelligence gathered here in Thailand; intelligence and communications are two most important factors in combatting infiltrators and insurgents. Recommended center be established to coordinate all intelligence. PriMin said Thais paying especial attention to this and requested more assistance in communications. Suggested special network be established for intelligence and counterintelligence units.

Following reference by Gen Johnson to counter-insurgency plan developed in JUSMAG, Adm Felt assured PriMin such plans meant to be helpful and stimulate Thai thinking this field; were only recommendations and we were not trying interfere in Thailand’s affairs. Dawee said plans were earlier developed by Supreme Command on counter-insurgency and anti-guerrilla warfare. These plans now approved and were very close to US plan that has been subsequently submitted.

I added that efforts strengthen border police, to encourage community development and other civic action programs, tie into overall counter-subversion plan. PriMin replied he understands these programs but is worried about slowness of US action to implement them. Felt indicated he would study plans being submitted, based on his experience with South Vietnam.

Admiral Felt then expressed hope we could continue with SEATO exercises which had been proposed. Sarit replied Air Force reported that Air Cobra exercise not useful and that budget not sufficient for Thai Air Force to participate. He feels personally there are too many exercises, too many plans, not enough action (obvious reference to Laos). Felt replied Thai Air Force and US Air Force would have opportunity act together in Air Cobra in support troops, which would be very useful training for both sides. Said paper had been prepared proposing sharing of expenses of SEATO exercises and that he supported such sharing by member countries. Added he would look into question of changing to such procedure; in meantime hoped we could go on planning for Air Cobra. PriMin complained Thailand always required contribute here and there, giving as example Geneva Conference which, in his opinion, served no purpose, and which at first Thailand had refused attend but had attended on US insistence. Admiral Felt concluded by stating it was nevertheless important for military men have opportunity get together and operate together.

Comment: Sarit’s responses on Laos and SEATO maintained his previously stated positions but with less conviction. On latter appeared he did not wish pursue matter at length pending outcome Thanat’s discussions Washington. This also applied to Air Cobra.

Unger

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–662. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 See Documents 433–435.

2 Reference is to the joint statement by Thanat and Rusk, released on March 6. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

3 In this message, Felt was to inform Sarit “that the US will not allow itself to be driven into a war in Laos by Phoumi’s intransigence.” Phoumi should realize that any attempt to hold out against a negotiated agreement with Souvanna Phouma and the Pathet Lao in expectation of eventual U.S. intervention on his side could only end in “disaster.” (Telegram 1288 to Bangkok, February 28; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–2862)

24. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 24. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, March 10, 1962, 9:52 p.m.

1368. SEATO. Seek appointment with Pote Sarasin to report SEATO aspects Thanat visit Washington as seen by US Govt. Tell him that Ambassador Young wants to call on him to give full personal report upon return but that in meantime Dept wants him have preliminary report. Following should be discussed in addition material separate tel for use in talks with SEATO allies.1

Communiqué2 largely speaks for itself. We believe it has had the effect of preventing deep schisms in SEATO by relieving pressure from Thailand for a procedural change (three-fourths rule) that was unacceptable to several SEATO members. In trying find ways reassure Thai Govt it adequately protected by SEATO without such change, we were conscious of Pote’s own view that abandonment of rule unanimity undesirable. Excessive emphasis by Thai press on individual obligations mentioned in communiqué unfortunate but this will not affect fundamental fact, stated in communiqué as well as in treaty, that obligations are both collective and individual. Any attempt by US to correct press treatment of subject would we fear be counterproductive.

Secretary not prepared at this stage agree to establishment definite date for Council meeting. Review with Pote various reasons affecting US position set forth previous tels. Assure him at same time that we would of course expect him be present if SEATO foreign ministers meet informally at time UNGA and would look forward to his visit to US at that time.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–1062. Secret. Drafted by Peters, cleared by Rice and Koren, and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Apparent reference to circular telegram 1549, March 10. (Ibid., 033.9211/3–1062)

2 See footnote 2, Document 23.

25. Memorandum From the Regional Planning Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Usher) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) 25. Memorandum From the Regional Planning Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Usher) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)Source

Washington, March 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Attached Policy Directive on SEATO1

Discussion:

We are not yet ready to make a firm recommendation regarding a SEATO countersubversion activity. The problem is to identify aspects of countersubversion activity which would neither conflict with our own bilateral countersubversion plans for Thailand nor involve SEATO in regional countersubversion activities having economic and social aspects. Mr. Peters outlined this problem and made a number of recommendations in preparation for Ambassador Young’s recent visit. It was decided at that time that the Ambassador should study the matter further after his return to Bangkok and send us his views. When these are received, we will be able to develop a final policy recommendation.

Meanwhile, a number of important policy decisions regarding SEATO have been made in connection with the recent Thanat visit. I believe it is appropriate that these be the subject of a Policy Directive even though we have not yet formulated a definite set of recommendations regarding SEATO’s countersubversion activity. The instructions regarding Policy Directives provide “That these Directives would, in general, record policy and action instructions created in a wide variety of circumstances; meetings, answering telegrams, task force reports, Presidential and NSC decisions, and the Secretary’s Staff meeting”.

Pursuant to the foregoing, the SEATO Policy Directive has been revised to reflect more precisely the problem we face with respect to a decision on a SEATO countersubversion effort.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that you approve.

* Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, SEATO. Secret.

1 The Policy Directive was not attached, but an approved version, PD/FE-1, is printed as Document 26.

26. Department of State Policy Directive 26. Department of State Policy DirectiveSource

Washington, April 5, 1962.

PD/FE-1

SUBJECT

Future of SEATO

REFERENCES

None

Asian member confidence in the protection afforded them by SEATO has been badly shaken by its failure to bring SEATO military action to bear in seeking a solution for the Laos situation. This problem of confidence has been particularly acute in the case of Thailand. However, the affirmation in the March 6 Rusk–Thanat communiqué1 of the individual as well as collective defense obligations under the Manila Pact has reassured the Thais and thereby reduced the threat of Thai withdrawal or other deep splits within the organization. SEATO difficulties are, however, broader than this single issue.

SEATO has not experienced the accession of other Asian states expected by its founders, and has not had notable success as a political association. The geographic separation and disparate interests of the membership does not provide a firm basis for collective action in nonmilitary activities. At the same time, Thailand has displayed unease with close association in SEATO with France and the U.K., former colonial powers, and is restive in the knowledge that closer relations with its neighbors are made more difficult by membership in SEATO. As a military alliance, however, SEATO has been successful in deterring overt Communist aggression, and the Manila Pact is important as the legal basis for military action by the U.S., individually or collectively, to meet Communist aggression should that be necessary. Because disappointments and frustrations on the civil side obscure the continuing military value of the pact, U.S. policy is gradually to de-emphasize the organization’s non-military activities.

Objectives

1. To maintain the military alliance as a deterrent to overt Communist aggression, and to continue military planning and SEATO exercises.

2. Gradually to de-emphasize the non-military aspects of the organization including reduction of the large staff and extensive functions of the SEATO Headquarters in Bangkok.

3. To support a SEATO countersubversion effort if agreement can be reached on SEATO activities in this field which will complement rather than conflict with our bilateral activities or multilateral programs having broader than SEATO participation which we might support in Southeast Asia.

4. To expedite decision making and to reduce the great number of petty issues coming before the Council Representatives.

5. To minimize SEATO as an impediment to the development of closer relations among Southeast Asian nations.

Plan of Action

1. No sudden or dramatic actions are proposed. Changes should be made gradually. The Asian members will be sensitive about giving up the leverage they feel the civil activities give them for obtaining increased economic assistance. Excessive U.S. pressure for change might also give rise to doubts about our continued reliance on SEATO, and thus jeopardize the Manila Pact which we desire to retain.

2. First steps, for which agreement among SEATO members can probably be reached fairly promptly, will be (a) reduction in the frequency of Council Representatives meetings and (b) elimination of the expert committees. This subject was discussed during his recent visit to Washington with Ambassador Young who, as opportunity affords, will take the necessary steps or make appropriate recommendations to the Department.

3. We will encourage assignment of increased administrative responsibility to the Secretary-General, and will agree to the fixing of non-mandatory target dates to assure that proposals are brought to a vote within a reasonable period of time.

4. Embassy Bangkok will make recommendations regarding reduction in Headquarters staff and functions. In the early stages, this can probably best be achieved by attrition as current appointments expire.

5. Embassy Bangkok will make recommendations regarding a SEATO Countersubversion Office as a basis for further consideration of the question. The problem is to ascertain whether functions could be established for such an office which would assure that it has enough constructive activity to justify its existence without impinging upon activities better supported bilaterally or inhibiting broader multilateral programs in Southeast Asia. Since Thailand will be the principal beneficiary of a SEATO program, we must also assure that Thailand is willing to accept the kind of assistance SEATO will be able to provide.

6. No new economic or cultural projects will be initiated, except possibly in the countersubversion field. Ultimately the present SEATO projects should be transferred to other auspices, not only to reduce nonmilitary activities, but also to broaden the benefits of these projects to other Southeast Asian nations. Ambassador Young is authorized to discuss discreetly with the Thai Foreign Minister possible transfer of appropriate projects to the Association of Southeast Asia or other Asian sponsorship.

7. Areas of interest previously assigned to the expert committees should be dealt with by ad hoc expert study groups.

8. Military planning at Bangkok and military exercises will be continued.

9. The semi-annual meetings of the Military Advisers should continue but with less emphasis on expensive and time-consuming protocol aspects of the sessions.

10. Annual meetings of the Council of Foreign Ministers are desirable but not essential. The meetings should be shorter than the three-day sessions held in the past and should be held with less emphasis on protocol and public display.

Action by

1. Embassy Bangkok (paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7).

2. Department of Defense (paragraphs 8 and 9).

3. Department (paragraphs 1, 5, 6, 7 and 10).

Authority

G—Mr. Johnson

Expires Automatically

July 1, 1964

* Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, Policy Directives. Secret. Drafted by Peters.

1 See footnote 2, Document 23.

27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 27. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, April 5, 1962, 10:34 a.m.

1520. Bangkok for Ambassador from Harriman. SEATO. Bangkok 1517 (rptd by Dept to other addressees).1 I believe we could accept change in voting procedures along lines Australian proposal2 if necessary, but have reservations about real need for such change except to satisfy demand of Thailand. General acceptance of principle of individual as well as collective obligations in SEATO treaty largely eliminates need for change with respect vital question war or peace. Assignment of greater administrative responsibility to SecGen and gradual de-emphasis on non-military activities will greatly diminish number of other decisions coming before Council Representatives. Nonmandatory target dates would help assure that issues are resolved within reasonable period of time.

At same time, acceptance of change in voting procedures would pose problems in terms (1) need to justify change to Congressional committees, (2) possible effect on procedures in CENTO and NATO, (3) opposition of British (reiterated by British Embassy March 30)3 and (4) financing in case of abstentions. I would therefore like you to re-examine your recommendation, consulting Thais if necessary, and let us have your further comments on the real need and purpose of this change in terms of SEATO’s future as we see it. For what type proposals is change such as this considered necessary? Would the change hamper gravitation away from SEATO’s non-military activities? Since my return Secretary has re-stated to me his interest in minimizing any adverse effect SEATO has on Thailand’s development closer ties with its neighbors and growth of SEA regional unity.

You may have to postpone discussion this item at April 11 meeting.4 Australian Embassy informs Department GOA prefers no change in voting procedures but willing accept abstentions arrangements (1) if politically necessary and (2) if Thailand will definitely withdraw its three-fourths proposal. (Embtel 15095 indicates Thanat not prepared withdraw Thai proposal.) New Zealand Ambassador has expressed concern that change would lead to new “wrangling,” and belief that preferable make no change at this time. Department has informed both that it is seeking further information on need for change.

For Paris, Karachi, Manila: Request appraisal attitude Governments to which you are accredited on Australian-type voting procedure for SEATO.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–3062. Secret. Drafted by Peters and cleared in draft by Czyzak, Salans, Howard Elting, Regional Planning Adviser of EUR, James N. Cortada, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, U. Alexis Johnson, Koren, Rice, and Arthur B. Emmons, Deputy Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs. Also sent to Manila, Paris, and Karachi and repeated to London, Canberra, Wellington, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 1517, March 30, Young informed Harriman that while the Thais were willing to forego pressing their own SEATO voting proposal, they still wanted a substantial change in procedures. Pakistan and especially the Philippines also seemed to be leaning in that direction. Young did not want to risk pitting Western versus Asian members on the issue, and asked to be authorized to negotiate a compromise along the lines of the Australian proposal (see footnote 2 below). (Department of State, Central Files, 379/3–3062)

2 The Australians proposed that important issues would be carried if 6 of the 8 SEATO members voted affirmatively and either both or one of the other two members did not vote negatively. Under the terms of the Australian proposal, no country would be obligated to participate in an operation unless it voted affirmatively for it. By a three-fourths majority of members, target dates would be set for votes to be taken.

3 In telegram 1533 to Bangkok, April 6, the Department stated that the British believed that Thailand merely wanted the courtesy of considered replies to the Thai proposal and would be willing to withdraw it and the Australian proposal if other steps were taken to improve SEATO procedures. (Department of State, Central Files, 379/4–562) In telegram 3690 from London, April 6, the Embassy reported that the British were opposed to any change in the SEATO voting procedure and there was no chance that their position would soften. (Ibid.)

4 Citing its desire to prevent a split on voting procedures, the Department instructed Young to try to postpone discussion on the matter at the April 11 SEATO Council Representatives meeting. (Telegram 1522 to Bangkok, April 5; ibid.)

5 Dated March 29. (Ibid., 379/3–2962)

28. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 28. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, April 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Memorandum from Chester Bowles, dated April 4, 19621

I have read the above mentioned memorandum, copies of which were sent by Ambassador Bowles, both to you and to me.

The bulk of the memorandum is a recitation of the recent history of our activities in the Far East. The tone is mildly critical of our past policy, especially vis-à-vis Taiwan and the Asian Neutrals.

Ambassador Bowles suggests a re-orientation of U.S. policy toward the area (beginning on page 33) but also recommends that it be accomplished step-by-step and without much fanfare. His major recommendations are as follows:

[Here follows a summary of Bowles’ recommendations on Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China.]

C. Southeast Asia

1. Strive to stabilize the military situation in Viet-Nam to produce at least a deadlock.

2. Make known through a third party our willingness to negotiate with the Russians or others on a political solution in South Viet-Nam.

3. Continue efforts on the Souvanna solution in Laos, but prepare contingency plan for de facto partition.

4. Step-by-step dissolution of SEATO to be replaced by U.S. bilateral guarantees.

5. Attempt to get Soviets and Chinese to join in guarantees (using grain shipments as leverage).

C. [sic] Regional Cooperation

Press for greater regional cooperation in the development of the Mekong River, the Asian Productivity Organization, and the Association of Southeast Asia (ASA).

Ambassador Bowles also discusses the political implications of these recommendations. Generally he believes that the domestic political impact will not be as great as one might expect. He cites the change of policy in Laos without much fuss and the domestic concern over our involvement in South Viet-Nam as indications of this. He stresses that if the position is properly explained by a united Administration, the logic of a “two China” policy could be conveyed to the American people.

The memorandum is persuasive and well organized. It would, of course, be political dynamite in certain quarters. For this reason, it is probably not wise to have it floating around. Many of the recommendations, however, can be supported on a purely pragmatic basis and quite independently of any overall philosophy. My own feeling is that it is not particularly helpful to cast our foreign policies in terms of a world view or overall political doctrine. Much more can be achieved, I think, if we simply take the position that each case will be judged on the basis of what appears to be the best interests of the United States at the time the decision is taken. One way of doing this is for the Administration quietly to support the view that the Communist enemy is not the unchanging monolith he is popularly believed to be. If the impression is conveyed that the changes within the Communist bloc require corresponding flexibility in our own attempts to deal with each local situation, the range of choices available to the President may hopefully be increased. There is one point in the Bowles memorandum with which I do not believe I agree: that is his suggestion that we should begin urging for a political solution in Viet-Nam at this time. I particularly doubt whether we should consider approaches to the Chinese or the Russians through third parties. It is too early to begin on this task. It is important, I think, both for domestic and foreign policy reasons, to maintain a rather strong position both in Thailand and in South Viet-Nam, especially if there is any hope of stabilizing the situation. It provides a counter-balance in the public mind to a more flexible policy in Laos and it also avoids misleading the Chinese and Viet Minh into thinking we might be preparing to disengage from the area. When the security situation shows definite signs of improving in South Viet-Nam, we would be in a better position to consider a negotiated settlement.

[Here follows a short paragraph on Ambassadorial appointments.]

MVF

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda, Staff Memorandum, Bowles, 4/5/62–6/62. Secret.

1 In an April 5 covering memorandum transmitting this 54-page memorandum to U. Alexis Johnson, Bowles noted that “it contains recommendations that many will consider controversial. Because of this, I am strictly limiting the number of copies available.” (Department of State, Central Files, 790.00/4–562)

29. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary General Pote Sarasin 29. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary General Pote SarasinSource

Washington, May 13, 1962.

Dear Pote: I have delayed replying to your letter of April 181 in the hope that the situation with regard to a Council meeting would further clarify itself. However, as you know from Ken Young, there is still some uncertainty. We had hoped that there could be a meeting here in the Fall at the time of the UNGA, and that we could see you here at that time, but there is still opposition by some to this. My own feeling was that the urgency of a meeting was somewhat lessened in the light of the developments during Thanat’s visit,2 and that it would do more harm than good to air differences which were still irreconcilable. I certainly do not see SEATO drifting into oblivion for, as you know, it is still the fundamental basis for our policy in the area. I would hope that events in the last few days would have given reassurance to Thailand in this regard.

I have been closely following the development of the countersubversion office and felt it important that we first make sure that such an office could perform a real function. We also thought it important that there be a full common understanding on the functions of the office and that we distinguish rather carefully between our bilateral activities and the role of a SEATO office so as not to create new misunderstandings. Our feeling is that a SEATO office can make its greatest contribution if its function is technical and advisory rather than as a channel for bilateral assistance. On such a basis we are prepared to support it fully and to nominate a qualified candidate. I know that Ken Young has been keeping in touch with you on this.

It is always good to hear from you. Pat joins me in sending our kindest regards.

Sincerely,

Alex3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/4–1862. Personal. Drafted by Johnson with assistance from Peters.

1 In this personal letter, Pote Sarasin stated that it was a great setback that the SEATO Council meeting was not held, because it was the most important event of the year. The lack of a meeting gave the impression that SEATO was breaking up. Pote Sarasin stated that such a meeting was a normal function of SEATO and if member nations took a negative attitude to the organization, it would certainly drift into oblivion. Secondly, Pote Sarasin suggested that the counter-subversion office of SEATO could only be effective if members took it seriously, and hoped that the United States would produce a good candidate to head the office. Pote Sarasin concluded that SEATO was being severely tested and negativism could cause its demise. (Ibid.)

2 See Documents 11, 433, and 435.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Johnson signed the original.

30. Editorial Note 30. Editorial Note

In light of the deteriorating situation in Laos, the Kennedy administration decided to send U.S. troops to Thailand. For documentation on the decision reached during May 10–14, 1962, see Documents 403 ff. and Volume XXIV. During a meeting on May 13, the President asked Hilsman to prepare an intelligence estimate on the reaction of SEATO nations to a request for their cooperation with the proposed U.S. military moves. Later in the meeting, Secretary of State Rusk observed that U.S. military moves in Thailand “should be taken under the SEATO umbrella but that formal SEATO approval would not be requested at this time.” See Document 439.

On May 14, the President assented to deployment of U.S. forces to Thailand. According to the account of the meeting, Kennedy agreed with Secretary Rusk that SEATO capitals should be informed, but that no formal SEATO action should yet be contemplated. The President asked the Department of State to “carefully consider the SEATO problem.” See Document 443.

31. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 31. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 15, 1962.

SEATO REACTIONS UNDER CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES IN LAOS

Conclusions

1. SEATO would not act effectively on an RLG request for assistance under any circumstances that now seem likely.

2. A majority of SEATO members would, however, individually support and some might participate in US/Thai three-stage plan of deterrent action. (Briefly, it is assumed that in Stage I, US forces deploy to the Gulf of Siam; in Stage II, US and Thai forces deploy to the Thai border; in Stage III, US and Thai forces occupy RLG-held territory of Laos.)

3. To implement such a three-stage plan without reference to SEATO, even though justified in terms of the Manila Pact, would make SEATO appear even more feckless as a collective security organization than ever before.

4. To seek SEATO action in keeping with the three-stage plan, or even SEATO endorsement of it, would probably fail. The chief possibility of SEATO endorsement would appear to be in the event that, when US/Thai forces entered Laos, the UK went along and France either acquiesced or withdrew from the organization.

Discussion

I. General Considerations

A. Members’ Views on Military Action: In SEATO Council debates over Laos in 1961, France and UK adamantly opposed the use of military force in Laos, New Zealand supported the UK position. Australia, Thailand and the Philippines were amenable to following the US lead favoring use of force if necessary. Pakistan also sided with the US after President Ayub overrode Foreign Office objections. These main divisions of opinion probably still obtain.

France and UK are profoundly influenced by what they consider more vital issues closer to home (especially Algeria and Berlin), fear of diverting US strength from the NATO to the SEATO area, a long-term historical trend downgrading their national interests in the Far East, and a deep reluctance to engage in hostilities in a country which they do not consider vital to free world security. In addition they appear to be more concerned than the US about the risk of escalation in the area. French experience in Indochina and the price the UK paid to defeat communist guerrillas in Malaya also influence their views on intervention in Laos. They find SEATO membership useful as a matter not only of prestige and presence, but even more important leverage to restrain what they may consider rash or unwise US actions in the area.

B. The Rule of Unanimity: Under the Manila Pact, there are two possibilities for bringing SEATO into action in Laos. Article IV (1) concerns overt armed attack against the treaty area, including the protocol states, and requires unanimous agreement for action in the name of SEATO. In this case each member is bound to “act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.”1 The US has recently interpreted this provision to involve an individual as well as a collective obligation and considers that each member could act pursuant to the treaty commitment without awaiting the unanimous concurrence of all SEATO members. Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, and the UKhave substantially agreed, publicly or privately, with this US interpretation.

Under Article IV (2), which concerns indirect aggression, member nations are committed to “consult immediately in order to agree on measures which should be taken for the common defense.” There is no doubt about the unanimity requirement under Article IV (2).

C. Plan Five: The SEATO military plan covering Laos2 applies both to direct and indirect aggression. Under this plan the main burden of the early commitment would fall on the US and Thailand, and to a lesser extent on Australia, New Zealand, and Pakistan. The major contribution contemplated by the two European members in the first two phases is one UK battalion. Thus the French or UK decisions are not predicated so much upon having to commit military forces as upon more basic political considerations.

II. Reactions if RLG Requested SEATO Intervention

Laos is covered in the Manila Pact only in the Protocol: SEATO action in Laos would have to be at the request or with the consent of the RLG.

If the RLG requested SEATO intervention, France and the UK would probably continue to oppose the use of armed force in Laos despite the communist breach of the cease-fire. They would attempt to head off an RLG request for SEATO intervention, and if it came before the SEATO Council would probably refuse to entertain it under Article IV (1) and would probably veto it under Article IV (2), which has no provisions for abstention.

Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand would vote to entertain the RLG request, with the position of New Zealand and Pakistan somewhat less certain. These same countries, though unable to secure formal SEATO action in response to an RLG request, would probably favor SEATO endorsement of independent but coordinated action by themselves and by the US. France and the UK would probably prevent such endorsement. At least Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand would then be willing to take independent action while Pakistan and New Zealand might follow the US lead, depending upon the circumstances.

III. Reactions to Certain Assumed US/Thai Moves Made Without Reference to SEATO

In the following sections of this paper it is assumed that the US and Thailand adopt and implement, as required, measures designed to deter the communists from further military action in Laos in order to reestablish the cease-fire and permit further negotiation for a government of national union. These measures are assumed to be in three stages, along the following lines:

Stage I. Movement of US forces into the Gulf of Siam together with appropriate US and Thai contingency alert measures.

Stage II. Introduction of US appropriate combat forces into Thailand; deployment of US and Thai ground forces to strategic locations along the Thai border with Laos so positioned and in such strength as to enable them to occupy and hold relevant RLG territory in Laos if necessary.

Stage III. Movement of US and Thai ground forces, supported by air elements as necessary into the area of Laos held by the RLG for the purpose of preventing further communist advances and enforcing a de facto partition of the country.

Both France and the UK recognize that SEATO’s continued passivity has serious disadvantages, but they view these as preferable to the risks involved in military action in Laos. Pakistan continues in principle to favor a strong stand against communist military advances in the area, but is becoming more cautious because of its desire for border negotiations with Communist China. None of the SEATO members would be significantly disturbed by actions short of introducing foreign combat troops into Laos. Australia, Pakistan, the Philippines, and Thailand would favor the actions assumed under Stage II and New Zealand would probably not be particularly alarmed. France might express disapproval and the UK would probably express a stronger degree of concern.

Introduction of Thai and US troops into Laos under assumed Stage III would arouse stronger reactions among the SEATO members, depending to a large extent on the individual member-country’s estimate of the probable communist reaction. Paris and London would be likely to be most concerned about the risks. If informed prior to initiation of Stage III, both European members would probably at first exert immediate and strenuous diplomatic efforts to dissuade us from pursuing this course of action.

Depending on circumstances, including its reading of US determination and of communist reactions, UK might subsequently decide that it could no longer exert a restraining influence and opt for token participation, albeit with grave reservations; they would feel that a modicum of cooperation would preserve at least some leverage over US and Thai action. More likely, however, the maximum UK cooperation would be to refrain from publicly opposing the US action. A parallel degree of restraint from France is possible but less probable.

If the other SEATO members were consulted prior to the initiation of US and Thai troop movements into Laos (Stage III), their reactions would range from approval with offers of at least token participation (Australia, Thailand, the Philippines, and possibly Pakistan) to New Zealand’s less positive attitude which would be strongly influenced by the UK. These countries would resent a US/Thai military action taken without prior consultation with them, would regard it as an unwarranted breach of faith among allies, and would probably further discount the value to them of SEATO membership. Non-European SEATO members are well aware of the problems of bringing the organization into the Laos crisis; they share our anxiety about communist aggression in Laos and its implications for other areas in Southeast Asia; and they would probably be willing to uphold their Manila Pact obligations even outside of the formal SEATO framework provided that they were consulted as early as possible.

IV. Possibility of SEATO Endorsement

A SEATO response to an RLG request seems out of the question; but some SEATO members would probably support and even participate in the assumed US/Thai actions. Such actions might be taken in the spirit of the Manila Pact, but not under SEATO auspices. This situation would leave SEATO as an organization in a most dubious light. What are the prospects of gaining any kind of endorsement by SEATO for action which some of its members object to?

A. Advantages of Seeking SEATO Endorsement: The principal arguments for seeking SEATO endorsement of the assumed military steps are: 1. To salvage what remains of SEATO’s deterrent power.

2. To utilize SEATO’s military planning, force availabilities, and experience derived from joint military exercises.

3. To broaden the base of intervention.

4. To strengthen our access to and use of bases in the Philippines.

B. Disadvantages: 1. The ensuing strains inside the Council might decisively fracture the organization and require major decisions as to its future.

2. Even if there were agreement to endorse the actions, it might come too late and add too many complications to the conduct of US/Thai operations to outweigh—at least in short term—the advantages listed above.

C. Member-Countries’ Attitudes Toward Endorsement: During Stage II, all SEATO members except France and the UK would probably be willing to give SEATO endorsement of the US/Thai action. France and the UK would probably refuse even tacit endorsement.

In Stage III, after US and Thai troops entered Laos, the possibility of SEATO endorsement might improve slightly. The UK might decide that it could no longer exert a restraining influence. It then might opt for token participation and for SEATO endorsement. The British would be more apt to exercise this option if they believed that Stage III would not result in further escalation.

France would still be most reluctant to acquiesce in SEATO endorsement, but (assuming the UK had come to favor it) would be under great pressure not to stand in the way. In these circumstances France might go along, although it is also possible that De Gaulle would veto SEATO endorsement. If pressed strongly, he might pull France out of SEATO.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Laos, General, 5/26/62–5/31/62. Top Secret. Hilsman sent this memorandum to Bundy under cover of an undated memorandum, on which he wrote the following note: “Mac: This says that the U.K. & France would oppose Seato participation in the Thailand Exercise; but might be dragged protesting into an extension of it over the border.” Deputy Director of INR Thomas Hughes sent a copy of this memorandum to Rusk on May 15 explaining that the President had requested it and suggesting that the Secretary might find it of immediate use. (Memorandum from Hughes to Rusk; Department of State, Central Files, 379/4–1562)

1 See footnote 1, Document 17.

2 SEATO Plan 5; see footnote 2, Document 405.

32. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President Johnson 32. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President JohnsonSource

Washington, June 5, 1962.

RE

SEATO Forces in Thailand

The build up of forces in Thailand continues although U.S. representation constitutes the majority of foreign personnel. The U.K., Australia and New Zealand in their capacities as members of SEATO, have sent token forces. France and Pakistan (also SEATO members) have declined to send any forces whatsoever. The Philippines is considering sending a token force—either an engineer or medical team.1

As of the 31st of May, Australia had dispatched 350 men, 8 fighter aircraft, 5 bombers and 2 transports. New Zealand had sent 35 paratroopers and 3 transports, while the U.K. had sent 20 fighter aircraft. By contrast, United States personnel in Thailand numbered more than 6,400, with a force of 9,200 authorized for the operation. The fighting element of U.S. forces is concentrated in the Marine group and the Army battle group of approximately 3,000 men, with 20 Marine aircraft and 20 Air Force aircraft to provide ground support. An Army Aviation Company, an evacuation hospital, and a light air transport squadron are enroute. Additionally, a fighter squadron and a transport squadron are in the Philippines for dispatch to Thailand if needed.

In contrast to the highly effective combat elements which the SEATO powers have sent into Thailand, the Lao forces across the Mekong River are wholly ineffective. They are demoralized, disorganized, and seemingly unwilling to fight.

* Source: Johnson Library, Vice President’s Security File, Memoranda to Vice President from Burris. Secret.

1 Documentation on contributions by SEATO countries to the deployment to Thailand is primarily in Department of State, Central Files 792.00 and 792.5.

33. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to President Kennedy 33. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to President KennedySource

Washington, June 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Need for a Definition of U.S. Political Objectives in Southeast Asia

In my memorandum to you of April 4th, “U.S. Policies in the Far East,”1 I urged that we clearly define and publicly state “a coherent overall political objective” for our involvement in Southeast Asia. Last Friday I again discussed this question with Mac Bundy.2

Since then, two developments have given the matter new urgency. The first is Mike Mansfield’s Michigan speech3 which has focussed public and congressional attention on our ultimate aims in Southeast Asia. The second is the apparent Laos settlement which now offers us an excellent opportunity for a positive clarification of our over-all political objectives.

The military decisions we have made thus far in Vietnam and Thailand and our contingency planning for Laos have been forced on us by events. Although the necessity for these decisions is to be regretted, the arguments for them at each juncture have been compelling.

However, our step-by-step military response has not been accompanied by a comparable effort to think through our ultimate political aims for Southeast Asia as a whole. As long as we lack a political “grand design” for Southeast Asia, the initiative will continue to rest with our adversaries and with our allies and camp followers, whose parochial views often ignore the global forces with which American policy must contend.

As matters now stand, we may find ourselves forced to choose between an escalating war or a humiliating retreat in an area where the strategic conditions are disadvantageous to us and where direct U.S. military participation would be roundly denounced by domestic critics as “another Democratic war.”

If in the meantime we have failed to go beyond Mr. Eisenhower’s famous “falling dominoes” analogy to explain our political objectives in Southeast Asia, we may find ourselves increasingly the captive of events with unpredictable results both at home and abroad.

The historical parallels are impressive and disturbing. Leaders of great nations have often found themselves pressed by a succession of events, each nondecisive in itself, into a position which they would not conceivably have chosen and from which there was no honorable avenue of retreat.

The Guns of August overflows with pertinent examples from World War I. In World War II, caught among the differing theories of Henry Morgenthau, Robert Taft, Henry Wallace, Stalin and Churchill, we found it impossible to agree on the kind of post-war Europe for which we were fighting. One by-product is the present ugly dilemma of Berlin.

In his discussion of the Korean War, Dick Neustadt has analyzed the process of “non-decision” which resulted in our crossing of the 38th Parallel, our march to the Yalu, and our catastrophic rout by the Chinese.

As Neustadt and others have pointed out, our inability to agree on our political objectives for Korea as a whole resulted in an unsatisfactory truce at the 38th Parallel two and one-half years—and many thousands of lives—after the Inchon landings when precisely the same settlement could have been achieved on our terms in an atmosphere of dignity and success.

During this period the French in Southeast Asia were also in the midst of a war with no clear definition of the broad political and economic aims which the fighting was designed to achieve.

For domestic political reasons, the French Government refused to spell out their willingness to grant freedom to the three nations of Indo–China once the struggle against the Communists had been won.

As a result, with nearly the entire population against them, the French Army suffered casualties that totaled more than 90,000, with money costs that exceeded all the aid we gave France under the Marshall Plan, to which we added $3 billion in U.S. equipment. Ten years later we are still paying for this debacle.

I believe that we may now stand at a comparable threshold of decision. In Southeast Asia U.S. forces are involved in operations of uncertain dimensions. This involvement is taking place in a political framework which is unclear to our allies, our adversaries, the people of Southeast Asia, the American public, and the Congress.

The greatest danger may lie in the profound confusion that exists among the 200 million Southeast Asians who are most directly concerned. Most young anti-Communist Vietnamese, Cambodians, Laos, Burmese, Malayans and Indonesians now tend to think of the U.S. in terms of the massive military supplies which we sent the French “colonialists” in the early 1950’s, of our abortive efforts to build up a Nationalist Chinese force within the borders of independent Burma, of our CIA efforts to overthrow Sukarno in 1958, and of our support for Sarit, Diem, Phoumi and Chiang Kai-shek, none of whom can be said to reflect the “New Frontier” in Asia.

It is essential that we present ourselves in a fresh and affirmative role. This requires a governmental decision, followed by a public statement understandable both at home and abroad, in which we spell out our objectives for Southeast Asia as a whole.

In June 1947 General Marshall dramatically outlined our economic and political aims for Europe. In 1961 you described through the Alliance for Progress what we are seeking to achieve in Latin America. In my opinion, the time is at hand for a similar statement in regard to Southeast Asia.

Here, as elsewhere in the world, what we want for the people of the region is almost precisely what the people want for themselves: guaranteed national independence, more rapid economic development, and maximum freedom of choice within their own cultures and religions.

These objectives not only coincide with our own interests; they are wholly compatible with our present undertakings. By spelling them out as American objectives in Southeast Asia, we can provide a compelling rationale for whatever future action—military, political or economic—we may be required to take in the region.

Such a clarification by you would be immediately reassuring to the politically sophisticated people in both neutral and aligned states of the region.

It would firmly identify the United States Government and people with peace, development, and the increasing regional unity which offers the most compelling alternative to Communist divisiveness and fragmentation.

It would give American military, political and economic operations in Southeast Asia the affirmative, understandable, appealing purpose which has been largely lacking since the days of Roosevelt.

It would also give us a clear initiative in dealing with our Communist adversaries, while encouraging whatever elements within the USSR may desire stabilization and neutralization of the region, and removing any valid excuse for Chinese Communist aggression based on a misunderstanding of our objectives.

I have outlined the kind of proposal that I have in mind in a rough draft of a speech, to be made by you, which I am attaching to this memorandum.4

In it I have sought to identify the United States with the forces of peaceful, democratic change throughout Southeast Asia, to picture the kind of future that the people there may achieve once the fighting has been ended, and to offer our assistance and support in this great effort.

It is important, of course, that the language of such a statement be sufficiently balanced to allow us room for maneuver while providing a firm commitment of U.S. support for a new start in this war-torn region, if the Communists will permit the establishment of peace.

As far as American public and Congressional opinion is concerned, I believe that such a declaration of American political objectives in Southeast Asia would be generally welcomed and applauded by members of both political parties.

I also believe that at the very least such a statement will restore confidence in the United States throughout Southeast Asia.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries Series, Laos Security, 6/10/62–7/31/62. Secret.

1 Summarized in Document 28.

2 No record of this conversation has been found.

3 Not identified.

4 Not identified.

34. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) 34. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)Source

Washington, June 16, 1962.

Dear Mr. Chairman: As Alexis Johnson informed the members of the Special Group (CI) at its last meeting,1 I have requested Governor Harriman to constitute an interdepartmental Task Force to coordinate United States activities in the Southeast Asian countries of Thailand, Cambodia, Burma, Laos and Viet-Nam.

I suggest that this Task Force, to be known as Task Force Southeast Asia (TF/SEA), be composed of representatives of the Department of State, the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Agency for International Development, and the United States Information Agency. Other departments and agencies could be represented as required.

The present Task Force Viet-Nam would remain in existence and its composition, terms of reference and scope of operations would be unchanged. However, in order to insure that TF/SEA is kept fully informed and that the work of the two Task Forces is completely coordinated, TF/VN would be represented on TF/SEA. TF/SEA would be charged with the following tasks:

1) Plan programs to carry out established United States policy with respect to these individual countries (or among two or more of them).

2) Coordinate, guide and follow closely execution of these programs to insure maximum cooperation and expeditious completion.

3) Develop new policy recommendations which will further United States objectives in these individual countries or in the area as a whole.

The new Task Force would be under the direction of Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs W. Averell Harriman, who is designating Henry L. T. Koren as Executive Officer and Robert G. Cleveland as Deputy Executive Officer of the Task Force.

I believe that TF/SEA should begin its work as soon as possible. Therefore if you agree, I suggest that Governor Harriman’s office be notified of the name or names of your representatives on TF/SEA, to permit setting an early date for a first meeting.

Sincerely,

Dean Rusk2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/6–1662. Confidential. Drafted on June 15 by Dexter and cleared by Cleveland and Cottrell, in substance by Koren, and in draft by Harriman and U. Alexis Johnson. Executive Secretary Brubeck sent the draft of this letter to Rusk with the explanation that Johnson, who prepared it under Harriman’s direction, “feels we should move promptly to meet the expressed interest of these Agencies in an ‘umbrella’ Task Force for Southeast Asia. The new group would in no way interfere with our present handling of Vietnam and Laos.” Identical letters were sent to McNamara; McCone; Fowler Hamilton, Administrator of AID; and Edward R. Murrow, Director of USIA.

1 The minutes of the June 14 Special Group (CI) meeting are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSC, Special Group (CI) Meetings. Regarding establishment of the Special Group (CI), see footnote 1, Document 423.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

35. Memorandum of Conversation 35. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

Current SEATO Problems

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Pote Sarasin, Secretary General of SEATO

FE—Gov. W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary

FE/PM—Mr. Henry G. Krause, Jr.

In the course of a call on Governor Harriman on September 25 Pote Sarasin stated his intention to bring before the SEATO Ministers at the forthcoming luncheon in New York1 two issues which he believes to be of urgency and importance:

1) Revision of SEATO voting procedures;

2) The matter of Pote’s successor as Secretary General.

Governor Harriman remarked that, although we see no special need for a change in SEATO’s voting procedures, we could accept a formula similar to the Australian proposal submitted early this year, which would permit decisions to be taken even though one or more members abstain from voting within a specified time limit.

With respect to Pote’s successor Governor Harriman stated that we do not consider it desirable to discuss this issue in New York, as there is ample time to reach agreement before the 1963 Council Meeting. He intimated that he personally considered Pote Sarasin the best qualified person. After a thoughtful pause Pote replied that he has been in office for five years—much too long, and dropped the subject.

As for a prospective date for the 1963 Council Meeting, Pote stated that he had just conferred with Mohammed Ali, who has agreed to accept April as a suitable time, thus bringing Pakistan into general accord with the other member nations on this issue. According to Pote, Mohammed Ali also agreed to tolerate the discussion of SEATO business at the New York luncheon, although he still insists that it not be referred to as a meeting.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–2562. Confidential. Drafted by Krause on September 27 and approved by Harriman on October 4.

1 See Document 37.

36. Memorandum of Conversation 36. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 28, 1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

US-Thai Relations

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Pote Sarasin, Secretary General, SEATO

Gov. W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Edward E. Masters, Officer-in-Charge, Thai Desk

Mr. Sarasin said SEATO has served and continues to serve a very useful purpose. Its problems stem largely from the diverse interests and geographic separation of its members. These differing interests have made it difficult to reach agreed decisions in times of crisis. However, we should look at the positive side. We should consider what might have happened if SEATO did not exist. SEATO’s value is emphasized by the fact that it provides a vehicle for US protection in the area.

President Kennedy said SEATO is important to us. It gives us a treaty basis for our actions in South Viet-Nam and Thailand and provides the basis on which we have extended guarantees to Thailand. The President cited the movement of troops to Thailand in May 1962 as a positive and constructive action taken under our SEATO obligations. The President congratulated Mr. Sarasin for his constructive role in SEATO and said he hoped the Secretary General would feel encouraged to continue his useful efforts.

Mr. Sarasin outlined briefly the various proposals to change SEATO’s voting procedures. He said one nation obviously could not commit another to act. However, several nations could decide to take action despite a lack of unanimity and such action would be considered to be under their treaty obligations. He said Thailand believes we must end the present situation in which it takes months to decide simple matters.

Citing the example of SEATO Plan 5,1 President Kennedy expressed the view that SEATO Military Planning is sometimes not very realistic. He said we need to get this military planning as close to political realities as possible.

[Here follows discussion of U.S.-Thai relations; see Document 467.]

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/9–2862. Secret. Drafted by Masters and cleared in the White House on October 15. The meeting lasted until 4:42 p.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) A short briefing paper for this meeting prepared by Forrestal and emphasizing U.S.-Thai relations is printed as Document 466. The Department of State sent a more extensive briefing paper to the White House. (Memorandum from Brubeck to O’Donnell, September 27; Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–2762)

1 See footnote 2, Document 405.

37. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 37. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

New York, September 30, 1962, 8 p.m.

Secto 61. Reference: Secto 53.1 SecGen review during SEATO luncheon of major problems facing treaty organization sparked vigorous discussion on voting procedures. Dominant theme emerging was necessity to avoid excessive concern with procedures, rules and semantics and concentrate instead on maintaining the treaty as a basis for action. Rusk–Thanat formula important development in this regard.2 Secretary cited importance of SEATO treaty for U.S. as constitutional basis our actions in Viet-Nam and troop movement to Thailand. Eyeing Thanat, said these actions show value of treaty and we must not allow development of public opinion that SEATO is unimportant. On contrary, as threat grows, it is more important than before.

Barwick said treaty important to him for same reasons in justifying Australian actions, including economic help, in Viet-Nam and Thailand, said value of treaty clearly demonstrated in troop movements, that treaty has been obscured and could be endangered by excessive concern with organization and procedure. Troop movements to Thailand showed that complicated rules don’t have much meaning when time to act comes. Secretary commented action itself under treaty more important than form. Holyoake fully supported Australian position.

Lord Home registered partial dissent. He said decisions in an alliance should be unanimous, that we shouldn’t “fiddle around” with decisions which could mean peace or war, that perhaps better leave present rules alone and rest on our ability to act, as in Thailand recently, “in spirit of SEATO treaty.” Home emphasized, however, that this not final word and UK willing to consider abstentions proposal. When Home at one point said abstentions might allow less than full memberships make “foolish” decision, Alphand of France corrected him with observation that veto power is preserved.

Thanat said Thailand does not seek or want any member SEATO act against its will but wants prevent reduction SEATO to importancy [impotency]. Problem is not just unanimous decision when issue arises but failure reach any decision over period of months. Secretary said question perhaps is that minority should not prevent action by others if they feel they can act in accordance with treaty provisions. Thanat said Thailand could show “resilience” to reach agreed solution on voting rule.

Alphand said that with some amendments, France perhaps able accept recent proposals, is thinking in terms of decision on basis affirmative votes by three-fourths membership if there no vetoes. Paris sending instructions to Bangkok shortly.

Suggestion by Pelaez that group formally endorse Rusk–Thanat formula, his major contribution to discussion, was answered by Secretary to effect each Foreign Minister would have to speak for own country but otherwise proposal was lost in discussion and not pursued by Pelaez.

Was clearly understood by all present that decision would be reached on voting procedures in Council Reps Bangkok.

FYI. Pote Sarasin unhelpful with excessive insistence on importance procedural rules, and statement at one point that “procedural questions” might be decided by majority vote though decisions on “security questions” should, of course, be on basis unanimity. End FYI.

Above is uncleared report of Secretary’s remarks.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/9–3062. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Manila, Karachi, Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In Secto 53, September 29, the Secretary provided a brief overview of the luncheon of the SEATO Foreign Ministers (minus a Pakistani representative) and the subsequent 2-hour discussion. (Ibid., 379/9–2962)

2 Reference is to the Rusk–Thanat communiqué, March 6, 1962, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

38. Memorandum of Conversation 38. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 14, 1963.

SUBJECT

Voting Procedure in SEATO

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. John Newhouse, Staff, Senate Foreign Relations Comm.

Mr. John Czyzak, L/FE

Mr. Carl Salans, L/FE

At Governor Harriman’s request, John Czyzak and Carl Salans this morning discussed the proposed SEATO voting formula (SEATO Doc SCR/62/D-158)1 with Mr. John Newhouse of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations staff, who substituted for Mr. Carl Marcy, Chief of Staff, by reason of the latter’s preoccupation with other business of the Committee.

Mr. Czyzak recalled that on February 27, 1962 Governor Harriman had appeared before the Committee in connection with the then prospective issuance of the Rusk-Thanat communiqué (March 6, 1962).2 At that time, Governor Harriman had indicated that there was considerable unhappiness in SEATO regarding voting procedures; that on the one hand Thailand wanted to abandon the rule of unanimity, which would require an amendment of the treaty; and that as a counter-proposal Australia had made a suggestion, which the United States could probably accept, that a SEATO member that did not want to vote affirmatively on a particular matter could abstain in which case that would not be considered a veto of the action.

Since early 1962, the SEATO parties had been discussing various proposals along the lines of the Australian formula; and they had now agreed on a formula which presumably would be finally adopted at the SEATO Council meeting in Paris, April 8–10, 1963. The formula provided that a “target date”, by which members should indicate their decision in regard to a particular proposal, could be set by an affirmative vote of five members. The proposal would be considered approved at the target date if by that time five members had voted affirmatively and no member had voted against. Members who had not positively voted for a proposal would not be bound by or required to participate in such SEATO action although they would be free to do so. Financial arrangements regarding SEATO action in which all members did not participate would be decided on an ad hoc basis.

Mr. Czyzak indicated that the effect of the formula was to provide that abstentions would not be considered a veto. This in no way derogated from the unanimity principle and did not involve an amendment of the treaty.

Mr. Newhouse readily agreed with Mr. Czyzak’s analysis and said he thought the proposal was a good idea. He asked that a copy of the proposed voting formula be made available to the Committee for its records. Mr. Czyzak promised to send Mr. Newhouse such a copy.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 8–5. Confidential. Drafted by Salans. The meeting was held at the New Senate Office Building.

1 As described below, this is a modification of the Australian proposal.

2 See footnote 2, Document 37. Harriman’s testimony before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on “The Situation in Thailand” is printed in Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Historical Series), 1962, vol. XIV, Eighty-Seventh Congress, Second Session, pp. 217–244.

39. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Embassies 39. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain EmbassiesSource

Washington, March 28, 1963, 1:13 p.m.

1659. SEATO. Herewith summary US views regarding SEATO and forthcoming SEATO Council Meeting which addressees may in their discretion tailor to individual needs in discussions with host governments.

1. We do not expect major developments, significant initiatives or dramatic results. Main benefits will be demonstration that members continue regard SEATO as significant instrument of policy. At same time, we believe it affords opportunity: (a) make clear to Communists and non-Communists alike there no weakening U.S. security commitments Southeast Asia; (b) impress on members our conviction that SEATO valuable for important but limited set of defense purposes—chiefly deter overt aggression or meet it if necessary; (c) encourage Asian members accept SEATO on this basis and discourage unrealistic expectations; (d) assure Thailand we intend meet defense commitments for which Manila Pact is essential instrument, and (e) encourage Australia’s growing role in Southeast Asia.

2. Speedy deployment of forces to Thailand in May 1962, Rusk–Thanat communiqué, new voting procedures, and new program to improve logistics base in Thailand are among recent developments which have demonstrated SEATO value as vehicle for collective actions and improved its ability to act.

3. SEATO remains important to US as essential legal instrument for security commitments Southeast Asia and vehicle for collective action if military intervention necessary. It has deterred overt Communist aggression in treaty area. It provides valuable mechanism for coordination of military planning for defense of area and is especially important for our relationship with Thailand, our only ally in continental Southeast Asia.

4. We believe any weakening in area security relationships in treaty area contrary to our interests in light continuing Communist threat and instability.

5. We expect greatest area problems in minds participants will be Laos and Malaysia. a. Laos. We will stress importance serious and earnest efforts to make Geneva Agreements work noting 1) number measures and courses of action open to us before question military action need arise; 2) that action to be taken in unlikely event Communists make militant move to take over in near future is question to be considered in light circumstances at the time.

b. Malaysia. We will not initiate discussion this subject but recognize it may come up anyway. We assume British and Phil statements if any will not go beyond presentation their views, and that others will confine remarks to general expression of concern. We intend remain in background restricting comment to statement our well-known position on this problem and North Borneo dispute plus observation we do not believe there any immediate Communist threat to Borneo.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Secret. Drafted by Krause and Peters; cleared in draft with Bell and with Hannah, John N. Gatch, Officer in Charge of Pakistan–Afghanistan Affairs, and Rice; and approved by Rusk. Sent to all seven SEATO posts and CINCPAC for POLAD.

40. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Embassies 40. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain EmbassiesSource

Washington, April 20, 1963.

CA-11778. Subject: The Eighth SEATO Council Meeting, Paris, April 8 to 10.

Summary Assessment

Although there were no major issues to be resolved and, as expected, no dramatic results, the Eighth Council Meeting in Paris took place in an atmosphere of extreme cordiality, the participation of most delegations was positive and constructive, and U.S. objectives were well served. Secretary’s Rusk’s strong assurances of continued U.S. support of SEATO were well received. The organization’s past difficulties were openly acknowledged, but members displayed no doubt of SEATO’s present value or continued existence. At the same time with unanimous support for collective security, and less emphasis upon non-military activities within SEATO, the members reflected a more realistic and a more precise understanding of the role SEATO plays in area affairs. Recent procedural changes and the troop movements to Thailand in 1962 were cited by most delegations as strengthening developments. The organization’s military activities, particularly military planning and SEATO exercises, were strongly endorsed. Emphasis was also placed upon the need for increased attention to countersubversion. The importance of economic and social development was stressed, but there was a notable absence of insistence upon SEATO economic assistance over and above bilateral aid programs.

The participation of Pakistan, represented by the Ambassador in Paris rather than the Foreign Minister, was narrowly nationalistic and not on the same constructive plane as that of other members. Pakistani statements were marked by criticism of American and British military aid to India and attempts to establish that India and Afghanistan, rather than Communist China, represented the main threat to area peace. France did not carry through in the Council meeting the surprisingly forthright attitude French representatives displayed in the Military Advisors Meeting, and, though cordial throughout and a good chairman, Couve de Murville made no significant contribution to discussion of matters of substance.

The meeting was given an unexpected sense of significance by the outbreak of fighting in Laos, and afforded an opportunity for close and immediate consultation among some of the countries most involved in developments there. It is notable that SEATO members, without discounting the past or future significance of Laos for the organization, accepted as a matter of course that the Plaine des Jarres fighting should be dealt with in the first instance in the context of the Geneva Agreements.

Although overshadowed locally by the Secretary’s meeting with de Gaulle and other developments relating to our NATO relationship, the SEATO meeting helped underline one of the roles of Free World alliances by providing an occasion to meet together in an atmosphere of harmony and friendship, thus serving to ameliorate current differences.

The bilateral talks made possible by a gathering of such a large number of foreign ministers proved to be one of the more important aspects of the meeting from a substantive point of view.

The onset of the meeting had the meritorious effect of bringing to decision a large number of issues pending within SEATO for a long time. The assent which Pakistan gave to a number of proposals to which it had previously been unable to agree was particularly notable.

[Here follow sections on “Countersubversion” and “Economic Development” and an assessment of the participation by individual delegations.]

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 FR (PA). Secret. Drafted by Peters, cleared by Young, and approved by Hilsman. Sent to the seven SEATO posts and Rangoon, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Kuala Lumpur, Djakarta, Hong Kong, Tokyo, CINCPAC POLAD, New Delhi, and Ankara.

BurmaBurma

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, January 12, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690B.93/1–1261. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Hong Kong, and Taipei.

42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of China

Washington, February 4, 1961, 9:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–1461. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lutkins and Martin, cleared by Parsons and in draft by Chapman, and approved by the Secretary. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and Rangoon.

43. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 10, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.5–MSP/2–1061. Secret. Drafted by Cross and cleared by Anderson, Cleveland, and Steeves.

44. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 20, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–2061. Top Secret. Parsons sent the memorandum and enclosure to Rusk stating that both the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs, Foy D. Kohler, and McGeorge Bundy informed him that the President wanted this paper.

45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma

Washington, February 21, 1961, 9:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90B/2–2161. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cross and approved by Usher.

46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Burma, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61. Confidential. In a March 7 covering note to McGeorge Bundy, Bromley Smith noted that the President’s letter to U Nu promised “close personal attention” of the President in resolving the Chinese irregular problem. Bundy wrote the following marginal comment: “Right—but for now I think we can count on DR [Dean Rusk] to keep his eye on this one.”

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, March 31, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690B.93/3–3161. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Taipei, and CINCPAC.

48. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to the Department of State

New Delhi, August 5, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12-BO/8–561. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Under Secretary Bowles was holding a series of regional meetings with U.S. Ambassadors around the world. According to a Department of State press release, the purpose of the meeting was to provide Bowles the opportunity to discuss the philosophy, broad objectives, and specific policies of the Kennedy administration and to consider techniques for improving the overall operation of U.S. missions abroad. Bowles was in Lagos July 26–28, Nicosia July 31–August 2, Rangoon August 4–5, and New Delhi August 7–9. (Department of State Bulletin, August 7, 1961, p. 246) Briefing papers for Bowles’ visit to Rangoon are in a memorandum from McConaughy to Bowles, July 21. (Department of State, FE/SEA/Burma Files: Lot 65 D 439, Briefing Papers, 1961)

49. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense For International Security Affairs (Nitze)

Washington, March 6, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 000.1–121, 1962. Confidential. Sent through William Bundy, who initialed.

50. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)

Washington, March 15, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 0001–121, 1962. Secret. Sent through William Bundy. A note on the source text indicates that Nitze saw it. An attached map showing border peoples and non-Burmese concentrations as of November 1961 as well as centers of dissident activity is not printed.

51. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 16, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret. At the request of John McCone, this memorandum was sent to Maxwell Taylor, U. Alexis Johnson, Roswell Gilpatric, and Robert Kennedy.

52. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, March 19, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.13/3–1962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok and CINCPAC for POLAD.

53. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, July 18, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.13/7–1862. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to Rangoon, to London, Moscow, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Taipei, and Hong Kong.

54. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 22, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 123.7–523, 1962. Secret. Sent to Secretary McNamara and Assistant Secretary Nitze under cover of a memorandum from Captain Paul L. Stahl, Acting Assistant Director for Processing, DIA.

55. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 19, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by David T. Schneider, Officer in Charge of India-Ceylon-Nepal Affairs, and Turner C. Cameron, Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs, and cleared by Donald L. Woolf of SEA; M. Gordon Knox, Deputy Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs; Harriman; Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; and William Bundy.

56. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Kennedy

Washington, May 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Koren.

57. Letter From the Ambassador to Burma (Everton) to President Kennedy

Rangoon, May 9, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PER Everton, John Scott. Confidential.

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, August 11, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, New Delhi, Saigon, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Manila, Hong Kong, CINCPAC, and Mandalay.

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma

Washington, August 30, 1963, 7:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–2 US–BURMA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hannah and cleared by Henry A. Byroade who was appointed Ambassador to Burma on September 10, Heinz, John S. Thompson of INR/RFE, Carl F. Salans of L/FE, and the Program Coordination Staff of AID. Repeated to CINCPAC, New Delhi, Bangkok, and Hong Kong.

60. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Harriman, Hilsman, and Hannah.

61. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 27, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Kinney and approved in S on September 29. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, October 7, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA-US. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, October 28, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA–US. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, Bangkok, New Delhi, and Hong Kong.

64. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, November 29, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Hannah.

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, December 5, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 BURMA. Secret; Priority.

41. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 41. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, January 12, 1961, 3 p.m.

490. Embtel 416; to Bangkok 48; to Taipei 5; to Hong Kong 8.1 During conversation with Embassy officer January 11, Prime Minister’s personal adviser U Ohn brought up subject of KMT irregulars. U Ohn stated GUB determined to get rid of all insurgents, but now intends to concentrate first upon KMTs since they continue to receive outside equipment and support. He claimed KMTs being supplied with modern American arms, some of which better than those available to Burma Army. Aside from difficulties KMTs creating for Burma, U Ohn said they are helping Communists, since they divert Army’s attention from Communist insurgents and are supplying arms to KNDOs who are tied up with Communists. He stated US prestige in Burma continues to suffer as result of KMT activities, and claimed it was becoming increasingly difficult to make press understand why US, if friendly to Burma, continues to allow American arms to be supplied to KMTs.

Embassy officer pointed out US expended considerable effort and expense to assist in evacuation of KMTs in 1954 and since then has made clear that it was opposed to any support to irregulars or their continuing as alien armed forces on Burmese soil. Embassy officer stated US supplies arms to Taiwan only for use in self-defense, as is case elsewhere in world. US has made number of representations to GRC on subject of irregulars and has been repeatedly assured by GRC that it neither exercises any control over irregulars remaining in Burma nor provides them with support or equipment.2

U Ohn replied that fact was nevertheless KMTs continuing to receive American arms from Taiwan. U Ohn said he was unaware US had made public statement expressing either disapproval of KMTs or of their getting supplies and assistance from outside. He also professed be unaware public statement by US that arms supplied GRC should be used only for self-defense, and said he would appreciate being given text of any such statements. In addition, he urged that incoming administration issue new statement making clear US position with respect to irregulars, as well as make further effort to force Taiwan to cease assistance to KMTs and, preferably, get them out of Burma. U Ohn insisted he was not offering any objection to US supplying arms to Taiwan or assisting GRC to maintain self-defense. He found it difficult to accept, however, that US, while supplying arms, was unable prevent them from being sent to KMTs in Burma.

Comment: This attitude expressed by U Ohn continues to be widely held in Burma. Press in past two days has reported intensification of attacks against KMTs by Burma Army. If major campaign against irregulars develops, as U Ohn indicated government intends, seems likely capture American arms may receive considerable publicity in press resulting in revival widespread public suspicion of US involvement with irregulars. In addition to continuing strongest pressure upon GRC to stop further support of irregulars, Embassy believes suggestion US issue public statement making clear once again where we stand on irregular issue has some merit here.3 Embassy would also appreciate if Department could supply as soon as possible past public statements or releases pertaining to questions about irregulars and arms to GRC raised by U Ohn.4

Snow

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690B.93/1–1261. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Hong Kong, and Taipei.

1 In telegram 416, December 8, Snow expressed concern that the KMT issue would have repercussions on U.S.-Burmese relations since the irregulars in Burma were a constant irritant that the People’s Republic of China (PRC) would exploit. The Embassy had reports that PRC and Burmese troops were engaged in joint operations against the irregulars. (Ibid., 690.93/12–860)

2 In a January 19 memorandum to Director Hugh Cumming, INR Office Director for Asia Charles N. Spinks surveyed Government of the Republic of China (GRC) support for irregulars in Burma. After the evacuation of 7,000 irregulars to Taiwan in 1953–1954, the GRC maintained contact with remaining irregulars (estimated at 4,000–5,000); had strengthened its contacts and support after the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis and the Tibetan revolt in 1959; and reportedly offered Lao General Phoumi Nosavan the use of Chinese irregulars in autumn 1960 in his conflict against Kong Le neutralists and Pathet Lao forces. (Ibid., FE/SEA/Laos Files: Lot 65 D 169, 320.11 Chinese Irregular Troops (KMT), Jan.-Mar. 1961 Laos)

3 Telegram 492 to Rangoon, February 16, provided Ambassador Snow with a public statement noting that U.S. equipment in the hands of Chinese irregulars was there without U.S. consent or knowledge. The statement was to be released at Snow’s discretion. (Ibid., Central Files, 690B.93/2–1561)

4 Telegram 455 to Rangoon, January 27, reported that useful public statements were few since Chinese irregulars was not a topic the U.S. Government usually commented on publicly. Under the terms of the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with the GRC, U.S. supplied weapons could only be used for internal security and self-defense, and shipment to irregulars in Burma would be illegal. The Department believed that a public statement from Washington on the irregulars in advance of public allegations in Burma would arouse more suspicion than it would dispel. Ambassador Snow should privately inform Burmese officials that the United States opposed the presence of Chinese irregulars and had privately informed the GRC several times in the past. (Ibid., 690B.93/1–1263)

42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of China 42. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Republic of ChinaSource

Washington, February 4, 1961, 9:31 p.m.

354. Reference Deptel 312 repeated Vientiane 7541 and Embtel 394 repeated Vientiane 11.2

At earliest opportunity you should see President Chiang to present our further views on irregulars problem.

Developments in Burma–Laos border area since November have confirmed our concern and borne out our warnings expressed to GRC over past two years re its support of irregulars and their operations. Burmese, exasperated with presence on their territory of alien forces, have sought and obtained Peiping’s assistance, resulting in entry of Chinese Communist troops into Burma. Moreover fact irregulars ineffective as fighting force now demonstrably clear in view recent Burmese Army capture their airfield at Mong Pa Liao and their Keng Lap base. Thus they cannot be regarded as posing threat of any significance to Chinese Communist control of Yunnan. Lastly, according to reliable information reaching us from Laos, irregulars now entered Laos where their presence offers Peiping good pretext for intervention if it chooses and aggravates already delicate civil war situation.

Tell President we consider it imperative in this situation that GRC avoid any actions with respect to irregulars, including particularly resupply air-drop flights, that could be regarded as provocative. In addition we consider it essential that GRC undertake without delay to effect return to Taiwan of its own military personnel and arrange with governments concerned for demobilization and resettlement of all others. With world attention currently focussed sharply on Laos and in view possibility some form of international presence in Laos there is obvious danger that fact irregulars are in Laos and are resupplied from abroad will be detected and attract public attention. Public revelation of GRC resupply of irregulars in contravention of its public pledge in UN on October 31, 1953 and by Acting Foreign Minister Shen on September 1, 1954 to have nothing further to do with irregulars remaining in area after 1953–54 evacuation, specifically not to furnish them any further support, would have most unfavorable impact on GRC’s international standing and possibly disastrous consequences for already threatened GRC position in UN.3

Tell President that while for obvious reasons it undesirable we be publicly associated with return of GRC personnel from area to Taiwan, we prepared to lend good offices in seeking cooperation RLG, and if necessary Thai Government, and also to lend assistance as necessary and appropriate. Would also be prepared to lend whatever assistance feasible in demobilization and resettlement of those elements who cannot be returned to Taiwan.

We would appreciate President’s informing us soonest what steps GRC taking deal with this dangerous situation and in what ways US might be of assistance.

You may inform President that we also discussing with RLG on urgent basis means of dealing with irregulars problem.4

FYI. During call by Ambassador Yeh on Secretary Rusk yesterday afternoon, Secretary emphasized unfortunate irregulars in Laos; anything giving Chinese Communists pretext intervene was great disservice to Laos and to mobilization of opinion to resist Communists. He urged Yeh to impress on his Government need to clean up irregulars problem.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–1461. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lutkins and Martin, cleared by Parsons and in draft by Chapman, and approved by the Secretary. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and Rangoon.

1 In telegram 312, January 12, the Department instructed the Embassy in Taipei to express to President Chiang “grave concern” over reports that the GRC was planning to offer Phoumi the use of GRC armed forces personnel currently in the Burma-Laos border area controlled by Chinese irregulars. At his discretion, Ambassador Drumright could tell Chiang that without an unequivocal assurance of cooperation, the United States was prepared to apply pressure on him. (Ibid., 751J.00/1–1261)

2 Telegram 394, January 14, reported that Drumright met with Chiang on January 14 and conveyed the substance of telegram 312 except for the threat to apply pressure. Chiang volunteered that Chinese Communist forces were in Phong Saly Province of Laos and would coordinate with Burmese forces against “our guerillas,” as he called the irregulars. Drumright considered the reports of irregular use in Laos a trial balloon and doubted Chiang would act without U.S. concurrence. (Ibid., 751J.00/1–1461)

3 See Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XII, Part 2, p. 165, footnote 2. The statement of September 1, 1954, has not been further identified.

4 In telegram 459 from Taipei, February 7, Drumright reported that he passed to Chiang the substance of all of this telegram except the last paragraph. Chiang promised a more formal reply later, but “with some acerbity” gave Drumright his informal impressions. Chiang complained that the United States was blind to Chinese Communist forces in Burma and Laos and concerned only with KMT irregulars, which were not part of the GRC armed forces and did not take orders from Taiwan. Drumright told Chiang that the main U.S. concern was the dispatch of “special forces” to Burma and resupply and base buildup. Drumright commented that Chiang would probably make a token offer of withdrawal to meet minimum U.S. requirements. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–761)

43. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to Secretary of State Rusk 43. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, February 10, 1961.

SUBJECT

Burma: Use of New Military Sales Program to Influence the Dispute in the Burma Army

At your staff meeting on Monday, February 61 you asked FE to consider the possibility of using the new military sales program for Burma in some way to influence events to our advantage during the present difficulties among the high command of the Burma Army.2 After careful consideration we have concluded that the circumstances do not seem to indicate that anything very useful along this line could be done at present.

The new military sales program could possibly be used as a bargaining counter in an attempt to halt a reduction in the present overt forms of US-Burmese military cooperation. We could withhold or threaten to withhold further military assistance until matters were adjusted more to our satisfaction. The success of such a tactic would, of course, depend upon the existence of a strong faction within the Burma Army so determined to obtain more American military assistance that it would be willing to act to reverse the present trend. No group holding such sentiments has yet appeared.

On the other hand, when the Burmese receive formal notification that we are prepared to negotiate another military sales agreement, they will then be faced with the necessity of making a clear decision for or against further American cooperation on the military side. This should tend to crystallize opinion in the Burma Army and give those elements favorable to further cooperation a concrete objective to work toward. Since recent events have badly disorganized the upper levels of the Burmese armed forces, it will take time for them to sort themselves out and to make any kind of decision. However, in the course of notifying the GUB about the sales program and during the negotiations themselves, if they occur, we will undoubtedly find opportunities to give some quiet encouragement to those Burmese officers who favor our interests in Burma. The sooner we can notify the Burmese the earlier we can commence this process. We are sending a think-piece cable to the Embassy expressing this idea and asking for their comments. (Cable attached)3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.5–MSP/2–1061. Secret. Drafted by Cross and cleared by Anderson, Cleveland, and Steeves.

1 Notes of the meeting are ibid., S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary’s Staff Meetings, January to March 1961.

2 Telegram 546 from Rangoon, February 8, provided a wrap-up of recent resignations, transfers, and dismissals in the Burmese military. The most notable were Brigadier Maung Maung, whose resignation was announced by General Ne Win on February 3, and Brigadier Aung Shwe who had also reportedly resigned. The Embassy reported that all except Maung Maung were planning to depose Ne Win, but he acted first. Maung Maung was not a coup plotter; his opposition was over policy and his personality conflict with Ne Win. (Ibid., Central Files, 790B.551/2–861)

3 Telegram 472 to Rangoon, February 10. (Ibid., 790B.00/2–1061) In telegram 556 from Rangoon, February 10, the Embassy commented on the “shakeup in the Burma Army” and concluded: “In summary, Ne Win has acted with apparent success to quell incipient challenge to his leadership and to prevent possible attempt by army to take over government. In the process he has considerably reduced its future ability to challenge the U Nu government, and possibly also its capability as a national security force, which capability was not too high before. Witness the beatings administered by KMTs and KNDOs recently. The changes he has made also seem to prepare way for some readjustment in anti-Communist, pro-West reputation that army had previously, in direction of more neutralist attitude which is in line with policy of U Nu government, although we should not rush to conclusions on this score. We still have friends in the army.” (Ibid.)

44. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 44. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, February 20, 1961.

SUBJECT

United States Efforts to Effect Cessation of Government of Republic of China’s Support of Chinese Irregulars in Burma-Laos Border Area

In accordance with your request of Saturday, communicated to the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs by Mr. Kohler and Mr. Bundy, I am transmitting under cover of this memorandum a paper examining the problem posed by the Government of Republic of China’s support of the Chinese irregulars in the Burma–Laos border area. This paper reports the background of the problem, brings out certain basic factors involved in it, and, as requested by you, treats in considerable detail the efforts we have made and are currently making to cause the Government of the Republic of China to cease its support of the irregulars.

D. Rusk1

Enclosure2

United States Efforts to Effect Cessation of Government of Republic of China’s Support of Chinese Irregulars in Burma–Laos Border Area

In 1949–50 some of the Chinese Nationalist military forces stationed in Yunnan Province retreated into Burma in the face of the advancing Communists and established themselves in a remote mountainous area of northeast Burma bordering on China, Laos, and Thailand, sparsely inhabited by tribal peoples and not effectively administered by the Burmese Government. The Burmese Government found the presence of these forces in Burma highly objectionable, and finally in March 1953 requested the inclusion on the General Assembly agenda of a resolution charging the Government of the Republic of China with aggression against Burma and calling on the United Nations to condemn its support of the irregulars and to take steps to bring about cessation of this support. Subsequently, a four-nation joint military commission was established in Bangkok under United Nations auspices, with the United States and Thailand lending their good offices to assist the Government of the Republic of China and the Burmese Government in working out and implementing a program to evacuate as many of the irregulars to Taiwan as possible. By September 1, 1954, when the Joint Military Committee terminated its activities, roughly 5,500 Chinese troops had been evacuated plus another 1,500 dependents and refugees. On October 31, 1953 the Government of the Republic of China’s delegate to the United Nations publicly disavowed the irregulars and promised that the Government of the Republic of China would no longer supply them. On September 18, 1954, following completion of the evacuation operation the Government of the Republic of China, through a statement by its Acting Foreign Minister, reiterated publicly that it would not maintain any relations with any irregulars remaining in the area nor furnish them with any support or assistance.

Following the 1953–54 evacuation this problem lay largely dormant until 1958. Beginning that year we received mounting evidence of a revival of the Government of the Republic of China’s interest in the irregulars, marked by efforts to increase their effectiveness by supplying arms and equipment and by introducing Republic of China armed forces personnel into the area for training and leadership purposes.

There are certain basic factors which are essential to an understanding of the problem that Government of the Republic of China’s support of the irregulars poses to us. In the first place the problem involves a fundamental divergence of national interests between us and the Government of the Republic of China. In our view the presence of the irregulars in the area gives the Chinese Communists a continuing opportunity to intervene directly or indirectly, affects adversely our relations with Burma, and hampers realization of our objective of bringing about increased cooperation between the countries of Southeast Asia in the face of the Chinese Communist threat. To the Government of the Republic of China, however, and particularly to President Chiang, the irregulars represent the spearhead of the forces that will achieve his goal of recovering the mainland. All available information indicates that President Chiang personally is the driving force behind the whole irregulars operation. Undoubtedly influenced by the fact of his advanced age and his recognition that time may be running out for him, he is obsessed with the idea that positive steps must be taken without delay to exploit what he regards as the shaky position of the Peiping regime as a result of food shortages and general popular disaffection. In his mind the irregulars are a key element in the operations that he feels must be undertaken to spark this positive popular unrest into active revolt.

A second major factor in the situation is the composition of the irregulars. The 1953–54 evacuation removed from the area virtually all of the irregulars subject to control from Taipei. Those remaining (estimated at 5,500, including dependents) were either local tribesmen or Chinese from the adjacent province of Yunnan, many of them married to tribal women. For the most part these elements, as local warlords profiting from the opium traffic, were by their standards very well off. They had no real ties with the Government of the Republic of China or any interest in being resettled in Taiwan. These considerations are believed to be still operative in the case of the great majority of irregulars presently in the area. Clearly, however, they are not applicable to those personnel sent out from Taiwan during the past year or two (estimated at between 1,000 and 1,500), who are subject to the Government of the Republic of China’s control and could be evacuated to Taiwan if the Government of the Republic of China were prepared to cooperate.

The Government of the Republic of China’s resupply and reinforcement of the irregulars have been a source of growing concern to us during the past two years. Over this period we have made repeated representations to the Government of the Republic of China—both on the formal, official plane to top officials of the Government and to Ambassador Yeh and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to the persons responsible under President Chiang for carrying out the irregulars operation—urging that it desist from supplying arms and providing support to the irregulars. We have pointed out that the Government of the Republic of China’s support of these forces in Burmese territory placed it in a completely indefensible position, particularly in view of its categoric assertions in 1953 and 1954. We emphasized that our efforts to maintain the international position of the Government of the Republic of China would be seriously impaired if these continued operations in violation of its publicly pledged word were to become known. We also argued that the irregulars’ activity, spurred by Government of the Republic of China’s support, constituted a standing pretext to the Chinese Communists to move into the area or at a minimum to bring intensified pressure to bear upon Burma, Laos, and Thailand. Finally, we stressed we could see no potential benefit from the irregulars’ operations that could possibly outweigh the very real harm that was resulting from them. All evidence indicated that compared with the Chinese Communist forces facing them, they were an ineffective fighting force which presented no serious threat to Peiping’s control of the adjacent area of Communist China.

When these fears were realized late last year in the form of a joint Burmese-Chinese Communist military operation against the irregulars, we again spoke to the Government of the Republic of China urging that it immediately cease supplying arms and providing support to the irregulars and take expeditious steps to withdraw personnel under its control from the area to Taiwan. In January, with their headquarters and airfield in Burma overrun by the Chinese Communist and Burmese forces, the bulk of the irregulars withdrew across the Mekong into Laos. In the light of this new situation Ambassador Drumright on instructions from us (Tab A)3 met with President Chiang on February 7 and told him we considered it imperative that the Government of the Republic of China avoid resupply airdrops to the irregulars that might result in further deterioration of the situation, and by way of positive action commence straightway to evacuate personnel under its control to Taiwan and make arrangements with the Laotian and Thai Governments for the disarming and resettlement of the remainder. The Ambassador stated that we were prepared to assist these moves as necessary and appropriate. President Chiang told the Ambassador (Tab B)4 that he would have to consider our representations before giving us a formal reply, but his immediate comments did not indicate a responsive attitude, and action was therefore taken to supply Ambassador Drumright with our counter arguments to points made by the President and to impress on Ambassador Yeh the great damage that might be done to the larger interests of the Republic of China if it did not cooperate with us wholeheartedly in dealing with the problem.

In addition to our repeated representations to the Government of the Republic of China we have also been at pains to inform the Thai and Laotian Governments of our views on the irregulars problem. Following receipt of reports that the Government of the Republic of China’s supply operation was being facilitated by the use of refueling facilities in Thailand, we made it clear to the Thais in December, 1960, that we viewed the Government of the Republic of China’s support of the irregulars with extreme disfavor and strongly indicated our hope that the Thai Government would not cooperate with the Republic of China in continuing it. In January of this year, having heard that General Phoumi might be considering enlisting the support of the irregulars in the Laos conflict, we made strong representations to him personally cautioning him against further aggravating the Laos picture by injecting the irregulars into it.

During the past week the problem has been rendered even more acute by two new developments. First, the Burmese press, obviously inspired by the Burmese Government, has initiated a campaign charging that modern-type military equipment identified as being of United States origin has been found in the irregulars’ captured bases. Second, a Republic of China PB4Y which was apparently seeking to drop supplies to irregular units still remaining in Burma was shot down by Burmese fighter aircraft;5 one of the latter was also shot down, reportedly by ground fire. This flight was undertaken clearly in disregard of the Ambassador’s explicit representations to President Chiang on February 7. Our Embassy in Taipei reports that the plane was supplied to the Government of the Republic of China under our Military Assistance Program, but had not been supported under the Program since 1958. The Thai Air Force reports that examination of the plane (which crashed on the Thai side of the border) reveals that it was unarmed.

[1 line of source text not declassified] the Government of the Republic of China’s indirect, tentative response to the Ambassador’s February 7 representations to President Chiang. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that if agreement in principle is reached [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the Government of the Republic of China will approach the Embassy formally. In brief President Chiang offers to withdraw all Chinese military forces from Burma and repatriate to Taiwan those willing to leave the area, and promises not to supply further any irregulars remaining in Burma. In return he would want United States assistance in resettling the irregulars withdrawn from Burma in Taiwan, Thailand, or Laos. More importantly, he wants an agreement between the Government of the Republic of China, the United States and the Laotian Government that the 3,000–5,000 irregulars already in Laos should remain there retaining arms sufficient to defend themselves against hostile forces in the area. The latter condition would not be acceptable to us, and the President’s proposition while a step forward does not in our view meet sufficiently the demands of the present critical situation.

As the record shows, the Government of the Republic of China—specifically President Chiang—has consistently disregarded our representations on this problem. Periodically, therefore, we have considered whether we could take steps that would force Government of the Republic of China compliance with our wishes. In each case we have run up against a basic limiting factor, that the amount of leverage available to us is in a practical sense very limited. This reflects the importance of the role that Taiwan plays in our strategic efforts to contain Chinese Communist expansionist pressures. The large and well-trained armed forces of the Government of the Republic of China represent one facet of this, [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] are a variety of intelligence operations conducted on and from Taiwan that are dependent on the cooperation of the Government of the Republic of China. Any major sanctions against the Government of the Republic of China, such as termination or drastic reduction of our military aid program, would place these operations in jeopardy and also tend to undermine our larger interests in the region.

I do not conclude, however, that we are helpless in dealing with the situation. It is possible that the Government of the Republic of China’s cooperation can be forced by a limited, selective cessation of military aid, and that it could be handled in such a way that the adverse repercussions noted above would be avoided or held to a minimum. Again I think that results might be obtained by informing President Chiang that unless he complies with our wishes on the irregulars problem, we will not be able to continue to work with the Government of the Republic of China in training special forces personnel and planning possible operations by them against the mainland. On February 17, I authorized the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs to discuss [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on an exploratory basis the desirability and feasibility of exploiting these possible areas of pressure. These discussions have been begun, and it is planned to send further instructions to Ambassador Drumright within the next few days.6

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–2061. Top Secret. Parsons sent the memorandum and enclosure to Rusk stating that both the Assistant Secretary for European Affairs, Foy D. Kohler, and McGeorge Bundy informed him that the President wanted this paper.

1 Rusk’s signature appears in an unidentified hand, indicating Rusk signed the original.

2 Drafted by Lutkins and cleared by Martin and Scott and in draft by Cleveland and Anderson.

3 Not attached, but Drumright’s instructions are printed as Document 42.

4 Not attached, but see footnote 4, Document 42.

5 Allen Dulles provided the President’s Military Aide, General Chester Clifton, background information on the shooting down of the PB4Y aircraft in a letter of February 20. [text not declassified] the GRC could not desert the irregulars without loss of prestige among Chinese people in Taiwan, on the mainland, and overseas. The GRC could withdraw organized military units which numbered in the hundreds, but that would still leave thousands of “refugees with rifles” who would not come to Taiwan. A note on the letter indicates that McGeorge Bundy briefed the President on it. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Laos, General, 2/20/61–2/28/61)

6 In a February 23 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Parsons reported that Rusk instructed Drumright to impress upon President Chiang the utmost seriousness of U.S. concern over KMT irregulars in Burma and Laos. Parsons observed: “I do not recall any language of comparable severity being used with President Chiang on any subject in recent years.” The Department asked Drumright for his opinion on possible sanctions against Chiang. Parsons promised to follow the matter “with all possible vigor.” (Ibid., China, Vol I)

45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma 45. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in BurmaSource

Washington, February 21, 1961, 9:41 p.m.

508. Department called in Burmese First Secretary U Pe (Ambassador ill) Feb 21 p.m. to see Steeves on demonstrations in Rangoon.1 Steeves said US greatly disappointed over mass support given anti-American riots since apparently demonstrations based on Burmese public assumption US involved in support Chinese irregulars. This in turn due to heavy play such accusations by press. Steeves went briefly over long history US efforts alleviate irregular situation and emphasized provisions standard MAP agreements absolutely prohibit using US supplied equipment as alleged has been done in Burma. He reiterated our determination act strongly and promptly if investigation showed agreements were violated and expressed hope that demonstrations were not indication that our efforts at building up good relationships between US and Burma have failed.

Tone throughout “more in sorrow than anger” but purpose talk was make clear USG seriously concerned and disappointed that GUB allowed demonstrations get started in face categorical denials by USG it not involved with supplying irregulars and moreover despite assurances we would act if investigation proved agreements violated.

U Pe was given following aide-mémoire. If useful you may use with GUB but Department does not necessarily expect you would wish follow same line in Rangoon.

Begin Verbatim Text: The Department of State has been receiving almost hourly reports from Rangoon concerning the serious riots and demonstrations directed against our Embassy there. We are informed that there has been extensive damage to the Chancery building but that Police and Burma Army units have so far been able to prevent actual entry by the rioters. It is disappointing to the Department that these demonstrations have occurred since they inevitably give the impression to the world that the normal and long-standing friendly relations between our countries have been affected.

The Department of State has noted from the reports that the rioters and demonstrators have shouted slogans alleging the United States has assisted the so-called KMT irregulars in Burma. The United States Government has categorically denied that it has done so by public statements in Washington and Rangoon and by private but official statements to the Burmese Ambassador in Washington. Therefore, the Department of State feels that it is both surprising and disappointing that demonstrations hostile to the United States were apparently based on these grounds. End Verbatim Text.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.90B/2–2161. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Cross and approved by Usher.

1 On February 21, mobs in Rangoon besieged the U.S. Embassy and attacked the Pan American Airways office. Damage to both was limited to broken windows, smashed furniture, and damage to automobiles. By midnight, the Burmese Army took charge of security in Rangoon, deployed tanks around the Embassy, and limited further attacks. No Americans were injured. (Telegrams 612, 615, and 618 from Rangoon, February 21, 22, and 22; ibid., 790B.00/2–2161 and 790B.00/7–2261)

2 On February 22, at 10 a.m., the Deputy Chief of Mission handed Barrington a copy of this aide-mémoire. (Telegram 622 from Rangoon, February 22; ibid., 611.90B/2–2261)

46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 46. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Proposed Reply to Prime Minister U Nu’s Letter

There are enclosed telegram No. 663 from Rangoon, containing the text of a letter addressed to you on March 2, 1961 by Prime Minister U Nu of Burma, together with a suggested reply to the Prime Minister.1

The letter from the Prime Minister is warm but very frank. It sets forth the Burmese view of the relationship of the United States to the problem of irregular Chinese troops in Burma. He requests that you “use your great personal authority and influence to bring to speedy end this intolerable situation which, while it lasts constitutes a standing grave threat to the cordial friendship which so far has subsisted between our two countries”.

The reply suggested is couched in friendly terms and expresses a desire to assist Burma with this problem. It explains quite frankly, however, that the Government of the United States is not responsible for the presence of the irregulars in Burma nor for the supply of arms to them. It also states specifically the results of our recent tough démarche to Chiang Kai-shek.2

I believe that such a reply, while setting the record straight with regard to our position, will be welcomed by U Nu because of its friendly personal address to him and its expression of determination to assist Burma in its problem. Moreover, the receipt by U Nu of such a letter from you at this time should serve to strengthen his own prestige in Burma. U Nu, in his own way, has been consistently anti-Communist, although he confines this practice largely to Burma’s internal affairs. Anything we can do to bolster U Nu’s position is especially useful at this time because there is increasing disunity in his ruling party and a trend toward neutralism in the Army’s foreign outlook which had previously been strongly anti-Communist.

If you approve the proposed message, it will be transmitted telegraphically to our Embassy at Rangoon for delivery to U Nu by Ambassador Snow pending receipt of the signed letter.3

It is recommended that no publicity be given to your message.

Dean Rusk4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Burma, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61. Confidential. In a March 7 covering note to McGeorge Bundy, Bromley Smith noted that the President’s letter to U Nu promised “close personal attention” of the President in resolving the Chinese irregular problem. Bundy wrote the following marginal comment: “Right—but for now I think we can count on DR [Dean Rusk] to keep his eye on this one.”

1 Telegram 663 is in Department of State, Central Files, 793.551/3–261. The suggested reply is not printed; see footnote 3 below.

2 See footnote 6, Document 44.

3 The reply was sent to Rangoon in telegram 542, March 6. The President informed U Nu that the United States had received “firm assurance” from the Republic of China that it would “withdraw to Taiwan all irregular troops responsive to its influence and will disassociate itself from and no longer supply those who do not respond to its orders.” (Ibid.) In a separate telegram, Parsons informed Snow that Rusk wanted the Burmese Government, and especially Barrington, to know that the decision of the Government of the Republic of China was a result of “most insistent representations.” Friendly relations were a “two-way street” and Burma should deal with the United States fairly and with good will in relation to captured U.S. equipment and discouragement of anti-American demonstrations. (Telegram 519 to Rangoon, February 26; ibid., 793.551/2–2661)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 47. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, March 31, 1961, 6 p.m.

774. James Barrington, Permanent Secretary, Burmese Foreign Office, conferred with Secretary Rusk at Embassy residence Bangkok, 7:00 to 8:00 P.M. March 29. Ambassadors Johnson and Snow also present.1

Barrington first presented to Secretary a copy of Prime Minister U Nu’s play “The Wages of Sin”, stating U Nu particularly hoped Secretary would find time to read it. Secretary replied he had heard of play and was very happy to have a copy.

Then Barrington took up KMT issue in some detail, beginning with brief historical review. In 1953–54, because KMT irregulars had allied themselves with Shan and Karen insurgents who were seriously threatening continued existence of Burmese Union, GUB had taken case to UN. As Secretary would recall, GUB also terminated USG’s technical assistance program in Burma as consequence of charges it felt compelled to make against US in that connection. Evacuation of KMT irregulars undertaken in 1954 had not been thorough enough to remove them all. Moreover, Formosa Regime had re-supplied the remainder and, in recent years, increased their numerical strength and combat effectiveness.

The action initiated in 1961 to remedy situation, including current evacuation program, had been going quite well so far, but GRC had now begun to announce that program would be terminated mid-April. This was causing considerable concern in Rangoon because according to Burma army sources a group of at least 500 irregulars, who had first retreated to Northern Thailand, had now returned to Burmese territory and were moving Westward toward or into Kayah State. Back in 1952–53, KMTs, in conjunction with KNDOs, had occupied Loikaw, Capital of Kayah State. Danger now was that this group and other KMTs might again join forces with KNDOs and cause serious further trouble. In 1953–54, although Burmese government had become aroused over KMT issue to point where US-Burmese relations had suffered, the Burmese public had not been nearly as inflamed as it was now.

Barrington had been instructed to ask Secretary for all possible USG assistance in insuring that KMT problem was completely eliminated this time. Something needed to be done about the 500 irregulars he had referred to, and it would also be very desirable for GRC to extend evacuation program until combined efforts could bring about removal greatest possible number of KMTs. Barrington went on to say that Burmese Parliamentary Leaders were beginning to assert in debates that SEATO Bases had been used in support of KMTs and would be again. Burmese public opinion was picking up this theme and hostility was mounting against SEATO, whereas previously no strong feeling in Burma about SEATO other than clear decision on part of GUB not to consider membership therein. Barrington thought there were upward of 3,000 KMTs left in Burma, possible 3,500. Johnson and Snow both questioned these figures as appearing too high.

The Secretary in reply first pointed out that there were no SEATO Bases as such; there were merely bases situated in SEATO countries. Barrington acknowledged that in talking about SEATO in this sense, Burmese really meant Thailand, but since Thailand was neighboring country, Burmese did not like to accuse Thais directly for fear of damaging friendly relations.

The Secretary said that upon assuming office in January, he had been dismayed to find KMT issue, with which he had been so familiar in early fifties and even during World War II when he had served in the area in command of KMT troops, had arisen again as major problem. As Barrington knew, firm representations had been made in Taipei and much accomplished already toward resolution of the problem. GRC gave every evidence of sincerely and efficiently cooperating. US Government would continue to help in every appropriate way but he wished to make it clear that US was not involved; in short, the problem was not “our baby.” He had personally gone to considerable lengths since January to ascertain whether any branch of US Government, even at middle or lower levels, had been involved in or had even connived at KMT re-supply and build-up. He had found no evidence of any such thing. He realized that any country such as Burma had sensitivities but he thought GUB should appreciate that United States also had its sensitivities. President Kennedy, as his letter to Prime Minister U Nu must surely have revealed, had special interest in US relations with Burma. The President also had strong feelings and opinions on certain subjects. He had strong feeling with regard to US prestige and respect for our good faith and would not be prepared to have them put in question by anybody. There was, for example, the case of Lumumba’s death; USG had had no part whatsoever in his death and yet when certain people “pushed the button,” demonstrations occurred simultaneously against American Embassies in forty different countries. There had also been the mob action against our Embassy in Rangoon. We were not prepared to accept such actions with equanimity. Riots inspired or abetted by Governments against our Embassies were something we were “not having” and we looked to governments to take the proper steps to prevent them.

Barrington, after taking rather confused exception to implication that February 21 riot against Embassy Rangoon had been government-inspired (Note: It was in fact inspired by anti-US propaganda fed to press by Burma Army), sought to defend role of Rangoon police on that occasion, although he acknowledged police had not handled situation February 21 as well as they might have. Prime Minister had been out of town; other cabinet ministers had been indecisive; police had hesitated to start shooting; but two people were killed and fifty or more injured by police action.

After some further discussion about KMTs, the Secretary outlined briefly the current US position on Laos. The Russians had not yet replied to British proposal that cease-fire be agreed upon, to be followed by reactivation of ICC and convoking of 14-nation conference. British proposal, supported by USG, represented clear test of Communist intentions. If Communist countries persisted in their military and subversive efforts, “there would be trouble in Laos.” The Secretary believed that neither Burma nor other comparable nations wanted to see Laos go Communist.

Barrington agreed Burma did not want Communists to take over Laos. He supposed Russian hesitation in responding to British proposal had been occasioned by ChiCom objection to having an Indian again serve as Chairman of ICC in view of present tension in ChiCom-Indian relations. The Secretary said that since Burma realized the threat which Communism represented for Laos, GUB could play a most important part in the 14-Nation conference deliberations when the time came.

The Secretary asked Barrington if all other aspects of US-Burmese bilateral relationship were in reasonably good order. Barrington indicated he believed they were. The Secretary told Barrington that although American Ambassador in Rangoon was always available, he, himself, had retained his genuine interest in Burma and would be willing to hear personally from Barrington or other Burmese officials if they wished to bring some particular point to his attention in that way.

Snow

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 690B.93/3–3161. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Taipei, and CINCPAC.

1 Rusk was in Bangkok attending the SEATO Council meeting March 27–29.

48. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to the Department of State 48. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) to the Department of StateSource

New Delhi, August 5, 1961, 7 p.m.

Secun 36. Secretary and President from Under Secretary Bowles. In course of long, detailed, and extremely useful discussion with U Nu, question of ChiNats in North Burma came up repeatedly. Prime Minister stated that shipments US aid in 1952–53 from Taiwan to this irregular force had come at time when Burmese Government was already sorely pressed by rebellious Kachins, Shans, Karens, plus two separate Communist groups and had very nearly broken back of his government.

Again last fall ChiNats reinforcements plus supplies provided to Taipei Government by US resulted in substantial casualties to Burmese Army, fresh opportunity for ChiComs and further loss traditional respect by Burmese for US Government.

Prime Minister accepted my regrets, explanations, and assurances that action of ChiNats on Taipei had been taken without our approval. While expressing personal confidence in new Kennedy administration, he added, some of his colleagues who did not have benefit of his personal contacts with US leaders over period of years, were still embittered and suspicious. Although he knew US had no part in present difficulties in Shan area, inevitable that Communists in Burma should spread rumor that we were involved and many Burmese believed them.

Comment: Against this background, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report from Taipei referring to existing organization of 3,000 ChiNats in Burma although unsubstantiated was most disturbing. If Taipei Government should seek again encourage this activity and regardless proof of our disapproval, US position and influence in Burma would be destroyed for some time to come.

Under circumstances believe it essential we underscore our insistence that any ChiNats aid to or contact with this insurgent group must not be resumed under any circumstances and that Embassy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Taipei be instructed watch situation with utmost care.

I should add that there was no indication that Prime Minister Nu suspects present activity or even communication with Taiwan. On contrary, he said that ChiNats appeared to have made clean break with what he referred to as Chinese “remnants”, whom he asserted had been broken up and dispersed.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.12-BO/8–561. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only. Under Secretary Bowles was holding a series of regional meetings with U.S. Ambassadors around the world. According to a Department of State press release, the purpose of the meeting was to provide Bowles the opportunity to discuss the philosophy, broad objectives, and specific policies of the Kennedy administration and to consider techniques for improving the overall operation of U.S. missions abroad. Bowles was in Lagos July 26–28, Nicosia July 31–August 2, Rangoon August 4–5, and New Delhi August 7–9. (Department of State Bulletin, August 7, 1961, p. 246) Briefing papers for Bowles’ visit to Rangoon are in a memorandum from McConaughy to Bowles, July 21. (Department of State, FE/SEA/Burma Files: Lot 65 D 439, Briefing Papers, 1961)

1 In Secun 37 from New Delhi, August 5, Bowles reported on a 1–1/2 hour private conversation with U Nu about U Nu’s April visit to Peking, his evaluation of the situation in China, and how it related to Burma. (Ibid., Central Files, 100.12-BO/8–561)

49. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense For International Security Affairs (Nitze) 49. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense For International Security Affairs (Nitze)Source

Washington, March 6, 1962.

I–2674/62

SUBJECT

An Analysis of the Current Situation in Burma

On 2 March 1962, General Ne Win, Chief of Staff, Burma Defense Forces, overthrew the Government of Premier U Nu in a swift bloodless coup d’etat.1 The Union Revolutionary Council (URC) (see attachment “A”)2 which has been established by General Ne Win to act as an interim government, has declared that it intends to continue a “neutral” foreign policy. This declaration of a neutral foreign policy follows the same pattern of the previous coup led by General Win in October 1958. In the previous 1958 caretaker government, General Ne Win did not shift radically from U Nu’s neutralist policies. However, General Ne Win did rescind U Nu’s cut-off of U.S. economic assistance and agreed to accept American aid for specific purposes.

International policy as conducted by the U Nu government is not considered to be a major factor in the causes for the present coup d’etat. The assignment of U Thi Han, a civilian non-military member of Revolutionary Council, to a Foreign Affairs portfolio is indicative of the low priority assigned to Burma’s foreign affairs problems. U Thi Han was also a minister in the previous Ne Win 1958 Caretaker Government and is a close friend of General Ne Win and General Aung Gyi.

General Ne Win has stated that one of his reasons for the latest coup was to check the disintegration of Burma. It would appear that General Ne Win was not only referring to the serious economic problems caused in part by the Government of U Nu but to the increasing demands of Burma ethnic minorities for a federal type government. General Ne Win has viewed skeptically U Nu’s handling of the ethnic minorities demand for a federal form of government which if approved would have made Burma proper a constituent state on a par with the other minority states within Burma. The Burmese Army feared that the National Seminar on Federalism which was attended by all minorities and political parties was reaching a point where U Nu may have felt compelled to make concessions to the minorities or face the possibility of the secession of the Shan States from Burma. Also, the Burma Army was aware of Shan and Karen insurgent overtures to the Thai and Lao Governments for assistance in their independence struggle with Burma. The possibility of an outbreak of general rebellion in the ethnic minority areas of Burma against the Burmese Army is greatly increased by the Burmese Army’s present position on the “Federal Form of Government” issue.

It is not yet known what the attitude of the Revolutionary Council will be towards the Military Officers who were purged by the U Nu government in January 1961. These officers in a sense were “exiled” to diplomatic posts abroad. Brigadier Maung Maung was made Ambassador to Israel and Aung Shwe was appointed Ambassador to Australia. Five other Colonels were assigned to military attaché posts abroad. These purged officers had occupied prominent posts in the earlier caretaker government and generally demonstrated administrative competence. It is well known that many of these officers are staunch anti-Communists and are generally pro-U.S. Whether or not they will be recalled from their diplomatic posts abroad by General Ne Win may give an insight into the future leanings of the new Revolutionary Council in its East-West posture.

The first coup d’etat by General Ne Win in 1958 had the approval of U Nu and therefore the “caretaker government” of Ne Win had the support of many civil administrators and civil servants which ordinarily the military regime could not have depended upon. However, this latest coup does not have the sanction of U Nu and the new interim government may experience difficulties in finding qualified administrators who will carry out effectively the proposed policies of the new government. This problem is further compounded by the fact that most of the “purged” military officers now in diplomatic “exile” are considered to be some of the most competent administrators within the Burmese Armed Forces.

L. C. Heinz
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 000.1–121, 1962. Confidential. Sent through William Bundy, who initialed.

1 The coup began on March 2 at 7 a.m. with the police and army securing Rangoon. At 8:50 a.m., General Ne Win announced that the army had taken control in light of the “deteriorating” situation. (Telegrams 634 and 637 from Rangoon, March 2; Department of State, Central Files, 790B.00/3–262) The Department of State hesitated to extend recognition to the new regime. After concluding that the new government was in effective control, had the acquiescence of the people, and seemed able to discharge its international obligations and maintain friendly relations, the United States informed the new Burmese Government of its desire to maintain cordial relations. (Telegrams 496, 500, and 505 to Rangoon, March 2, 3, 5; ibid., 790B.02/3–262; 790B.02/3–363, and 790B.00/3–562)

2 Attachment A contained a list of the members of the Revolutionary Council of Burma and their current or former positions. General Ne Win, Chief of Staff of the Burma Defense Forces (BDF), was Chairman. Members included Brigadier Aung Gyi, Army Vice Chief of Staff, BDF; Commodore Than Pe, Navy Vice Chief of Staff, BDF; Brigadier Thomas Cliff, Air Force Vice Chief of Staff (BDF); and 11 other military officers. The attachment also listed the expected distribution of ministerial portfolios.

50. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) 50. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)Source

Washington, March 15, 1962.

I–15637/62

SUBJECT

Dissident Ethnic Minority Groups in Burma

The political issue of “Federalism” was a decisive factor in the decision of the Burma Army to overthrow the Government of U Nu. General Ne Win, leader of the coup d’etat, stated that the deteriorating situation and the impending danger of disintegration of the Union of Burma, brought on by the demand for Federalism, compelled him to act in the manner that he did. General Ne Win also stated he had proof that the Shans were in contact with SEATO and planned to join it after seceding from the Union of Burma. It is believed that Gen Ne Win, when he used the word SEATO, was indirectly accusing Thailand of interference in Burmese affairs. In Burma, Federalism can be considered synonymous with the demands of the ethnic minority groups for political, religious and cultural equality.

In political structure, the Union of Burma consists of Burma proper and five semi-autonomous states representing the country’s main ethnic minorities, e.g. the Special Division of the Chins, the Kachin State, the Shan State, the Kayah State and the Karen State. The Shan and Kayah States have the right to secede under the constitution of Burma. Burma, similar to many other nations of Asia, has large ethnic minorities within her borders. There are an estimated 21 million people living in Burma of which 13 million are Burmans while the other 7 million are varied minority groups. The more important of the ethnic minorities are the Kachins (360,000 people), the Chins (420,000 people), the Shans (a close kin to the Thai), who number 1,500,000 and the Karens including the Kayah who constitute 3,000,000 people.

In recent years many of the ethnic minorities have resorted to insurgency to rectify their many grievances and throw-off Burman rule. Of all the insurgent or discontented minority groups in Burma, the largest and the best organized is the Karen group. After World War II the Karen National Defense Organization (KNDO) emerged as the insurgent military arm of the Karen National Union (KNU) group. This Group’s present ent armed strength is approximately 4,500 to 6,000 men. It is well led and experienced in jungle warfare; it has fought against Burma for 12 years. Karen-Burman antipathy dates back to the pre-British era of the Burman Kings who treated the Karens harshly as an inferior subject people.

The newest of Burma’s ethnic insurgent forces is the Kachin Independence Army (KIA). It is believed to be gaining in strength. The KIA forces are well trained and well armed with personal weapons. The basic causes for the Kachin insurgency are similar to those of the Shan and Karens: dislike for the arrogance of the Burman particularly the military. Additional grievances include the ceding of three Kachin villages to Communist China in the recent border settlement and the adoption of Buddhism as Burma’s state religion. The great majority of Kachins are animist or Christian rather than Buddhist. Present Kachin unrest is also traced to dissatisfaction with the Burmanization of Kachin units in the Burma army.

The original aim of the Shans who are Burma’s second largest indigenous minority was to set up an autonomous state within a federated Burma. However, in 1959 certain Shan rulers (Sawbwas) signed over their hereditary rights to the Burmese government and received money payments in compensation. This action was deplored by certain Shans who formed the Shan State Independence Army. Its present strength is estimated to be approximately over 3,000 men. It is believed that this insurgent group has the moral support of the Thai Government and possibly some Thai logistical assistance as well.

Red China’s interest in the ethnic minorities along her southern border is well established. The creation in Yunnan of a Thai autonomous state seems not only aimed at the Thai and Lao peoples but also at the Shans who are ethnically Thai and who refer to themselves as Thai Yi (Big Thai). In the past, Peking also has urged the creation of a greater Kachin State which would be composed of the 400,000 Kachins in Burma, the 70,000 in India and the 400,000 in Red China.

Prior to the coup d’etat the Burmese Armed Forces were planning a counter-insurgency campaign primarily directed against the dissident ethnic minority groups. Their military plans called for an all-out offensive in mid-1963 against the insurgents and the FY 62 U.S. Military Assistance Program is geared to assist in this program. However, the new Burma Army regime may be forced to deal with these insurgent groups earlier than they had planned as there exists today the possibility of open rebellion in the Shan States. Strong military repression of the Shans could provoke increased rebellion by other minority groups and the defection of Kachin and Chin units from the Burma Army.

The 87,000 man Burma Army could have serious difficulty in defeating these insurgent groups. The possibility of the various dissident ethnic groups banding together in a common cause against the Burma Army could prove militarily and politically disastrous for the Union of Burma. How the new regime of General Ne Win handles the contingency of the dissident ethnic groups may very well determine the political fate of his new government.

It is entirely possible that if the new regime mishandles this ethnic minorities problem they may call upon Communist China for assistance in suppressing the rebellions. Also Communist China on its own motion could use the rebellions as a pretext for extending her influence into the strategic border areas of Burma which she has long coveted.

On the other hand Red China could decide that her interests dictate aiding the ethnic dissident minorities as she has in past established autonomous areas in China that could politically absorb these minorities—particularly the Shans.

It is also possible that the Shans may appeal to the Thais for open assistance in their rebellion against the Burmans and this would further complicate an already complex situation. KMT irregulars in the Thai Lao border area could also become involved in the conflict.

L. C. Heinz
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 0001–121, 1962. Secret. Sent through William Bundy. A note on the source text indicates that Nitze saw it. An attached map showing border peoples and non-Burmese concentrations as of November 1961 as well as centers of dissident activity is not printed.

51. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 51. Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, March 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Burma Allegations of US/SEATO Involvement in Separatist Movements

1. The Central Intelligence Agency is not engaged in operational activities either in Burma or in Thailand which encourage or support Shan insurgency in any way. CIA is aware of the rumors which increased after the Burma Army coup, to the effect that SEATO members were in sympathetic contact with representatives of the Shan and Karen separatist ist movements. In reality, no element of the U.S. Government is in contact with such individuals nor is there any known basis for an allegation of involvement. Reliable reports indicate that Shan insurgent requests for arms and ammunition from the Thai and Lao Governments have been rejected.

2. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] a Karen rebel leader who visited Bangkok 8–12 February 1962, had his requests for supplies parried by Colonel Chalermsak Chutavong of the Thai Joint Intelligence Directorate, and that Prince Na Kham, seeking aid for the Shans from the Royal Lao Government, was refused by General Ouan Rathikoun on 22 February. On 5 March General Wallop Rochanawisut, Director of the Joint Intelligence Directorate, Thai Ministry of Defense, stated that Shan representatives who recently contacted his government on the matter of support for their insurgency were told that they might be allowed to obtain food and medicine, but not arms and ammunition, because to supply the latter would jeopardize good relations between the Thai and Burmese Governments.

3. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Rangoon has expressed the feeling that the allegations and rumors may have been started by the Burma Army to support its coup, but now that the rumors have served their original purpose, Army leaders may be attempting to squelch them for fear that their continuance would jeopardize Burmese relations with the U.S. and Thai Governments.

4. It is recommended that the Thai Government be urged to make clear their position regarding allegations of support to the Shan insurgents. It is noted that Brigadier Aung Gyi, Vice Chief of Staff, Burma Army, and Air Chief Marshal Thawi Chulasap, have dealt directly on the problem of the KMT Irregulars in the past and are reportedly on good personal terms. This channel might be suggested to the Thais.1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret. At the request of John McCone, this memorandum was sent to Maxwell Taylor, U. Alexis Johnson, Roswell Gilpatric, and Robert Kennedy.

1 In a March 27 letter to E.H. Knoche, McCone’s assistant, U. Alexis Johnson noted that, in light of Sarit’s March 9 strong public reassurance that Thailand was not assisting the Shans and Ne Win’s acknowledgement of it, special assurance by key Thai military figures to Burma seemed unnecessary. (Ibid.)

52. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 52. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, March 19, 1962, 5 p.m.

726. Department telegram 537.1 Initial call Ne Win this morning lasted 45 minutes. Throughout discussion only Ne Win and myself present. Ne Win appeared friendly, relaxed, and very self assured. He greeted me warmly and gave no evidence strain or tension in his attitude.

I began call conveying President’s greetings and hope he could visit Washington early July. Ne Win replied wished come Washington and meet President as soon as possible but not sure could get away so early. He said would like defer decision for time being, and felt by end of April he would be able see way clear whether could come or not. I pointed out importance having decision as early as possible in view question President’s own scheduling, and he promised give decision no later than end April. Ne Win referred to putting off Bowles visit, and asked me assure Bowles only timing inauspicious and he would be happy see Bowles at later time. Said visit by person his position so soon after change of government might have been misconstrued and also that he and all members government so busy at time would not have been able see anyone.

Regarding policy new government, Ne Win stressed would follow course “strict neutrality.” Also referred to statement would follow socialist pattern, which he said might bother some people in West. Said not yet decided part private sector would play in economic development plans but this under consideration and in principle he felt should be place for private as well as government sector in economy. Ne Win said not yet time fully consider role other countries with respect objectives economic growth in Burma but his government currently examining question. I mentioned optimism our recent trade mission regarding expansion US-Burmese trade and that we now prepared discuss conclusion investment on grantee agreement to which Ne Win gave agreement discussions proceed at appropriate level.

Ne Win brought up Laos situation stating effort form coalition government under Souvanna Phouma extraordinarily difficult if not impossible. Regarded Souvanna as “weak reed”, but also expressed little regard Phoumi or Souphanouvong. Asked what he expected happen, he shrugged off with “who knows.” Added it was most complicated situation and no easy answers. In context Laos, mentioned possibility of visit Malcolm MacDonald, and said regarded both MacDonald and his wife as good friends. (British Ambassador told me last night some discussion visit by MacDonald had come up in his initial talk with Ne Win.)

In discussion US programs Burma, I reviewed military sales programs and civic action program in terms reference telegram. Ne Win said negotiations military sales program carried on in accordance his wishes and final package agreed upon represented his own thinking as to what needed. Expressed pleasure new phase appeared nearing final solution. After I reviewed recommendations civic action re Namsang project, which I said under immediate consideration, Ne Win expressed some concern that there had been sufficient investigation whether spring able produce sufficient water for gravity flow system. Said he had originally preferred pumping system from river but had been assured gravity flow was most effective way provide water supply. He seemed pleased at progress made in discussions civic action and said he hoped development veteran villages would also stimulate other villages in area to improve cultivation methods et cetera, which he regarded as important by-product this program.

Regarding highway, Ne Win said details should be discussed with Minister Public Works (U Thi Han who also Foreign Minister and now in Geneva; Brig Tin Pe acting in his absence) and his staff who would then bring question to him. However, I went over for him our current concept stressing importance getting started as soon as possible Rangoon–Pegu section while at same time carrying out new engineering survey disputed Pegu–Pye sector. Recalled 75–25 percent division cost up to our original commitment 31.76 million and made clear we now neither reducing nor raising our original financial commitment. Also put him on notice when we had firm cost estimates as result new survey disputed sector we would need again sit down with Burmese and determine how proceed. Regarding question of alignment, Ne Win remarked he personally would like to have road on new alignment as did not wish us build on unsatisfactory alignment where later owing flood or other reasons might produce bad reaction to whole project. He reaffirmed priority his government gave to highway, and assured we could be sure of getting quick decisions from his government. Subject left for discussion Minister Public Works who would report to Ne Win for final decision. (Foreign Office has scheduled call on all members cabinet March 23 so doubt possibility see Tin Pe before that date although I am making effort to do so.)

When I probed regarding other programs such as PL 480,2 Fulbright, et cetera, Ne Win said all programs now under review by new government but no reason not go ahead in discussions with appropriate officials. He stated press report suspending state scholarship program sending Burmese scholars abroad not necessarily accurate, although such course now under consideration. Said government not suspending educational exchange programs with other governments and UN, but “for present” will suspend exchange programs Asia and Ford Foundations. Ne Win stated not entirely happy present status either foundation in Burma. In particular, said activities Asia Foundation under careful review at present. Expressed unhappiness some of Asia Foundation programs at Rangoon University and also complained never gave full accounting of funds. On Ford Foundation, expressed concern support for Technological Institute at Insein. In this regard complained original intent Institute train subengineers and technicians being lost sight of by using it primarily as feeder for engineering college. Also said inadequate attention had been given to qualification students from Institute sent to US for further study. Concluded that in any case for present did not expect use resources either foundation for training purposes.

No discussion rumors Thai-SEATO-US assistance to Shans. Ne Win did not mention and in view tenor our discussion and second-hand nature reports I thought best not on my own initiative engage in denial or defense our position.

Memo of conversation being pouched.3

Everton

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.13/3–1962. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok and CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 Telegram 537, March 16, instructed Everton to inform Ne Win that U Nu had been invited to Washington for 5 days during July 1962. The President would receive Ne Win during that time if convenient. Everton was also to inform Ne Win that the Military Sales Program for Burma would soon be approved. (Ibid., 033.90B11/3–1662)

2 The Agricultural Trade Development Act of 1954, “Food for Peace,” P.L. 480, 83d Congress, approved on July 10, 1954, as amended through P.L. 87–195, approved on September 4, 1961. (68 Stat. 454)

3 In despatch 447, March 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 790B.13/3–2562)

53. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of State 53. Telegram From the Consulate General in Geneva to the Department of StateSource

Geneva, July 18, 1962, 8 p.m.

72. From Harriman.1 I believe Ambassador Everton’s suggestion that I go to Vienna to see Ne Win proved unusually useful. I had two hour talk with him alone before dinner July 17 and then long relaxed conversation during dinner, at which Mrs. Ne Win, her doctor brother, LtCol Bo Iwin, head of intelligence, and Chargé Porter were also present.

Ne Win responded warmly when I explained that President Kennedy’s policies regarding value and rights of neutrals were quite different from those of Dulles. He said he had respect for position President Kennedy had taken and hoped he would not misunderstand his having declined an invitation go to Washington because of inability to leave Burma, and now learning of his presence Vienna.

He spoke frankly that purpose his visit was his wife’s [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] health. She needed treatments Vienna and his presence would be of assistance. He had found that situation in Burma was quieting down, so it was possible for him to leave. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] When I asked about his own health, he said he was going to take advantage his presence Vienna to have his sinuses treated, but that this had no connection with purpose his visit.

At dinner, Mrs. Ne Win [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] entered the conversation freely, always in agreement with her husband, but sometimes taking initiative. In contradiction to previous reports, she did not show pro-ChiCom bias.

In private conversation, when I expressed surprise at violence of treatment of students, he explained actions had been necessary. Communists were dominating university, and previous appeasement similar incidents had simply entrenched them. They held student center as a fortress, which police could not storm. They had small group of Communists in each hostel who dominated and terrorized other students. Many Communists remained on, flunking exams and pretending to continue work. Their real purpose was organization of student body. When university was reopened, he would prevent such students further attendance. He said that, except for Communists, he believed Burmese public opinion would eventually understand why this vigorous action was necessary.

He condemned U Nu timidity and indecision, not only in connection with student matters, but in all others.

When I asked him why he had retained control of govt for so short a period last time he took over, he said he now knew it was mistake. This time he would have to retain power four or five years to achieve his objectives. His general purpose was to unify country, get rid of graft, establish new constitution designed to create social and economic order that suited the Burmese (Burmese socialism). It was ridiculous to talk about Burmese capitalists because there were none. If larger industries were owned privately, they would be controlled by foreigners. He said he was not going to follow Chinese example. He appeared to consider some of Israeli experience of value. He could not accept the kibbutz, but felt newer type of cooperative farming, in which each family had individual homes, was more in tune with Burmese ideas, although he did not indicate he intended to take away from private holdings.

We had long discussion both alone and at dinner about Red China’s economic collapse, during which he indicated he could not tell how much agricultural disaster was due to three years of bad weather, and how much to bad organization. This gave me good chance to expound on Communist failure to produce food anywhere, including Soviet Union. He took no exception to any of this criticism. He commented that farmers needed incentives, particularly important for Burma with eighty percent of population farmers.

He expressed respect for very high rice production in Japan, but did not know anything about similar achievements in Taiwan. He said Japan produces per acre over 10 times as much as Burma. I said I understood it was three times, but he stuck to his figure.

He had great deal to say in criticism of past operations of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] ICA, mentioning certain individuals by name. He maintained they [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had attempted to corrupt Burmese officials. He underlined particularly telephone deal, in which he claimed Burma only got sixty percent of what was paid for. American companies also had attempted to corrupt Burmese. He said he did not consider Ford as bad as the Asia Foundation, but he was suspicious of all foreign agencies operating in the country as attempting to work for foreign objectives not Burmese.

He expressed some feeling over manner in which he was treated in Washington by Pentagon, particularly presentation of decoration without prior consultation. He said he was embarrassed as he did not want to receive it and yet felt he could not refuse it.

He said he had good reaction to Ambassador Everton. He expressed doubts about James Barrington. I understood him to say he trusted his Ambassador in Washington as well as his Lao conference delegate Myat Tun.

Both he and his wife expressed great respect and affection for Malcolm MacDonald. They both agreed that if they had to have been under colonial rule, they were lucky that it was British.

In 1952, Philip Jessup had refused to accept his appraisal of situation in Viet-Nam that the French were through. Ne Win had told him this in Rangoon both before he went to Saigon and after.

Sihanouk he classified as impractical and erratic, but agreed that it was fortunate that a man of force was in control in Cambodia who kept Communists down. He said Sihanouk had the impractical idea of some sort of union between Cambodia, Laos and Burma.

He agreed that South Vietnamese would fight guerillas, but I did not explore further his views on present Viet-Nam situation. He applauded President Kennedy’s position in regard to Laos and when I assured him that we intended continue political and economic aid, he expressed satisfaction. He said Souvanna would respond to pressures and present pressures were to the left. I asked him to work with us to see that Souvanna came back to the center, to which he agreed.

He is suspicious of Sarit and suspects Thais of encouragement to Shan states. However, he expressed confidence in the liking for Thanat. (This ties in with Thanat’s statement re disadvantages of SEATO in development of more friendly relations with neutral nations such as Burma.)

When I asked him about General Phoumi’s visit, he said that Phoumi had contradicted himself, first maintaining he had US support and then shrugging his shoulders when Ne Win asked him why US aid had been cut off. Win had given Phoumi no encouragement.

He spoke at some length about Burmese history. He expressed respect for Roosevelt’s influence on change in British postwar colonial policies, regretted Roosevelt’s plan of not returning Indochina to France had been ignored.

He expressed admiration for President Kennedy’s objectives, and although he believed Cuba had been a mistake, volunteered that he understood difficulty of stopping an operation of that kind when it had once been started by previous administration.

He said US had certainly lost good will during Eisenhower–Dulles era, that we had been as self-seeking as the Russians but expressed confidence that under Kennedy we would regain confidence of world opinion.

In discussing Southeast Asia, I underlined President Kennedy’s desire for peace. We were encouraged by the progress in South Viet-Nam although it would take some time. He commented that of course Burma was vitally interested in events in all of Southeast Asia.

Ne Win was relaxed, accepted me as a friend. He made it plain that Burma wanted to go her own way, without interference by either East or West. In discussing “power corrupts” he underlined that he had great ambitions for his country, but none for himself.

He expressed desire to visit US at some time when it was convenient, but would prefer to come as informally as possible.

All in all, I believe conversation was well worthwhile. I did not attempt to prod him for intelligence, but discussed subjects which appeared to be on his mind.

I am glad to say that so far no press comment has appeared of my visit, which I believe Ne Win prefers.

Tubby

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790B.13/7–1862. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to Rangoon, to London, Moscow, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Taipei, and Hong Kong.

1 Harriman was in Geneva as head of the delegation to the Conference on Laos.

54. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency 54. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, August 22, 1962.

NIE 51–62: PROSPECTS FOR BURMA1

This National Intelligence Estimate was approved by the United States Intelligence Board on 22 August 1962. Significant judgments of the Estimate are as follows:

The Union Revolutionary Council (URC), headed by General Ne Win, has full control over Burma and it can probably remain in power for a considerable period. It is unlikely that a split in the council will develop which would be serious enough to endanger the stability of the government. Ne Win may decide to relinquish office after a year or so but he can probably turn his power over to an individual or a group chosen from the URC without precipitating a serious political crisis.

The URC has announced that it will try to develop a Burmese type of socialism. Implementation of this program has not gone very far, but present indications are that the council plans a greater degree of state control over the economic and political life of the country than is envisaged in any Western socialist system. There is to be a single political organization, a monolithic labor union federation, and an economic system dominated by the state. While Ne Win would not knowingly allow his country to fall under Communist control, the politico-economic system which he plans may give Communists some opportunities to influence the government and to infiltrate the organizations which the government establishes.

The URC will endeavor to eliminate the insurgency which has plagued the country since independence. Through military operations it can probably improve security conditions in the constituent states. However, a solution of the problem of insurgency will depend on the adoption of both the army and the government of a program which convinces the ethnic minority groups that their claims to a special status will be respected.

The revolutionary government will follow a policy of neutrality and nonalignment, bordering on isolationism. It will seek to balance Western and Soviet influence in the country, but at first will be more concerned to reduce U.S. influence. Ne Win distrusts U.S. motives and actions in Burma and neighboring countries and his relations with the U.S. will be cool and aloof. Ne Win and the URC will continue to accord a special status to Communist China, in the belief that cordial and cooperative relations with Peiping provide the best possible defense against future aggression by their giant neighbor.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Burma 123.7–523, 1962. Secret. Sent to Secretary McNamara and Assistant Secretary Nitze under cover of a memorandum from Captain Paul L. Stahl, Acting Assistant Director for Processing, DIA.

1 Dated August 22. (Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165)

55. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 55. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Kashmir; Military Aid to India; Burma

In your memorandum of April 8 to Mr. Talbot1 you asked four questions. The questions and our replies follow:

[Here follow responses to the President’s first three questions concerning the India–Pakistan dispute.]

4. I am concerned about the situation in Burma. Can the Indians do anything about it?

a. India can do little to help in the tangled internal situation and trends in Burma. Burma fears Red China. Despite historic similarities in the foreign policies of India and Burma, Indian influence is not welcomed by Burmese leaders. The Burmese object to all foreign (especially big power) influence and their receptivity to Indian suggestions is further inhibited by a general distaste for Indians derived from their experience with Indians in Burma. The high-level personal rapport between Nehru and U Nu, which formerly contributed to cooperation between the two countries, does not exist under Ne Win. The Burmese presumably also sense a lack of sympathy on the part of the Government of India for their domestic policies. This stems in part from the imprisonment of U Nu, an old friend of Nehru’s, and in part from Burmese nationalization measures which strike hard against the Indian minority and Indian commercial interests in Burma.

b. Although Indian strategic planning is quite inadequate, the Indians in their purely military planning seem to be taking into account the possibility of a Chinese thrust through Burma. Defense against invasion through Burma is, of course, a much more complicated business than the defense of the northern passes.

c. As the Indians make military preparations against such a threat they will also need to improve relations with Burma. An essential prerequisite is for the Indians to think of the Chinese threat in subcontinental terms and to understand the threat in its many forms. To be successful they must be prepared to meet it as a military invasion, as subversion, as a political and psychological offensive.2

D.R.3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDIA-PAK. Secret. Drafted by David T. Schneider, Officer in Charge of India-Ceylon-Nepal Affairs, and Turner C. Cameron, Director of the Office of South Asian Affairs, and cleared by Donald L. Woolf of SEA; M. Gordon Knox, Deputy Director of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs; Harriman; Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs; and William Bundy.

1 Not printed. (Ibid.)

2 In a memorandum of April 23, McGeorge Bundy informed Rusk that the President had an additional question “with respect to the situation in Burma, about which you’ll recall he expressed his concern, asking whether the Indians could do anything about it.

“Granting that the Indians can do little to help, at least in the short run, the President would like to know whether there is anything more we can do about Burma than we are already doing. Are there any ways in which we could get closer to Ne Win and influence him against pursuing so pro-Chinese a course?” (Ibid.)

3 Rusk’s initials appear in an unidentified hand, indicating Rusk signed the original.

56. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Kennedy 56. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President KennedySource

Washington, May 4, 1963.

SUBJECT

The Burma Problem

In his memorandum dated April 23,1 Mr. Bundy expressed your concern over the situation in Burma and your wish to know whether there is anything we can do about it which we are not already doing.

Mr. Bundy also asked if there is any way in which we might get closer to Ne Win and influence him against pursuing “so pro-Chinese a course.”

The attached background paper reflects the Department’s opinion that Ne Win is following a course that is not particularly pro-Chinese by Burmese standards. Although his policies are not very helpful I see little to be done that we are not already doing, to influence the situation directly.

In view of the psychological bent of the Burmese we are limited to indirect means to influence the direction of Burmese policies and improve relations with the Ne Win regime.

Last year we invited Ne Win to visit the United States as a Presidential guest but he was unable to come. We will be watching for development of conditions in Burma which may make it appropriate to reextend this invitation. We are also keeping alert for opportunities to bring Ne Win in contact in Rangoon with important US officials and other Americans when this can be done without our appearing to be making special efforts to woo him. For example, we understand that Chester Bowles will be in the area in July and hope he will be able to visit Rangoon.

In our indirect efforts, we are seeking to enlist the help of non-Communist Asian nations. For example, we have tried to encourage Thailand to work with Burma to eliminate potential difficulties over Chinese Irregular troops still in the area. Also, we are suggesting that Souvanna and the Indian Government help promote Burmese understanding of the Laos problem.

George W. Ball2

Attachment

BACKGROUND PAPER

SUBJECT

The Burma Problem

The following observations lead to the conclusion, expressed in the covering memorandum, that the Ne Win regime is not, in fact, particularly pro-Chinese, and that we are doing everything we can to improve relations between Ne Win and ourselves.

Neutralism—Burma’s neutralism is deeply ingrained. It is derived from the anti-colonial tradition, reinforced by a lack of self-confidence in Burma’s ability to deal with the outside world. The Burmese would like to go about their business with as little foreign involvement as possible.

Attitude Toward Communist China—Ne Win’s attitude toward Communist China is about the same as that of previous Burmese Governments. It is based upon an overriding sense of vulnerability to Chinese power and reflects the conclusion of most Burmese that the only defense is to avoid provocation and to cultivate Peking’s good will.

However, this does not mean subservience to Chinese influence. Burma continues to show a degree of independence, especially where China-Burma relations are not directly involved. For example, Burma under Ne Win has not subscribed to the Chinese position on the Sino–Indian border dispute or on the Laos crisis.

In domestic policies, also, Ne Win is going his own way. The influence of Marxism-Leninism is evident in his domestic program, which he calls “The Burmese Way to Socialism”, but it does not seem to be inspired particularly by Communist China. Moreover, Ne Win continues to fight Communist insurgents and to deny aboveground Communist groups any participation in his Government.

Ideological Danger—There is a danger, of course, that the Ne Win Government’s socialist ideology may cause it to look more to Communist countries, including Communist China, for advice, assistance and inspiration at the expense of the West. Offsetting this is Ne Win’s aversion to foreign influence and fear of Chinese domination, and also Burmese public opinion.

Xenophobia—Xenophobia is an important ingredient in Burmese foreign policy and is an important source of our difficulties in Burma. It was a major reason for Ne Win’s decision to eliminate the Ford and Asia Foundations and to curtail the Fulbright Program. This is an attitude deeply rooted in Burmese national psychology. It is directed at all foreign countries, though it has been displayed most dramatically in relations with the United States. This is partly because the United States “presence” in Burma has been bigger and, therefore, from the xenophobic point of view, more objectionable than that of other countries. Also, in dealing with the United States, Ne Win is not restrained by the fear that inhibits him in dealing with Communist China.

Internal Stability—A potential threat to Burmese neutrality has always been posed by recurring political instability in the country, and this danger exists today. Ne Win’s domestic policies have aroused considerable opposition which, if unchecked, could produce serious unrest. Out of this could come an opportunity for the Communists to seize power. However, our hope is that opposition forces of moderation will develop in an orderly manner and, ultimately, either force the Ne Win Government into more moderate channels or displace it without a civil war which the Communists could exploit.

What the United States Can Do—Although important United States interests are not directly threatened just now, we continue to view Burma with concern and to seek means of improving our relations with it. Unfortunately, possibilities for influencing the situation are limited. Because of Ne Win’s hypersensitive attitude toward United States influence, the present does not appear to be propitious for attempting any new direct approaches to him. Also, we must take into account the growing domestic opposition to Ne Win’s policies and avoid actions aimed at getting closer to him which might have the side effect of discouraging opposition elements who favor principles more congenial to the United States than does Ne Win.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Koren.

1 See footnote 2, Document 55.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Ball signed the original.

57. Letter From the Ambassador to Burma (Everton) to President Kennedy 57. Letter From the Ambassador to Burma (Everton) to President KennedySource

Rangoon, May 9, 1963.

Dear Mr. President: Following an exchange of correspondence with Secretary Rusk,1 it appears desirable to request that I be relieved of my charge here on or about May 20 of this year. It is with genuine regret that we leave Burma but also with deep appreciation for the honor and privilege which has been accorded us in serving under your Administration.

In spite of the problems we have encountered with political changes which have occurred here, we have not lost faith in the long-run future of Burma, although present trends are not encouraging. As I have noted in my correspondence with Secretary Rusk, I consider the coming months to be critical in determining the success or failure of the present regime. I trust that there will not be an extended period between my departure and the arrival of my successor, as the Embassy will require the best resources at its command to serve effectively in this critical period. I hope that my successor may have enough in common with General Ne Win to assure a closer relationship than most of us in the Diplomatic Corps now enjoy. In Burma, personal relationships are all-important, and this is particularly true in the case of the General.

The next period in U. S.-Burmese relations is going to be difficult under any circumstances. Anti-Western feeling on the part of the government is intense and there is no assurance of any early abatement of this feeling. The government has chosen political and economic systems more compatible with those of the Eastern bloc than with our own. We may very well see further curtailment of U. S. Government programs in Burma within the next several months. The objective of freedom of choice is not viable here now. Our objectives to keep Burma non-aligned and independent are shared by the Ne Win regime.

Mr. President, I am aware of the fact that much of our attention must, of necessity, be centered on the Viet-Nams, Laoses, and Cubas. However, I wonder whether it is not possible to develop a form of preventive diplomacy for countries like Burma which will save us from coming to the brink of disaster before decisive action. I am not prepared to admit that Burma has gone beyond the point of no return yet but it will take all of our best efforts to avoid this happening. The room for maneuverability is steadily diminishing. I hope that sufficient attention can be devoted to this problem to prevent this strategically situated country from a complete subservience to communism.

To end on a more hopeful note, one needs to distinguish between the attitudes of the government and the attitudes of the people. In Burma I am persuaded that the vast majority of the people are committed to Western ideas and Western institutions, and they view with apprehension and concern the steady drift to the left. There is a substantial reservoir of good will among the people which is characterized by friendship for the West, by belief in parliamentary democracy and the rule of law. If these democratic impulses can be kept alive under a system of increasing indoctrination, both economic and political, then there is still some real hope for the long-run future of Burma. Part of our task is to discover ways in which we may continue to nourish and sustain these Western ideas in an increasingly hostile climate. This is no easy task but I am confident it can be accomplished with the right leadership. I have confidence in the essential soundness of the people of Burma and hope we can find ways to tap these resources.

If there is ever any way in which I may be of further use to your Administration, please feel free to call upon me. I leave your service with my very best wishes for your continuing success and high confidence in the welfare of our country under your wise guidance. Thank you once again for the privilege of serving in Burma.2

My very best wishes.

Respectfully yours,

John Scott Everton3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PER Everton, John Scott. Confidential.

1 [text not declassified] this correspondence [text not declassified] has not been found, [text not declassified].

2 On May 18, Everton had a final private discussion with Ne Win that lasted over an hour. Their discussion covered a wide range of issues, and Everton used the occasion to suggest that free elections should be held and democracy instituted “at an appropriate time.” Ne Win stated it would take from 5 to 10 years before that was possible. (Memorandum of conversation, May 18; Department of State, Central Files, PER Everton, John Scott)

Everton returned to Washington on June 5—his resignation took effect on May 20—for a 10-day period of consultation. He met with Rusk on 3 p.m. on June 14, but no substantive record of their conversation has been found. (Memorandum from Hilsman to Rusk, June 4; ibid., POL BURMA–US) He requested a meeting with the President on June 11. (Memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy, June 11; ibid.) According to the President’s Appointment Book, Kennedy did not see Everton. (Kennedy Library)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 58. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, August 11, 1963, 2 p.m.

90. Department pass DIA and Army for ACSI. CINCPAC for POLAD. Manila pass Felt. Ref Embtel 72.1

Part I (of two parts). This message in two parts. Part I will list elements comprising background political situation Burma immediately following arrest Friday morning two a.m. principal pro-Western and pro-democratic leaders who remained at large following March 2, 1962 coup. Part II sets forth Embassy analysis including views re future developments.

Part I. Main elements comprising background current political situation (excluding more permanent factors such as geographic location, colonial history, etc.)

1. Inability U Nu’s UP government meet minimum standards of effectiveness during interregnum of military government. Failure Parliament function as law-making body of nation, due U Nu’s insistence upon complete personal control all aspects of government (excepting military which he “left unto Caeser”) and fact opposition (AFPFL) intimidated by knowledge army watching from wings and prepared retake government on any excuse, particularly that of sharp disagreement among the civilian politicians. Stagnation of economy.

2. Objectives of March 2, 1962 coup: a. Excise former political leaders, and under leadership of army:

b. Re-establish national unity;

c. Vigorously propel country along road to socialism;

d. Create new political atmosphere which would have roots in his administration and constitute definite break with system of parliamentary democracy and former constitution.

3. Failure of RGUB: a. Faulty implementation of socialist measures introduced without adequate preparation has resulted in sharp decline economic well-being peasants;

b. Attack on private enterprise has resulted in sharp decline in general business activity creating large-scale urban unemployment;

c. Disillusionment of virtually all other elements of populace—dissatisfaction of preponderant majority;

d. Minority insurgents sustained if not increased;

e. Dissatisfaction overwhelming majority of people with RGUB encouraged leaders of older political parties and, after period of about one year, served reawaken interest in former parties and leaders among people who resent army rule and see no future for themselves in new regime;

f. Impact of foregoing within armed forces, where dissatisfaction with regime combined in some circles by shock of seeing armed forces used as vehicle for expanding Communist influence in government. Departure of Brigadier Aung Gyi and Colonel Kyi Maung from army.

4. Absence of even single competent political leader within government of RC hierarchy. The lack of political sophistication on part of General Ne Win and his naivete in government—as distinct from army—matters should not be underestimated.

5. Visit of Liu Shao-chi last spring2 —In any Burmese government, relations with Communist China form cornerstone foreign policy. General Ne Win appears to have become even more concerned than previous leaders or to have chosen use fear of China as a means of persuading others to support his regime. During last eighteen months this fear of China on part General has become increasingly evident.

6. Increasing unpopularity of his regime has caused the General to seek new sources of support. a. Old line political leaders and parties are rejected—the purpose of the revolution was to rid the country of their influence. (However, he is reported to have recently stated that if it ever came to turning the government back to civilians he would rather [turn] it back to those he took it from than to Ba Swe, Kyaw Nyein and company.)

b. He considers minority insurgents as traitors wishing bring down the nation—no room for agreement except on terms which provide for centralized control and authority.

c. The Communists, in eyes of the General (according to many who know him well) are nationalists at heart. They may advocate extreme form of government but they stand for a united Burma. Furthermore, the mission of government in Burma has ever been to develop a socialist state. Finally, there is requirement to develop Burmese state along lines least apt prove irritating to Communist China while providing for continued independence.

7. For the past three months the major efforts of General Ne Win directed towards reaching accommodation with the Communist insurgents, including [garble—both?] Red and White Hag.3 Embassy does not know conditions General would find acceptable in agreement establishing peace between government and these factions, but it significant that negotiations have been progressing so long and that they have recently provided an opportunity for the General to bring back from China, and the Chinese leaders to send back, twenty or more Burmese White Flag Communist leaders, including the deputy party leader and senior military commander. These leaders had been given refuge in China (some for ten years or more) and heretofore all efforts of Burmese leaders to meet them or discuss their status with the Chinese have been unavailing. Bo Zeya, one of the returned leaders, was a “brother” of the General’s in the “Thirty Comrades”.4 Bo Ye Htut, military leader of the BCP in Burma, is another of the “Thirty Comrades” to come above ground in recent months.

8. Concurrently there have been discussions with minority insurgents, but except for the left-wing Karen group they have not appeared promising. Negotiations with the right-wing Karen forces slated to begin soon, preliminary talks having provided a basis for further talks. No other minority insurgent groups representing significant numbers appear prepared negotiate seriously. Success with Karen factions might start a minority move toward settling differences with the RGUB.

9. Obvious lack popular support for regime, evidence army division and growing evidence that General is prepared make some sort arrangement with Communists combined to convince leading non-Communist political leaders and many other interested observers that the present an opportune time in which endeavor coalesce opposition into effective anti-government force if they are to be in position take advantage stresses they believe are bound to surface in agricultural areas at harvest time, next November and December.

10. Calls to resistance issued first by U Ba Swe on July 19 and followed by U Win, and the subsequent circulation of these speeches at rallies their respective political parties throughout nation.

11. Inauguration of a series of Phongyi rallies which while ostensibly focused on Buddhist matters in fact constituted first public organized anti-government demonstrations.

12. Continuation of RGUB-Communist discussions, supplemented last week by reports that U Nu (some reports add Justice Myint Thein) had been moved to the government guest house, where General Ne Win had also taken up residence and that he had a series of discussions with the General. (Embassy believes these reports accurate.)

13. Prompt RGUB announcement in support of the partial test ban treaty, published on the same day that the ChiComs issued blast and subsequent decision of RGUB to sign on August 14.

14. For one month the RGUB has been deferring signing FY-63 MAP agreement.

Foregoing list not all inclusive and might well have included several earlier developments. One earlier event of particular importance in reviewing current situation in Burma is purge of Brigadier Maung Maung and other high-level pro-Western officers from army in February 1961.

End Part I.

Part II.

1. The imprisonment of eleven of the most influential pro-democratic and pro-Western leaders under circumstances prevailing Burma today, and in particular at time when Revolutionary Council engaged in serious negotiations with Communist underground leaders—including leaders who have returned from China for these negotiations—constitutes another major move in the direction of a Communist-oriented government.

2. Given the apparent ascendancy of Chinese influence in the Burmese underground Communist movement, the return of about twenty top BCP leaders from China for the current negotiations and the growing prestige and influence of the underground Communist groups in the over-all Communist movement in Burma, this move toward Communism also constitutes a move in the direction of establishing greater Chinese Communist influence in Burmese internal affairs.

3. While Burmese position of neutrality and non-alignment may not be overtly affected by this development, the quality of Burmese neutrality will change; henceforth Burmese neutrality will to an increased degree be a matter of lese majesté on the part of the ChiComs. As Burma has always considered China first in any major foreign policy issue, this is a shift in degree rather than kind, but a shift which alters the essential quality of Burmese neutrality. Some support for the foregoing is found in a report of the Japanese Ambassador’s conversation yesterday with a high official in the Foreign Office, in the course of which the Ambassador inquired whether the return of the Burmese Communists from China did not constitute Chinese interference in Burmese internal affairs. The Foreign Office official promptly replied: “Oh no! Proof that isn’t so is the fact that we are signing the test ban treaty.”

4. I do not think the General is deliberately leading his country into the ChiCom orbit. I believe that in recent months he has come to believe that his first objective in foreign affairs must be to protect Burma from what he finds be an increasing danger of a Chinese takeover and that he believes the best chance of doing this is by establishing an internal regime compatible with the Communist regime across the border. Whether the report is accurate or not, I believe his attitude is reflected in a recent report of a conversation in which he is alleged to have stated that “the Americans and the British will never attack us, but they will never fight for us”. In my own mind I think it possible that to some extent the General may exaggerate this fear of China to convince others of the necessity of going along with the new order he envisions for Burma.

5. Conceivably the General may have been trapped by his confidence in being able to wean away from the Communists his former army colleagues (Bo Ye Htut, Bo Zeya) who he hoped would join his leftist-oriented national peace movement which would also be led by other members of the “Thirty Comrades” and be based on the army. There is a theory that one reason for the return of the BCP group from China was the fear that this might happen, a fear which may have been justified according to statements made by Bo Ye Htut both before and after the return of the BCP group from China. By the time the Communists from China made known their opposition to such a development, the General may have been too deeply committed to pull out. Quite apart from this caricature, it would appear that the General had crossed the Rubicon when he permitted the BCP men to return for these negotiations, for at that time he must have recognized that from then on he had to come to some agreement with this group or incur the displeasure of the Chinese, a risk I cannot conceive of him taking in his present frame of mind.

6. The release of the three Thakin leaders of U Nu’s Cabinet may be a balancing act to take some of the sting out of the announcement of the arrests but it probably also serves the purpose of unloading some men he no longer needed to keep in jail and might also foretell Thakin support for his regime. The Thakin faction of the UP Party has appeared prepared to join the General since the first week after the coup, but were embarrassed by the continued detention of U Nu. I believe more Thakins will be released in coming weeks, and that there will be more arrests of democracy leaders.

7. We do not know anything about the conversations between U Nu and the General. The general impression in political circles is that the General has not yet succeeded in getting U Nu to front for him. One contact with a connection with the detainees says that U Nu continues to sign his chits and other papers “Maung Nu, P. M.” My own impression of U Nu at the time he was arrested is that he had ceased to be in contact with political reality. The release of the Thakins does not necessarily indicate that a deal has been made between the General and U Nu. U Nu had resigned from the party leadership before the coup, Thakin Tin is the nominal leader and it would have been characteristic of U Nu to have advised the others that they are free to follow any course they choose.

8. It is questionable whether Thakin support could significantly alter the general picture of non-support for the regime. Support by the Communists would tend to solidify the anti-Communist opposition (the U Bos and the AFPFL are virtually united now) to the regime, but, in theory at least, there might be a favorable reaction among the peasants if they ceased to be the object of Communist Party attention. In fact, one cannot expect the Communists to reduce their political activity as a result of any agreement with the regime.

9. Conversations with U Ba Swe, U Kyaw Nyein, U Win, and other AFPFL stalwarts since their arrests lead me to expect a definite move to open up a new insurgent front led by AFPFL and U Bo secondary leaders who are already positioned in the districts and who have some arms. I do not feel capable of foretelling public reaction, but unless these elements are joined by army units, I do not think that they can do more than mount harassing actions for the foreseeable future. I believe the basic concept is that they will be organized and in being should opposition to the government reach an explosive degree among the peasants or should an opportunity develop for action with disaffected elements of the army

10. Elements working toward a counter-coup will be encouraged, a basic question is where will they find leadership. I do not believe Brigadier Aung Gyi will assume such a role until he finds there is an effective organization in being with a good chance of succeeding. I would expect other potential leaders to be picked up in the near future. I anticipate that the top leadership of the army will remain loyal to the General or leave the army, but will it start a three-pronged civil war.

11. There are reports that Colonels Chit Myaing, Khin Nyo and Saw Myint objected to the arrest and asked to resign from the RC. There are also reports they have been arrested, but not confirmed.

12. I anticipate that the Burmese will soon have to reconsider our MEDT program (if they are not doing so right now) but that our other relations will not change abruptly. For some time the Burmese will be anxious to avoid the impression that they have fallen deep into the Chinese area of influence and I tend to think the Chinese will accommodate them although their dispute with the Soviets might result in their talking a harder line. I expect the Burmese will be particularly anxious to avoid measures which would cause concern to the Thais. I think Soviet influence will not be much affected as it does not appear to be very marked, but that Embassy’s relations with the Communists will prove even less fruitful.

Schnee

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, New Delhi, Saigon, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Manila, Hong Kong, CINCPAC, and Mandalay.

1 Telegram 72, August 6, reported that Ne Win seemed on the point of making a major decision on negotiations with minority and Communist insurgents. Although unable to predict whether major concessions would alienate the Burmese Army enough to act, the Embassy recommended a “policy of quiet observation” and stated its intention to offer recommendations “should the situation jell.” (Ibid.)

2 Chairman of the People’s Republic of China Liu Shao-chi and Foreign Minister Chen Yi visited Burma April 20–26.

3 The Burma Communist Party, founded in 1939, split in 1946 over doctrinal and personal differences into two factions, the Communist Party (Burma) (CPB) or Red Flag Party and the Burma Communist Party (BCP) or White Flag Party. By the early 1960s, the two parties were operating independently in trying to overthrow the government. The Red Flag’s strength was estimated to be around 200 while the White Flag had approximately 1,000 members. Neither was a real military threat to the Burmese Government. (Telegram 108 from Rangoon, August 19; Department of State, Central Files, CSM 9–6 Burma)

4 The Thirty Comrades was a group of Burmese nationalists given military training by the Japanese during World War II. They formed the core of the Burma Independence Army.

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma 59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in BurmaSource

Washington, August 30, 1963, 7:49 p.m.

57. Ref: Embtel 134.1 While sharing Embassy’s concern over disturbing trends in Burma, particularly in this latest phase of efforts made by Burma since independence to control its own left-wing and seek accommodation with China, Department nevertheless believes MEDT/MAP is one of most important of the few avenues open to US for maintaining some influence in Burma. Precisely because of risks implicit in current Burmese political maneuverings, we believe it is important that US not give up or jeopardize this key tool which serves to maintain US position and keeps open to Burma, during this difficult period, the possibility of an alternative to increasing dependence on China. Moreover, an eleventh-hour refusal to conclude agreement would not only discourage pro-free world elements of Armed Services but might counter-productively tend to push RGUB further into Chinese arms rather than the reverse. As Embassy points out, refusal to sign Agreement is a one-shot action which, in absence of some clearly demonstrable threat or provocation, would achieve no useful purpose. As indicated Deptel [Embtel] 99,2 we believe [agree!] that present circumstances do not call for US refusal to sign Agreement to which we are clearly deeply committed through past negotiations.

We recognize desirability of frank exchanges views between US and RGUB, but believe approach to Ne Win at this time, relating MEDT to political trends in Burma, would be interpreted by Ne Win as an unacceptable pressure tactic and might well lead to Burmese termination MEDT, thereby causing US to lose this foothold without gaining any political advantages thereby. Therefore, you are instructed to proceed with arrangements to exchange signatures at earliest date convenient to GUB.

We have noted RGUB desire to exchange notes informally at relatively low-level, but do not think this destroys value of program to US nor does it destroy its political rationale. As Embassy points out, RGUB may desire soft-pedal signing because of Chinese audience. On other hand, RGUB willingness delegate signing of future notes to military channels may also reflect fact MEDT has been fully accepted at political levels as a stable part of Burma’s program which can be handled in future on military technical level. Therefore we see no objection to informal signing by either you as Chargé d’Affaires or Col. Naudts as Chief, MEDT. Presumably whoever signs for Burma will be given full authority to sign. Hope you can arrange final signature by end first week September as desired by Burmese. Do not desire delay until arrival Ambassador Byroade who would prefer to have this matter disposed of satisfactorily before engaging in talks with Ne Win.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–2 US–BURMA. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hannah and cleared by Henry A. Byroade who was appointed Ambassador to Burma on September 10, Heinz, John S. Thompson of INR/RFE, Carl F. Salans of L/FE, and the Program Coordination Staff of AID. Repeated to CINCPAC, New Delhi, Bangkok, and Hong Kong.

1 In telegram 134, August 29, the Embassy commented on and made recommendations on the Burmese request for an exchange of notes on the FY 1963 Military Assistance Program. The Embassy’s main concern was whether Burmese-Chinese relations had become so close that Burmese independence could not be furthered by the agreement. The Embassy also noted that failure to sign an agreement might impel Burma into even closer association with its neighbor China. The Embassy Country Team recommended that Chargé Schnee request a chance to explore the matter with General Ne Win before making a decision. (Ibid., DEF 19 US–BURMA)

2 Dated August 13. (Ibid.)

60. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 60. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, September 10, 1963.

SUBJECT

Proposed Policy Statements to General Ne Win of Burma by Ambassador Byroade

Enclosed is a memorandum recommending that Ambassador Byroade be authorized to make certain policy statements to General Ne Win in the President’s name. The statements are in the nature of reassurances, without specific commitments, that the United States would assist Burma in resisting foreign threats to its independence.

Ambassador Byroade has an appointment with the President today at 4:30 p.m., and will wish to discuss this matter with the President.1

Grant G. Hilliker2

Attachment3

SUBJECT

Assurances to General Ne Win of Burma

There have been some indications in recent months that General Ne Win may be becoming increasingly concerned over Burma’s vulnerability in the face of Communist China. To some extent his aloofness toward the United States and even his domestic policies (e.g. current negotiations with Burmese Communist insurgents) may be influenced by a desire to please Communist China or by behind-the-scenes Chinese pressure coupled with a belief that he could not rely on support from the United States. If so, he might adopt a somewhat more friendly posture toward the United States and a firmer stance against communism in Burma if he were given reassurance that the United States would be prepared effectively to help his country resist Chinese pressure or aggression.

Given Burma’s neutrality and the very limited degree of cooperation between the United States and Burma, there can be no question of a formal commitment to take any specific action to help Burma. Moreover, the Burmese themselves would not welcome any public indication that they were under a United States or SEATO “umbrella”. On the other hand, because of its geographical position between Thailand and the India–Pakistan sub-continent, Burma’s continuing independence and freedom from Chinese domination are of such importance to the United States that we could not stand idly by if the Chinese should move against it. While expending vast efforts to prevent Communist takeovers in Laos and Viet-Nam, the United States could not accept a Chinese end run into Burma.

In these circumstances, we believe it would be useful to have the United States concern for Burma’s independence clearly impressed upon General Ne Win. Ambassador Byroade will be proceeding to Rangoon shortly and the occasion of an early substantive talk with the General would be an appropriate occasion for this. We believe his remarks would carry additional weight if they could be presented as coming from the President.

We recommend that Ambassador Byroade be authorized to tell General Ne Win that the President wishes him to know the following: 1. The United States regards Burma’s continuing independence and freedom from foreign domination as vital to the security of Southeast and South Asia, where United States interests are deeply involved. Burma is no less important in this regard than other countries of Southeast Asia.

2. In view of Burma’s neutrality it would obviously be inappropriate for the United States to make a commitment to take any specific military measures in some undefined future contingency. Nevertheless there should be no doubt of the willingness of the United States to take all feasible measures to support Burmese resistance against foreign aggression, direct or indirect, or against other foreign threats to Burma’s independence.

3. United States concern for Burma is not diminished by that country’s neutral foreign policy, which we fully understand and respect. Nor is it affected by the form of internal organization adopted by the Burmese so long as the Government remains determined to maintain Burma’s independence and true neutrality.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Harriman, Hilsman, and Hannah.

1 No substantive record of the Kennedy–Byroade conversation, which lasted from 5:12 to 5:30 p.m., has been found. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Books) According to a September 11 memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Nitze, the President approved Byroade speaking to Ne Win along the last three paragraphs of the attached memorandum. (Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA–US)

2 Hilliker signed for Read above Read’s typed signature.

3 Drafted by Hannah and Dexter and cleared by Byroade, Harriman, Rice, and Hilsman.

61. Memorandum of Conversation 61. Memorandum of ConversationSource

New York, September 27, 1963, 5 p.m.

SecDel/MC/27

SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, September 1963

PARTICIPANTS

US Secretary Rusk

Robert L. Kinney, Far East Adviser, US Delegation

Foreign H.E. U Thi Han, Foreign Minister of Burma

H.E. James Barrington, Ambassador of Burma to the UN

SUBJECT

Current Political Circumstances in Burma

After an exchange of pleasantries, in the course of which Minister Han emphasized that he had “no problems” with which to burden the Secretary, the Secretary confessed that he had felt a bit out of touch with developments within Burma for the past six months or so. He asked if the Minister couldn’t bring him up to date. He asked: “What causes Ministers to lose sleep these nights in Rangoon?”

He laughed and said that a major problem appeared to be the lack of progress in the Government’s “talks” with the Red Flag Communists, who had been up to some “monkey tricks”. They had talks with both Red and White Flag groups toward the end of gaining their acceptance of Burmese socialism, but there has been no real agreement.

The Secretary asked if the White Flag Communists were situated in one area or spread about. The Minister replied that they were in different areas but in touch with each other by radio.

Secretary inquired whether there had been any infiltration of Red Chinese through North Burma into India. Both the Minister and Ambassador Barrington denied this. They noted that the Kachens in North Burma were hostile to the Red Chinese. There had been a small problem with Nagas from Pakistan. The Burmese are quite aware of Indian sensitivities and are being extremely careful on this score. The Minister emphasized that the Government now maintains “traffic” with North Burma and has much improved capacity to keep informed. They are sure that if there were Chinese infiltration efforts they would learn of these.

The Secretary noted that Thai Foreign Minister Thanat had advised him with evident pleasure that relations between Burma and Thailand were now excellent.

The Minister agreed enthusiastically. He said “the first thing Thanat said to me when I came here was that he was pleased” about this.

The Secretary asked about the extent of the problem currently of Nationalist Chinese irregulars in the Burma border areas. The Minister replied that there is no problem now because of excellent Thai-Burmese cooperation. He amended this slightly with the observation that a small group of the KMT irregulars (the Secretary suggested that these might be in the number of two to three thousand and the Minister agreed) remained in the Laos border region. He implied that these were not of major concern.

The Secretary asked that the Minister let us know promptly if they had any trouble with the KMT remainders and promised to help if needed. He said that the United States could furnish aircraft for evacuation if required.

In response to a question from the Secretary about the effect of the Moscow–Peking division upon Burmese Communists, the Minister said that the effects were quite apparent. He noted that the Communists “above-ground”, e.g. those in Rangoon who had never joined the rebel movements in the country-side, had remained pro-Moscow.

The Secretary inquired about the status of Burma’s export trade. He observed that there appeared to be no lack of market for food-stuffs. He noted particularly that the Soviet Union was increasing such purchases abroad.

The Minister said that they had no difficulty in marketing rice. They had experienced some problems in production, but he spoke enthusiastically of Burma’s much improved foreign exchange position.

The Secretary asked about development efforts, such as housing.

The Minister said that some projects previously begun, such as housing in Rangoon, had been stopped in order to give priority to others. He said that roads and sewerage were considered more important at this stage.

The Government also was faced with a need to improve wages for civil servants and other workers who, he suggested, were restive. He said that there is considerable “labor trouble”. Ambassador Barrington noted that wages for civil servants had last been adjusted in 1947.

The Minister confessed that workers in factories in and around Rangoon had interfered with production and said labor problems were causing a major problem for the Government.

The Secretary asked whether the nationalization program had caused some slight economic “indigestion”.

The Minister noted that Burma had tried for fifteen years to encourage private initiative but that they had found that the Burmese entrepeneurs simply couldn’t “stand on their own feet” and that as a result the Chinese and Indians had kept all the profits for themselves. The Government had decided that nationalization was the only way “to help these people”. He said that they intended to eliminate the Chinese and Indian hold over enterprise and trade and put the Burmese in their place until they could at last “stand on their own feet”.

The Secretary asked if the Chinese were pro-Peking. Both the Minister and the Ambassador insisted that the wealthier Chinese were apolitical and would “change their color” with the wind. They said that they were uninformed as to the loyalties of the Chinese “masses”, however.

The Secretary asked permission to raise a delicate question. He said that he had not felt for some time that we had had adequate true communications with Ne Win and the Burmese leadership. He noted that it was highly important that we be able to understand each other and that without a capacity to communicate our diplomacy could not function effectively on either side. He emphasized that we were sending a highly able Ambassador in the person of Mr. Byroade and asked the Minister’s help in opening the way to a relationship of mutual confidence through the Ambassador for our two Governments.

The Minister said that about two months ago he and Mr. Schnee, our Chargé, had agreed to hold regular “talks” toward the end mentioned by the Secretary. He said that two such talks had been held to date and that he felt these were quite helpful.

In a brief discussion of the China–India clash of last year, the Burmese suggested that the Chinese may not have intended to engage in a major conflict. Ambassador Barrington said that he thought that the situation may have developed rather accidentally: a regional commander may have embarked upon a tentative adventure, found that the Indian opposition was crumbling before him and “decided to make a name for himself” until “he was called back”.

The Secretary speculated that the Chinese, might have decided to take advantage of the Cuban confrontation, thinking that the major powers would have their hands full elsewhere, and then, when the Russians retreated, pulled back.

Minister Han said that he was leaving within 24 hours. He said that his portfolios included that of Labor Minister and that there was labor trouble at the Burma Oil Company requiring his presence.

Before departing Minister Han warmly invited the Secretary to revisit Burma, where he would note many changes since his war-time days there. He said that his Government would be glad to arrange an extensive tour.

The Secretary said that he had a warm affection for Burma, which he had held for many years. He thanked the Minister and said that he hoped very much that he could take advantage of the invitation before long.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Kinney and approved in S on September 29. The meeting was held at the U.S. Mission.

62. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 62. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, October 7, 1963, 5 p.m.

245. Presented credentials General Ne Win 9:00 a.m. this morning (Monday). Highly pleased at frank nature our first conversation but equally concerned at content his remarks. Conversation easy and friendly and I found him quite likeable personally. Chief of Protocol and Cabinet Secretary remained throughout conversation which lasted thirty minutes.

After initial small talk about my previous service west and north of Burma’s borders, his apology for not receiving me sooner, the conveyance of Secretary’s and Harriman’s greetings, etc., etc., I asked if it would be appropriate to turn to substantive matters. Upon his request that I should always be frank and direct with him, I said wished to start with my last talk with President Kennedy before departure Washington. President had seemed very well informed re Burma and I would speak from notes I had made at that time.

President’s first thought had been that I should convey his desire to have opportunity meet Ne Win personally. I had felt from nature his remarks that President had received reports that the General’s last trip to Washington during the previous administration didn’t go very well and that he seemed eager erase any past misunderstandings.1 He had said he hoped that at some mutually convenient future time a meeting would be possible.

Ne Win said he greatly appreciated this thought from President. Said we need not be concerned over unfortunate events during his last visit as relations between nations should not be affected by such small matters, and there were indeed matters between us of more serious nature. He nevertheless related in some detail, obviously trying to give appearance of laughing them off, mishaps his last visit. It obvious mistakes on our part during that visit are still with us, despite his protestations to contrary, although as he himself said, and later proved, this not our greatest problem by any means.

[Here follows Byroade’s account of making the three points suggested and approved in the Attachment to Document 60.]

The General listened intently during above but asked no direct questions. Said he pleased at President’s interest in Burma. He said he thought the Kennedy administration had changed the US understanding of neutral nations and their problems. He supposed President might well be confused about what is happening in Burma. This would not seem unusual as he felt sure even many Burmese were not really aware of what he was trying to do. He hoped things would clear up in future and everyone would see that he on right path. Burma had a great desire to be left alone with her problems at the moment although he knew that no nation, as no individual, could really stand alone for very long. The story had proven however that Burma must beware of seeming friends who let her down.

I said if he were speaking of the US I must ask that he be more specific. I had found suspicions here and this was a cause of great personal concern to me. His reaction was immediate and he spoke with feeling, saying he would tell me of one of past grievances. He related the great sense of personal loss he had felt when he found that some of his closest friends in the officer corps had been subverted by us and were actually [garble—your?] agents. He did not mention names but it obvious when he spoke of one in particular he referring to Brig. Maung Maung now seconded as Ambassador to Israel.

I told Ne Win he would always get the truth from me. I could not comment on events in past of which he spoke as I did not as yet know. If what he said were true I could understand his feelings. I could only tell him that I was an old-timer at the diplomatic business; that nothing would happen in his country from American sources that I did not know about and personally approve; and that I would give him my word that he need have no concerns of this nature about the future.

Ne Win said he aware Kennedy was making progress in bringing total US Government and activities under control—even making progress over most difficult agency—but even though progress being made he had not been able fully succeed as yet (this in laughing vein as if he didn’t envy President his task). I replied that I knew for a fact that President had already succeeded. I recalled Ne Win’s remarks to Harriman2 (he remembers this talk with pleasure) of steps he had taken to insure against corruption of too much power in hands one Cabinet member or individual. Said I not at liberty go into details but President’s methods somewhat like his own, and I could assure him President now fully and completely in control.

Ne Win reverted again to thought that he and Kennedy might meet. He said he hoped this could be possible. I should know however that he had been so involved in internal matters that he had not even been able to accept as yet three invitations in local area, i.e. India, Pakistan and Ceylon. He hoped to get these out of way as soon as possible but in any event these should precede any return to the US. He laughed heartily when I said I thought one idea Kennedy may have wished to get across was that he had managed to get rid of the fellows who were in control in Washington at the time of his last visit.

I told Ne Win if any suspicions arose in future I hoped he would discuss them both quickly and frankly with me personally. Said I hoped see him occasionally in any event, as I had feeling Washington had felt somewhat, cut off from him personally of late. Knew of course of great demands on him personally, particularly during present difficult period, and would be careful not to overdo privilege seeing him personally. He said would be great pleasure and we parted in mutual agreement we both would have had less troubled life had we stayed in the army.

Comment: It obvious the General’s suspicions real and are not going to be corrected either quickly or easily. While it disturbing find he feels as he does it nonetheless gratifying that he talked about it as he did. The DCM tells me that he has not done so before here locally and at least open grievances should be easier to deal with than secret ones. Hope Dept will understand my decision at this meeting avoid denials or belabor past. Have feeling had I done so would have lost credence with Ne Win personally even in process presenting credentials.3

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA-US. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 The 1960 visit was described as a “fiasco” by Dexter. Ne Win felt he was not given proper honor upon his arrival, his wife was insulted while he was undergoing medical attention at Walter Reed Hospital, and no high-ranking Department of Defense officials saw him. (Memorandum from Dexter to Hilsman, October 11; ibid., EA/BUC Files: Lot 66 D 483, POL 15-1, Head of State, Exec. Branch (Ne Win))

2 See Document 53.

3 Harriman informed Hilsman on October 8 that Byroade “very sensibly avoided engaging in an apology for or defense of past U.S. actions in Burma.” Harriman believed it would have been counterproductive and that it should not be attempted in future contacts. Hilsman sent Harriman’s advice to the Burma desk. (Memorandum from Harriman to Hilsman, October 8; Department of State, EA/BUC Files: Lot 66 D 483, POL 15–1, Head of State, Exec Branch (Ne Win))

On October 9, the Department commented on the “friendly and frank” tenor of the conversation: “His suspicions past US activities Burma are of course an old story which we recognize as important element our current problem establishing satisfactory relations with him. Believe you were wise not to attempt refute his accusations but to stress instead your assurances regarding future. Although Ne Win’s suspicions based on serious distortions of facts on past US relations with one of his associates, we have always believed no useful purpose would be served by debating subject with him. Our efforts must now concentrate on future actions to dispel to extent possible Ne Win’s lingering suspicions of US motives.” (Telegram 120; ibid., Central Files, POL 1 BURMA–US)

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, October 28, 1963, noon.

286. CINCPAC for POLAD. After one month in Burma regret that I cannot give other than pessimistic report on state of our relations. I find the US with many sincere friends throughout Burma but these people, with few exceptions, have little or no voice with the present Government of Burma. My experience here is of course still limited. I have only established initial contacts with Ne Win and about three-fourths of his Cabinet. These experiences have been friendly in a personal sort of way, but in the case of several key individuals at least one is left with impression that these are really courtesies; that the government group feels they have really nothing of importance to discuss with us and some apprehension over being very close to us. One gets the feeling that they don’t consider the US really very important in their own limited horizon, and that we are in a way discounted as a factor here.

Our areas of mutual interests with this government, outside of the vital matter of maintaining Burma’s independence, are in fact probably quite limited.

Set upon a course of “Burmanization” to exclude previous forms of Western influence and exploitation, they are not about to seek or listen to advice upon development their economy or social structure. They feel they have the resources to do it their own way without undue hardship and would rather try. The intense Burmanization process plus long-held socialistic ideology is leading them in a direction so akin to Communism that, should present trends continue, the day may well come when to distinguish between “the Burmese way to socialism” and Communism, as far as internal forms of economic and political organization are concerned, will become virtually meaningless. Whether such a body could conduct an independent foreign policy serving both Burmese and free world interests is certainly to be doubted.

And yet, as of today, I believe there are still areas where our basic interests coincide. I also believe that we must try to identify these areas more precisely than we have heretofore and then set about working on them with a great deal more energy. More complete analysis of this situation will follow as we become more sure of our ground and can devise recommendations for our future courses of action.

In the meantime we have a problem that I believe requires immediate attention. There seems little doubt that the US position here has been systematically undermined by the planting of malicious misinformation. The actual agents for spreading these stories are almost certainly Burmese elements of leftist tendencies either directly in the government or advisers to the government. Whether they are inspired on their own or some ChiCom influence is brought to bear is not, as of now at least, known.

I believe that, in general, we have not taken adequate cognizance of this situation. I fear our lack of reaction is either taken to be ignorance on our part of what is happening here, impotence to react, or indifference to such an extent that we believe nothing that happens in Burma could really interest us.

In the last two days I have had reports that Ne Win was furious over an alleged infringement of ours on the government’s labor policy in connection with upcoming construction of road project from Rangoon north toward Mandalay. The inference supposedly was that we were either trying to circumvent the govt’s labor policy because we didn’t like it, or to use systems of our own to make possible kickbacks for personal profit.

This is so obviously a planted story that I have decided to react as quickly as possible. Accordingly I have asked for an appointment to deliver a letter setting the record straight personally to the Foreign Minister and plan to request that he give copy to Ne Win. The letter also suggests a complete investigation and offers our assistance and cooperation in any such investigation. The text is being pouched separately.

This case itself is of course a minor thing, but if the General is as upset as reported one can’t be sure of his reaction. I feel we must attempt to set the record straight as it seems a series of things of this type have left us nearly impotent here and we should at least try to reverse the trend. If we show a sufficient degree of interest and concern to regain Ne Win’s confidence on current matters we may perhaps be able to move from there to a more constructive relationship in the future.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA–US. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, Bangkok, New Delhi, and Hong Kong.

64. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) 64. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, November 29, 1963.

SUBJECT

Recent Developments in Burma.

At Mr. Sullivan’s suggestion, we have prepared the following summary and interpretation of significant developments in Burma which took place during your recent absence in Latin America:1

The Situation—On November 14, Ne Win broke off peace talks with the White Flag Communists and their allies which had been in progress since late summer. In the following few days the Government arrested large numbers of opposition leaders (plus a few newspaper men and others) mainly from pre-Communist parties in the National United Front (NUF). About 700 have been apprehended in this latest wave of arrests.

The peace talks broke down over the terms of a cease-fire. The Government became convinced that the Communists were not, as Ne Win had hoped earlier, willing to subordinate their own political ambitions and cooperate with him under the banner of his “Burmese Way to Socialism”. The arrests of the pro-Communist NUF leaders apparently resulted from the NUF’s recent efforts to mobilize public pressure on the government to accept Communist terms.

It looks as though the breach with the Communists is final. Since August 14, the Communist negotiators have returned to their jungle headquarters under safe conduct; the government has launched a loud anti-Communist propaganda campaign; and there are reports of preparations to resume fighting. There has been no information on the whereabouts of the White Flag leaders who came back from Communist China last August.

Significance: Ne Win’s position and political stability in Burma may have been damaged by these events. The Ne Win regime was not popular before and opposition has been growing. Fed by the increasing discontent, the Communist insurgency might, when resumed, be a more serious threat than it was before. Also, the above-ground Communist organizations still have a capability for mischief, despite the recent arrests, and Ne Win seems to have no answer but more repression. Somewhat offsetting this enhanced threat of internal disorder is the probability that Ne Win, by returning to his traditional anti-Communist position, has quieted apprehensions in the Army and reduced the possibility of major defections in that quarter.

Assuming that internal chaos is not around the corner, the recent developments seem in other respects to be favorable to the United States. The danger that Ne Win could be hoodwinked into accepting a partnership with the Communists has receded. There is also less danger than before that NUF and Communist sympathizers will be able to infiltrate Ne Win’s new Burma Socialist Program Party and key positions in the government. In Burma’s foreign relations, there also may be benefits for us. Communist China had a stake in the talks as a result of having publicly cooperated in return of the White Flag leaders from China. Moscow, too, was somewhat involved since it had sought to counter China’s position with the White Flags by working through the NUF. Thus, the subversive strategies of both countries have been delivered a serious set-back. Ultimately this could cause Ne Win to reassess the value of United States friendship.

Our conclusions regarding United States policy are the same as those of the Embassy.2 There seems to be a possibility for at least modest improvement in the atmosphere of U.S. relations with the RGUB. However, this could be blighted if we should do anything now which the RGUB would regard as attempting to take advantage of this shift in domestic policy away from the Communists.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 BURMA. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Hannah.

1 Harriman was the Chairman of the U.S. Delegation to the Inter-American Economic and Social Council Ministerial Meetings held in Sao Paulo, Brazil, November 11–18.

2 The Embassy’s assessment was transmitted in telegram 348 from Rangoon, November 26. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 BURMA)

65. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 65. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of StateSource

Rangoon, December 5, 1963, 2 p.m.

377. For Harriman from Byroade. Deptel 181.1 Grateful indeed for urtel and your interest in the current situation Burma. It came at a time when I was conscious, and indeed hoping, that Washington would be wondering what actions we might take to further our cause here. The American press has been overly optimistic as to successes for the West here locally recently, but it is indeed a fluid time of change in which we should be ever alert for opportunities to affect the very delicate balance of things.

All of my efforts so far have been to prepare myself for the opportune time to start working on Ne Win personally. The Burmese way of things being what they are, I did not feel it in US interests to attempt to push myself upon him too fast and in the midst of his all-consuming internal peace negotiations with the Communist insurgents. Now that these are out of the way (and I think not unhappily for us) it has seemed to me that this week was the ideal time to attempt to start straight talk with Ne Win. I realized that following such talks recommendations to the Dept would be essential, and am grateful mood seems so receptive. Unfortunately I shall not be able to carry through this plan myself because of my medical evacuation back to Washington regarding which I am communicating separately to the Secretary.

I believe that the reporting from this post during this uncertain period in internal affairs has been good. It has sought to be factual and probably errs mostly in length which prohibits complete high level digestion. It has not been long on recommendations as we couldn’t tell with enough certainty which way the tail would point after this internal crisis. I shall have to leave it to the regular Embassy staff to continue reporting in my absence. This is an extremely complex situation in which the press usually misses the point, and which only poorly fits the excellent counter-insurgency school training which I attended before assignment here. As an example, some of the insurgents (notably the Shans but also I think the Kachins) are undoubtedly more pro West than the present Government of Burma.

If Ne Win could somehow reverse patterns re the ethnic minority groups that have grown up partly as a reaction to the British preferential treatment of minorities there would be room for much more hope. If he could establish common cause with these ethnic minorities and turn a united Burma against the Communist insurgents we would have our classical insurgency situation in which, if accepted we could provide telling assistance. I doubt that his mind runs in this direction, but this I had hoped to explore. We have of course already done much to increase the RGUB capability for counter-insurgency through our Military Assistance Program.

What has happened here of late is better than the various alternatives that seemed possible only a month ago. It unfortunately does not mean a turn to the right and away from the far left in domestic affairs. The US role in helping correct this situation, if indeed there can be one, is still not susceptible to concrete recommendations as to what the Washington level might do to assist us at this juncture.

Our everyday presence is a factor which I believe pays dividends, but any overt attempt on our part to exploit the failure of the peace talks not preceded by a change in outlook by Ne Win personally would be sterile at best, and could boomerang. In absence of the chance to get through to Ne Win the Embassy can only wait, but when it sees opportunity for a greater US role its recommendations will be properly forthcoming.

Byroade

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 BURMA. Secret; Priority.

1 In telegram 181, December 3, Harriman asked Byroade to keep in mind the U.S. special interest in counterinsurgency in light of the breakdown of internal peace negotiations and the possibility of augmented Communist guerrilla capacity. Recognizing the delicacy of the Burmese political situation, Harriman stated that the Department would depend heavily on Byroade’s judgment. He asked for an assessment and recommendations for policy. (Ibid.)

CambodiaCambodia

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, February 20, 1961, 12:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–2061. Confidential; Niact; Presidential Handling. Drafted by Askew and cleared in substance by Parsons and by Ralph A. Dungan of the White House.

67. Editorial Note

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, May 3, 1961, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/5–361. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and Vientiane.

69. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 10, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Cambodia 000.1–, 1961. Secret

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, June 1, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–161. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Geneva, Paris, and CINCPACPOLAD.

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 15, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–1561. Secret. Also sent to CINCPACPOLAD and repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Geneva, Paris, Vientiane, and London.

72. Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, September 22, 1961.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Cambodia Files: Lot 65 D 55, 22.4 Sihanouk Visits, 1961–1962. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Cleveland, Anderson, Theodore J.C. Heavner of SEA, McConaughy, and Richard J. Gookin of the Under Secretary of State’s office. Sent to the White House under cover of a September 22 memorandum from Battle to Bundy.

73. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 23, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/24/61–10/23/61. Secret.

74. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 25, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/24/61–10/23/61. Secret. Drafted by Steeves. The meeting was held in the Hotel Carlyle. President Kennedy was in New York to address the U.N. General Assembly. The text of the President’s speech is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 618–626.

75. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, October 26, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/10–2661. Confidential. Sent to McGeorge Bundy at the White House with copies for Taylor, Schlesinger, Rostow, and others whom Bundy might think appropriate.

76. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 31, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 10/29/61–10/31/61. Top Secret.

77. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 2, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Rostow and Bromley Smith.

78. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 6, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. Bundy wrote “done” on this memorandum. A copy was sent to Rostow.

79. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 7, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Rostow. Bundy doodled extensively on this memorandum.

80. Telegram From the Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Cambodia (Scherrer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Phnom Penh, November 15, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to SecDef (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indochina. Secret; Routine; Noforn. Repeated to CHJUSMAAG Saigon and Bangkok and readdressed by CINCPAC on November 24 priority for JCS. Brigadier General E.C.D. Scherrer became the Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Cambodia in August 1961. He replaced Brigadier General Charles H. Chase.

81. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff (Collins)

Washington, November 29, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to Sec Def (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indochina. Secret. A copy was sent to Admiral Heinz.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, January 19, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/1–1962. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Geneva, Vientiane, and CINCPACPOLAD.

83. Letter From the Ambassador to Cambodia (Trimble) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Phnom Penh, March 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/3–562. Secret; Official–Informal.

84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, June 1, 1962, 8:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/6–162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Arzac and Wright on May 31; cleared by Koren, Cleveland, Cottrell, and Heavner of the Vietnam Task Force; sent for information to Ainsworth of EA; and approved by Rice. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok and repeated to CINCPACPOLAD.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, June 5, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, CINCPACPOLAD, and Vientiane.

86. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 22, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–2262. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Taipei, and CINCPAC.

87. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 23, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Cambodia 091.3 MAP. Secret.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, August 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/8–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and Taipei.

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, August 22, 1962, 10:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/8–2262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Arzac; cleared in draft by Harriman and Rice and in substance by Anderson; and approved by Cleveland. Also sent priority to London, Paris, Ottawa, New Delhi, Saigon, Vientiane, and Rangoon and repeated to Phnom Penh, Moscow, Canberra, USUN, and Warsaw.

90. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, September 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/9–762. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Vientiane, Paris, London, USUN, and CINCPACPOLAD. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received on September 8 at 1:37 a.m.

91. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 12, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51H/9–1262. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and Arzac and cleared in draft by Chayes and by Joseph J. Sisco, Director of the Office of UN Political and Security Affairs, and U. Alexis Johnson. Johnson wrote the following note on the memorandum: “Mr. Secretary: This is not a very happy situation but I believe this formula is about the best that can be done. Alex.”

92. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, September 13, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/9–1362. Secret; Niact. Relayed to the White House and the Office of the Secretary of Defense for McNamara and General Lemnitzer. Repeated priority to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, Vientiane, CINCPACPOLAD, and USUN.

93. Paper Prepared by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)

September 20, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Far East Trip, September 1962, T-022–69. Top Secret.

94. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs (Arzac) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren)

Washington, November 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Cambodia Files: Lot 65 D 55, 1.4 Neutral Policy of Cambodia, Nov.-Dec. 1962. Secret.

95. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPACPOLAD, and Vientiane.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPACPOLAD, and Vientiane.

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPACPOLAD, and Vientiane.

98. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 30, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–3062. Drafted by Koren on December 7 and approved in S on December 12.

99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, December 6, 1962, 10:31 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 12/5/62–12/13/62. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Koren and cleared by Arzac, Rice, Forrestal and in draft by Harriman and Czyzak. Repeated to London, Paris, Bangkok, New Delhi, Saigon, Ottawa, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPACPOLAD.

100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, December 6, 1962.

Source: Kennedy. Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 12/5/62–12/13/62. Secret.

101. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/1–2363. Drafted by Koren and Hannah and cleared in draft by Czyzak and William C. Burdett, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs. Initialed by Harriman.

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, March 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, March 8, 1963, 6:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-CHICOM. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Arzac, cleared by Wood of the Vietnam Working Group and by Hannah and in draft by Koren, and approved by Rice. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Taipei.

104. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, April 10, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Arzac on April 9 and cleared by Koren and Wood. Initialed by Rice.

105. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, May 17, 1963, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 CAMB. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, June 29, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, New Delhi, Paris, Saigon, USUN, CINCPAC, and Vientiane and pouched to Ottawa.

107. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, July 2, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPACPOLAD.

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, October 12, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPACPOLAD.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, October 21, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-US. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 28, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/12/63–11/7/63. Confidential.

111. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 13, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:07 a.m. and repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, CINCPAC, Saigon, and Vientiane.

112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, November 13, 1963, 5:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-THAI. Confidential. Drafted by John S. Thomson of INR; cleared in draft by Arzac and Thomas M. Judd of EUR/BNA; and approved by Allen S. Whiting, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for the Far East, INR. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Saigon.

113. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Dean Acheson and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)

Washington, November 14, 1963, 11:25 a.m.

Source: Department of State, EA/Burma Union-Cambodia Files: Lot 66 D 492, 1963 Cambodia, July-December. No classification marking. Transcribed in Rice’s office.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, November 16, 1963, 2:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Arzac, cleared by Koren and U. Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rice. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 16, 1963, 2:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Joseph A. Mendenhall of FE and Arzac, cleared in draft by Koren, and approved by Rice.

116. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 17, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, CINCPAC, and Vientiane.

117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, November 20, 1963, 8:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah and Hilsman; cleared in draft by U. Alexis Johnson and Bromley Smith at the White House; and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for Secretary Rusk who was in Honolulu.

118. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Washington, November 21, 1963, 11:03 a.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

119. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Arzac and cleared by Koren and Hilsman.

120. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, November 25, 1963, 7:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Koren; cleared by Arzac, Hilsman, and Robert Komer of the NSC Staff; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 26, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC. No time of transmission is on the source text; the telegram was received at 8:58 a.m.

122. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 27, 1963, 3:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-US. Confidential. Drafted by Hilsman and approved in the White House on December 2. Prime Minister Kantol was attending President Kennedy’s funeral. In a cable to Forrestal, Hilsman reported that the meeting between President Johnson and Kantol was arranged with “herculean efforts.” (Telegram 275 to Phnon Penh, November 27; ibid., AID (US) CAMB)

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 30, 1963, 7:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Received at 11:36 p.m. and repeated to Bangkok and Saigon. Passed to the White House at 12:20 a.m. on December 1.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, November 30, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 3:02 a.m. on December 1 and repeated to Paris, Bangkok, London, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, December 1, 1963, 6:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah; cleared by Koren, Czyzak, and Harriman; and approved by Hilsman. Also sent to Saigon as telegram 884 and repeated to London, Paris, Vientiane, Ottawa, Phnom Penh, New Delhi, and Moscow.

126. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 2, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret.

127. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 2, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret.

128. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 3, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman’s Staff Group, Dec. 1963, WH Staff Memos, T–213–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by William Y. Smith.

129. Editorial Note

130. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 4, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Frazier Meade of EUR/BNA and approved in S on December 9. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 6.”

131. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, December 7, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–S.VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

132. Editorial Note

133. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Dean Acheson

Washington, December 9, 1963, 12:25 p.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

134. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 10, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman’s Staff Group, Dec. 1963, WH Staff Memos, T–213–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by Smith.

135. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, December 11, 1963, 6:45 p.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

136. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, December 14, 1963, 5:15 p.m.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Telephone Conversations. No Distribution. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

137. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Hannah)

Washington, December 16, 1963.

Source: Department of State, EA/Burma Union–Cambodia Files: Lot 66 D 492, 1963 Cambodia, July thru Dec. Confidential. Also sent to Czyzak of L/FE.

138. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, December 17, 1963, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Passed to the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

139. Current Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, December 19, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared in the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. At the request of the Acting Director of Central Intelligence, Deputy Director (Intelligence) Ray S. Cline sent this memorandum to McGeorge Bundy for his personal attention. Much of the information in this memorandum and its attachment was incorporated into the Office of Current Intelligence’s Special Report on “The Situation in Cambodia,” SC No. 00623/63B, December 20. (Ibid.)

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, December 19, 1963, 1:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared by Harriman, and approved by Hannah for Hilsman.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, December 19, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Passed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency and repeated to CINCPAC.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, December 22, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate. Passed to the White House.

66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 66. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, February 20, 1961, 12:48 p.m.

726. Deliver soonest following message from President to Prince Sihanouk:

“February 20, 1961

Your Royal Highness:

The tragic crisis in Laos was among the major problems in foreign affairs to confront my Administration. In studying the various proposals advanced for resolving the problem we were particularly impressed by the series of valuable suggestions made by Your Royal Highness over the past several months. Therefore, I was very happy to receive your letter of January 281 giving your further thoughts on the points raised by President Eisenhower in his letter of January 16.2

Your proposal for an international conference on Laos engaged our serious attention as a constructive plan aimed at a peaceful settlement. From the tenor of your letter and from consultations between our Governments, I believe it correct to infer that you also shared our concern over the need for prompt action. However, while the conference was designed to resolve international antagonism over Laos, certain replies to your proposal did not foster confidence that this would be the objective of all prospective participants. Indeed, we could not ignore the possibility that a large international meeting at this time would increase international tensions, rather than reduce them, and thus seriously impede and delay effective measures to relieve the situation in Laos. Therefore, it appeared desirable to find a plan for the neutralization of Laos which offered the necessary assurances to all interested parties, including the Communist powers, which explicitly respected Lao sovereignty and integrity, and which would not become an occasion for intensifying international antagonisms.

Your proposal for a commission composed exclusively of neutral nations offered valuable guidance. We noted also that a similar proposal had been made by the Government of the Union of Burma, and this concept was an important feature of recent consultations with the Royal Government of Laos.

I believe the declaration made on February 19 by His Majesty King Savang Vatthana3 and the related actions of the Royal Lao Government contain the essential elements of your proposals. The United States strongly supports the Lao declaration. Recognition by other interested countries of the peaceful intent of this declaration and the need to support its aims; would in effect provide broad international sanction to the role of the Commission.

I earnestly hope you will find it possible to accept leadership of the Commission.4 In this respect, I do not regard lightly the burden of such a responsibility, particularly on a statesman who already carries the weight of a demanding political role at home. However, I believe that the success of any plan to neutralize Laos, indeed that the future of Southeast Asia, depend on the resolute and courageous action of the nations in Southeast Asia most directly concerned. Moreover, the assumption of such direct responsibility in carrying forward a solution based on Asian initiatives would appear to be in consonance with the expressed aspirations of these nations to resolve their problems in their own way. In this historic endeavor Your Royal Highness can count on the full and sympathetic support of the United States and, I am sure, of all nations interested in the cause of freedom and world peace.

Sincerely, John F. Kennedy”

White House has no plans release text but has no objection should Sihanouk desire do so. In such case would appreciate 24 hours advance notice if possible to permit consideration simultaneous release here.

Observe Presidential Handling.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–2061. Confidential; Niact; Presidential Handling. Drafted by Askew and cleared in substance by Parsons and by Ralph A. Dungan of the White House.

1 Text of the letter was transmitted in telegram 953 from Phnom Penh, January 28. In the letter, Sihanouk reiterated his earlier proposal to President Eisenhower in a January 1 letter for a Fourteen-Power conference and suggested that a neutral nations commission be established to bring about a cease-fire in Laos. (Ibid., 751J.00/1–2861) Sihanouk’s January 1 letter is in telegram 782 from Phnom Penh, January 3. (Ibid., 751J.00/1–361)

2 In his January 16 response, Eisenhower assured Sihanouk that his proposal for the Fourteen-Power conference as well as his earlier idea of neutralization of Cambodia and Laos were receiving “serious study” in Washington. The “crux of the matter,” Eisenhower stated, was how to obtain “reliable assurance” against outside intervention directed against Laos. (Telegram 773 to Phnom Penh, January 17; ibid.)

3 For text of Savang’s statement, which was carefully coordinated with the United States, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 991–992.

4 On February 24, Sihanouk wrote President Kennedy and congratulated him on the U.S. decision to seek a neutral nations commission, but informed him that Cambodia must refuse to serve on any such commission. Sihanouk stated that a commission had to be recognized by both Lao governments, Boun Oum’s and Prince Souvanna Phouma’s, and repeated his conviction that the only solution would be a conference in which the two Lao factions met face-to-face along with the powers supporting them. (Translation of February 24 letter from Sihanouk to Kennedy, attached to a memorandum from Stoessel to Dungan, March 3; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–361)

67. Editorial Note 67. Editorial Note

Ambassador at Large W. Averell Harriman made a tour of Southeast Asia to assess the situation and offer support to U.S. allies during the period before the implementation of the cease-fire in Laos. On April 30, 1961, Harriman was in Luang Prabang, the Royal capital of Laos, where Prince Sihanouk was attending the State funeral of King Sisavong and attempting to bring the Lao factions together. Harriman asked Sihanouk to use his influence with Prince Souvanna Phouma and Captain Kong Le to help establish a cease-fire. Sihanouk raised his idea of a neutral zone in Southeast Asia composed of Laos and Cambodia, confiding to Harriman that such a plan required prior approval of the powers and then could be ratified by a neutral nations commission. Sihanouk attempted to arrange a meeting between Harriman and Souvanna Phouma in Phnom Penh on May 2, but Souvanna was delayed and Harriman had to go on to Bangkok. (Memorandum, April 30; Department of State; Central Files, 751J.00/4–3061)

On May 3, Harriman and Ambassador William Trimble met with Sihanouk in Phnom Penh for 50 minutes. Their discussion related primarily to Laos, but Harriman assured Sihanouk that President Kennedy had a sympathetic understanding of the rights of nations to non-alignment, notwithstanding the U.S. belief in collective security. Indian Prime Minister Nehru had come, in Harriman’s view, to understand this. Harriman hoped Sihanouk would also find the U.S. position on neutralism compatible. (Telegram 1368 from Phnom Penh, May 4; ibid., 751J.00/5–461)

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 68. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, May 3, 1961, 11 a.m.

1366. Department telegram 977.1 Obviously elements lacking here for judgment present political and military situation Laos. Nevertheless what happens there must inevitably affect neighboring Cambodia in which US strategic interest largely a question of geography. If fall of Laos to bloc would endanger SVN and Thailand, equally true closer alignment of Cambodia with bloc would have same general effect.

Cambodian neutrality predicated on balance between major world camps. Without such equilibrium, Cambodians believe neutrality impossible, implying accommodation in that case necessary with winning side. Sihanouk, who formulates Cambodian policy, has expressed conviction that eventual Communist hegemony over world inevitable and in particular that ChiComs “wave of future” in SEA. However so long as free world power counterbalances bloc, neutrality a viable policy.

To Cambodia, Laos a battle between two major world camps which fully responsible for situation there, having used elements in that country to own ends. A Communist Laps distasteful to Cambodia both because of danger of subversion and because need for choice between major camps would be more imminent. Present Cambodian pessimism over course of events in Laos therefore apparently foreshadows further accommodation with bloc, though precisely what form this may take too early tell. Compulsion seek such accommodation likely be compounded by new factor of Sihanouk’s falling out with Savang Vattana (which US suspected of haying maneuvered) from which spiteful reaction can be expected due Sihanouk’s well known [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] temperament.

Naturally flames fanned by leftists who control local media and are closest advisors of Prince who essentially a publicist (not to say demagogue) in terms tools he uses accomplish his ends. They have insistently interpreted world events as continuing setbacks for US—Turkey revolt, overthrow of Rhee, Japan events in conjunction proposed Eisenhower visit, etc. This line has made deep impression on Cambodians, particularly Sihanouk. Apparently inability US intervene successfully in Cuba, its own back yard, has been especially damaging. Thus US failure in Laos seen as inevitable and this view drummed in ceaselessly here.

Sihanouk’s proposals for Laos solution held by Cambodians to be noble, realistic, disinterested attempt salvage situation in interest world peace and Cambodia’s own future. Delays in acting on his suggestions, attributed to US fumbling in which CIA chief culprit, seen as making almost inevitable Communist takeover in Laos. In effect, Cambodians believe truly neutral Laos now impossible. Although having no illusions about Communist purposes, free world held be just as bad as bloc as to means and in some cases as to ends. US seen as facing only two choices, either a Laos of pro-Communist “neutrality” or direct intervention which will escalate to major war. Cambodia would prefer former but both imply defeat for US since bloc thought be superior protagonist in major armed conflict.

Cambodian estimate of world balance of forces obviously not based on accurate information of its many complex factors. However, Cambodians (read Sihanouk) convinced of ability make judgments and no reason believe they will not act thereon.

In final analysis, attitude of RKG determined not by what West says and does in Cambodia but by what West says and does worldwide vis-à-vis bloc, and in its view present power posture favors other side.

Trimble

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/5–361. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and Vientiane.

1 In telegram 977, May 1, also sent to Vientiane and Bangkok, the Department requested the three Embassies’ “best estimate” on the current military political situation. (Ibid., 751J.00/5–161)

69. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 69. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Heinz) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 10, 1961.

I–14127/61

SUBJECT

Jet Aircraft for Cambodia

Problem:

The Government of Cambodia (RKG) has requested, through military assistance channels, that T–37 jet aircraft be provided to participate in Independence Day ceremonies, 9 November 1961. According to Chief, MAAG (Cambodia) intent of government officials is to demonstrate to the populace that Cambodian pilots are undergoing jet training (six now in United States undergoing basic training). The Ambassador, in message Phnom Penh 1280, 6 April 1961, stated he is in accord with the action.1

Discussion:

There is no military justification for a jet program in Cambodia. The FY–61 program did not include jet aircraft, and the RKG was so advised; nor does the FY–62 program, at its current stage. CINCPAC noted, in message. 13 April 1961,2 that Washington, D.C. agencies have approved introduction of jet training and jet aircraft on political grounds, having overridden his position that the program could not be justified from a military standpoint. He concurs in the statements by Ambassador and Chief, MAAG that the RKG request should be supported.

In the same message CINCPAC recommends:

a. Deliver five T–37’s to Cambodia with essential support equipment.

b. Return pilots to Cambodia about 20 October after completion of approximately 100 hours of primary flight training in United States, cancelling proposed basic course that would have followed.

c. Provide 4 U.S. instructor pilots to participate in Independence Day ceremonies, with two remaining for approximately 13 weeks to complete in-country training of the six Cambodian pilots.

d. Other support arrangements.

By priority message dated 3 May 1961, Department of the Air Force advised CINCPAC that plan can be accomplished, utilizing C–124 aircraft to deliver four T–37 jet aircraft from Wichita, Kansas, at a cost of $964,200.3

Before the project can be consumated, a determination must be made as to whether or not the provisions of National Security Council Action 2267c, 21 July 1960,4 apply in this instance. This action requires that NSC be consulted on any question concerning jet aircraft for Viet Nam or Cambodia.

On 9 May 1961, the Director of the Coordinating Staff (NSC and Collateral Activities) (Mr. Wade) conferred informally with the Acting Executive Secretary, NSC (Mr. Boggs). They agreed that the NSC requirement to consult might be satisfied if the Deputy Assistant Secretary (ISA) (Mr. Bundy) were to consult informally with the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Mr. McGeorge Bundy). The basis for this consultation might be that the Operations Coordinating Board, in its minutes dated 25 November 1960 of a meeting of 16 November 1960, noted that the President approved the offer of training (of the six pilots) but made no decision with respect to providing aircraft, and that the President gave instructions that if RLG asked for aircraft, reply would be made to indicate that sympathetic consideration would be made at the appropriate time (Agenda Item 3).

Implementation:

Based on Mr. McGeorge Bundy’s response, two alternative causes of action are available:

a. If he indicates no further action by NSC is required—OASD obtain Department of State concurrence and proceed with necessary programming and delivery actions. (Incl No. 1 hereto.)5

b. If he indicates NSC prior approval is required—obtain signature for the attached letter to Department of State, and forward. (Incl No. 2 hereto.)6

Recommendation:

Recommend Deputy Assistant Secretary (ISA) call the Special Assistant to the President as indicated above.7

L. C. Heinz
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Cambodia 000.1–, 1961. Secret

1 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.5622/4–661)

2 CINCPAC 130318Z. (Ibid., 751H.5622/4–1361)

3 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Cambodia 000.1–, 1961)

4 See vol. XVI, p. 208, footnote 12.

5 The attached draft letter is not printed. It was apparently not sent. The letter described in footnote 7 below probably replaced it. Telegram 1018 to Phnom Penh, May 11, informed the Embassy that it agreed to Cambodia’s request for four jet trainers and the return of jet pilots in time for the independence ceremony. When informing Cambodia of this decision, Ambassador Trimble was to stress the need for improving border control with South Vietnam. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.5622/4–2761)

6 Not found attached.

7 According to a letter from William Bundy to Ball, May 11 (1–14138/61), William Bundy checked with McGeorge Bundy who reported that the recommendations were also included in the report of the Vietnam Task Force. The President provisionally supported the Task Force recommendations unless either the Departments of State or Defense objected. Since both State and Defense had concurred, McGeorge Bundy concluded it was already approved by the President. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, Cambodia 000.1–, 1961)

70. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 70. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, June 1, 1961, 8 p.m.

1458. Geneva for FECON. Deptel 1086.1

1. Before commenting specifically, as requested reference telegram, on actions which might be taken to encourage improved RKG–GVN relations, particularly with respect border control problem, believe some background as viewed from Phnom Penh might be useful.

2. RKG does not accept GVN thesis that Cambodia provides transit facilities, training areas and safehaven significant scale to Viet Cong and that this is one of major causes for growing insecurity SVN (Embtel 1412).2 It does not consider there is serious problem of border control with GVN nor does it appear to believe cooperating with GVN or intensified border control measures adapted unilaterally (apart from those that may be required along northeast frontier as result Laos developments) would significantly add to Cambodian security (Embassy despatches 284, 288 and 374).3

3. I likewise believe that GVN thesis not valid for reasons indicated in paragraph 4 below. Although I cannot offer formal proof in support my position, proof in direct support of GVN thesis also appears lacking except for that supplied by GVN sources which as far as I am aware uncorroborated by non-GVN sources. I submit, therefore, that GVN claims may be grossly exaggerated in order provide excuse its inability more effectively cope with Viet Cong. Thus, while more effective border controls by RKG desirable, believe they not likely play very decisive role in achieving improved security conditions in SVN. This view shared by CHMAAG, ARMA, [less than line of source text not declassified] and, I understand, chief French military mission General Seta, who has served in Cambodia for almost ten years.

4. There are number of factors which support RKG contention that Cambodia not giving assistance, knowingly or unknowingly, to Viet Cong elements on any significant scale. First is Sihanouk’s detestation and fear of Vietnamese and in particular Viet Minh. While latter’s presence in Cambodia in 1953 could be rationalized Sihanouk deeply resented Viet [garble—Minh?] invasion 1954 after Cambodia had acceded to independence, a move which (according to Seta) he will never forgive. Despite his dislike of Diem, he has nothing to gain in cooperating with Viet Cong and indeed greatly concerned possibility Communist state on his border. Cambodian population itself remains hostile to Vietnamese, has likewise not forgotten experiences of 1953–1954 and is not likely give support to Viet Minh directed apparatus such as Viet Cong. Attitudes expressed by FARK officers also tend support belief they disposed react vigorously when alerted to any Vietnamese encroachment in Cambodia. (In conversation they take obvious pride and satisfaction in quick response to Hoa Hao incident in April 1960 and Takeo battalion headquarters has gory pictorial display of victims.)4 Apart from Cambodian attitude, area through which Viet Cong would have to transit Cambodia from Lao into SVN, very inhospitable, little food and water and difficult terrain. So long as Annamite Mountain chain and sea route from North Vietnam provide satisfactory corridor into SVN, little reason use Cambodia which risks creating political problems between North Vietnam and Cambodia.

5. I do not deny existence of some limited Viet Cong activity in Cambodia. Undoubtedly small groups of Viet Cong may transit Cambodia from time to time in guise of harmless peasants and Viet Cong couriers may feel more secure in transiting Cambodia than using corridor through SVN. Small Viet Cong groups likewise may find safehaven across frontier in Cambodia with collaboration of civilians and even military who may be susceptible to bribery. This more likely in areas such as Svay Rieng province where Vietnamese population particularly large. In addition, fund raising, propagandizing and even recruiting by Viet Cong undoubtedly taking place among Vietnamese minority population who for most part anti-Diem although not necessarily pro-Viet Minh. However we have yet to see convincing evidence that type and scale of such activities are responsible to any significant degree for growing insecurity SVN, and it not likely that new border control measures would succeed in curbing such activities to any appreciable degree.

We consider highly improbable recent GVN claim that force of 3,000 being secretly trained in Stung Treng and likewise seriously question accuracy of allegation that French here actively supporting anti-Diem elements.

6. Events in Laos are leading RKG to give increasing attention to border control problem along northeastern frontier in expectation of more active effort by Communists to infiltrate into Cambodia should Laos fall under Communist domination. Sihanouk acknowledged this concern to me recently (Embtel 1412), at same time expressing resentment over allegedly false GVN accusations that Cambodian territory utilized by Viet Cong. This concern doubtless explanation for proposal made at Geneva by Foreign Minister Tioulong May 22 that ICC be increased in strength and that fixed posts be created along Cambodia–Laos frontier. Appears evident that such a measure, while bringing some degree of reassurance to RKG, should also be helpful to GVN.

7. Improvement in RKG–GVN relations has for past several years been common major objective of AmEmbassies Phnom Penh and Saigon since these relations closely intertwined with US–RKG relations and free world position in SEA. Some progress has been made but it necessarily slow since we working against deep seated enmity and distrust which have existed for centuries. RKG appears to accept principle for further conversations with GVN in attempt resolve outstanding problems following Tho–Tioulong meeting March 26 to discuss Khmer Krom problem.5 Due RKG present concentration on Laos and absence from Phnom Penh of all policymakers, these conversations not likely be resumed until after Geneva Conference. So long as Tioulong remains Foreign Minister and there is no new incident to re-envenom relations believe prospects for such conversations are favorable. Obviously settlement financial problems (Paris Accords)6 to which GVN holds key would help create atmosphere in which some form border control cooperation (short of hot pursuit) could be worked out. However believe important reiterate there no reason as yet to believe RKG considers that border cooperation would materially enhance RKG security. The more importance US and GVN appear attach to such cooperation the greater the quid pro quo RKG likely to seek. Until RKG feels own security directly or indirectly more threatened by possible Viet Cong domination of SVN than by suspected (and sometimes substantiated) GVN backing for anti-Sihanouk activities, spirit of cooperation will be lacking even though written agreements may exist.

8. Following are our specific suggestions on this problem: (A) We continue efforts to bring about resumption Tho–Tioulong discussions following Geneva conference. Because Tioulong–Mau7 personal relations are on quite different basis than those between Tioulong and Tho, and because personal relations can be highly important in such negotiations, recommend we do not encourage Tioulong–Mau discussion in Geneva.

(B) Any US discussions with Cambodians on border control should be on basis new situation in Laos and not on basis GVN contentions re use of Cambodia by Viet Cong unless some significant and acceptable evidence to contrary can be produced.

(C) US should take maximum advantage of Tioulong’s suggestion May 22 speech re increasing number ICC personnel and establishing fixed positions along Laos–Cambodian frontier. This is RKG proposal which has security implications for RKG and should also benefit SVN.

(D) Pending further developments in Geneva conference we inclined discourage approach by Ambassador Harriman to Sihanouk unless replies from other addressees introduce some new element of which we unaware. However, informal discussions with Tioulong, but not Son Sann, on border problems, stressing enhanced importance of area cooperation for area security might be useful. Tioulong less emotional and more realistic than Sihanouk on question GVN relations and such discussions might create greater receptivity to idea of cooperation when RKG–GVN conversations actually get under way. Our approach to Tioulong not likely make impression unless we able and willing support his proposal mentioned in (C) above.

(E) We doubt French approach to Sihanouk would be productive. French here share our views re GVN allegations on use of Cambodia by Viet Cong.

(F) Suggest carrot of additional MAP items not be proffered until Geneva outcome and RKG attitude toward border cooperation in light thereof somewhat clearer.

Trimble

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–161. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Geneva, Paris, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 1086, May 29, also sent to Saigon as 1466, the Vietnam Task Force asked for suggestions as to what South Vietnam and Cambodia could realistically do to improve relations and how the United States could facilitate the process. (Ibid., 751K.5–MSP/5–2961)

2 Dated May 13. (Ibid., 751J.00/5–1361)

3 Despatch 284, March 20, concerns an unrelated matter; it was not found in Department of State files. Despatches 288 and 374, March 21 and May 31, contain information on South Vietnamese-Cambodian relations. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K31/3–2161 and 651H.51K3/5–3161)

4 On April 1, 1960, FARK clashed with Hoa Hao forces operating in Cambodian territory. The Hoa Hao were a dissident Vietnamese sect generally in opposition to the Diem government, but the forces involved in the April 1 fight were secretly working for South Vietnamese intelligence in an effort to combat Viet Cong forces in Cambodia. (Telegram 3164 from Saigon, May 10, 1960; ibid., 651H.51K/5–1060)

5 An account of these talks between South Vietnamese Vice President Nguyen Ngoc Tho and Tioulong at Siemreap was transmitted in telegrams 1256 and 1258 from Phnom Penh, March 27 and 28. (Ibid., 651H.51K/3–2761 and 651H.51K/3–2861)

6 The dispute between Cambodia and South Vietnam over the Paris Accords of 1954 revolved around the division of assets and liabilities of the old joint Bank of Issue of Indochina and the debt incurred by the Indochina Treasury for financing certain French military expeditions during 1945–1950. South Vietnam wanted France to assume at least part of this debt or have it reapportioned differently among the three Indochina successor states. Cambodia and the other signatories (Laos and France) of the Paris Accords claimed that the issue had been settled. (Despatch 307 from Saigon, January 20; ibid., 651H.51K/1–2061)

7 Vu Van Mau, South Vietnamese Foreign Minister.

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 71. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of StateSource

Saigon, June 15, 1961, 6 p.m.

1880. Geneva for FECON. Reference: Department’s 1466,1 Phnom Penh’s 1458,2 our 1879.3 We recognize that Ambassador Trimble has difficult problem in convincing Sihanouk of desirability of taking action on border control problem with Vietnam. In effort demonstrate to Sihanouk that Cambodia is used by VC as safehaven, supply and training base and to some extent as infiltration route all reports summarized our 1879 except Nos 5 and 16 may be conveyed to him or other high level RKG officials, without revealing exact source.

We likewise have difficult problem in getting Diem to give border controls top priority in his relations with Cambodia and to bend all other efforts in those relations toward achieving something workable in this domain. His antipathy and distrust of Sihanouk are so great that it is hard to convince him that game is worth candle. Magnifying this is current conviction of Diem and Nhu that Sihanouk now countenances, if he does not actually encourage, activities of anti-Diem dissidents Cambodia and is assisting efforts of certain of these dissidents to establish contact with DRV officials in Geneva.

Despite these obstacles we believe question of border controls of sufficient importance to warrant more effort convince Diem he should really do something more about problem than he has in past. I do not believe, however, that we ought to go to extent of getting Ambassador Harriman involved in Vietnamese-Cambodia problems as mediator. In our view, such a move would probably be counter-productive, as it would dramatize differences between two countries, probably cause both to publicly restate their positions (which are basically different ideologically and philosophically) and make practical cooperation on border control less likely. Our thought is that to alleviate problem of border-control, best approach would be to establish possible sufficient political agreement between two countries to enable practical working relationships to be established between neighboring province chiefs on border and between province chiefs and military officers, who think effective and useful border-control measures may be established.

We concur with Phnom Penh that renewal of Tho–Tioulong discussions offers best prospect for some accomplishment along above lines. We recognize this cannot be done until Tioulong returns from Geneva, but believe it would be better to have Tho follow up on conversations than to suggest that Mau talk to Tioulong.

Meanwhile measures which could lead to Tho–Tioulong conversations could be taken. First step in our view would be to try settle question of GVNs C–47 plane detained by RKG. GVN does not believe RKG has shadow of justification under international law in keeping this aircraft. Unless we can get this problem settled it will undoubtedly be raised as first obstacle by Diem in any conversation with him on relations with Cambodia. Though not very satisfactory method of settlement, we suggest Phnom Penh pursue line already taken with RKG (Phnom Penh 1239).4

We could then tackle Diem once again on question of financial settlement under Paris accords. Our aim would be to induce GVN to make reasonable offer to RKG on financial issue and reasonable assessment of what might be achievable in way of border controls. Believe program outlined our 1330, January 31,5 on these two points represents reasonable approach.

We concur Department’s suggestion about encouraging France to approach Sihanouk on matter of border controls, and Embassy has proposed this, in series of cables starting with our 466, August 25, 60.6

Nolting

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–1561. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC POLAD and repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, Geneva, Paris, Vientiane, and London.

1 See footnote 1, Document 70.

2 Document 70.

3 In telegram 1879 from Saigon, June 15, the Embassy summarized 16 reports that it believed verified Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory. The Embassy stated that since the issue was one cause of deteriorating South Vietnamese-Cambodian relations, it should be considered in any attempt to better those relations. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–1561)

4 In telegram 1239 from Phnom Penh, March 23, the Embassy suggested that South Vietnam transfer title of the impounded aircraft to the United States, which would make a similar plane available to South Vietnam. The United States would fly the impounded plane out of Cambodia. Another C-47 aircraft in first-class condition was scheduled for delivery to Cambodia under the Military Assistance Program. Foreign Minister Nhiek Tioulong’s initial reaction was favorable. (Ibid., 751J.5411/3–2361)

5 In telegram 1330, Ambassador Durbrow reported that he planned to urge Diem to arrange a meeting of representatives of the two governments. He outlined a plan of action to bring the two sides together on border control and on the financial dispute over Vietnamese debt owed Cambodia under the Paris Accords. (Ibid., 651H.51K/1–3161)

6 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. I, pp. 541–544.

72. Paper Prepared in the Department of State 72. Paper Prepared in the Department of StateSource

Washington, September 22, 1961.

BACKGROUND PAPER FOR PRESIDENT’S MEETING WITH PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUK

New York, September 25, 1961

While Prince Sihanouk’s official purpose in coming to the U.S. is to attend the United Nations General Assembly, he is also greatly interested in meeting the President. The Prince is proud and emotional. He greatly enjoys playing an active personal role in world affairs, and is flattered by association with leaders of the great powers. He will probably be highly gratified with the President’s display of interest in exchanging views on world affairs and with the development of a personal relationship with the President. In view of the Prince’s unique power in Cambodia, the personal impressions which he carries from his meeting with the President could have a long-term beneficial effect on U.S. relations with Cambodia. (See Biographic Data Report attached.)1

It is suggested that early in the meeting the President extend to the Prince an oral invitation to visit the U.S. on a state visit early next year. Details of such a visit, on which White House agreement has already been given in principle, can be discussed later with Ambassador Trimble in Phnom Penh. In connection with this invitation, the President should be prepared to respond as appropriate to an invitation which the Prince is expected to make for the President to visit Cambodia.

Although Prince Sihanouk will probably be interested mainly in discussing world questions, it would be desirable for the President to mention, in complimentary terms, internal developments in Cambodia under the Prince’s leadership. Particularly praiseworthy are Sihanouk’s determination to safeguard Cambodia’s independence, his alertness against Communist subversion and his government’s attention to the educational needs of his country.

The following is background information on a few specific topics which may be or should be brought up during the conversation with the Prince.

1. Relations with the U.S. U.S.-Cambodian relations are currently good, having greatly improved since 1959, when Prince Sihanouk was convinced we were involved in a plot to overthrow him. We have constantly sought to assure him that we respect his government’s choice of neutrality. Our policy is based on a simple precept—to assist Cambodia to remain independent. This objective is always worth reiterating.

Economic assistance has been an important instrument in furthering this United States policy in Cambodia. The United States has been the chief source of outside assistance to Cambodia since independence, having provided both military and economic aid. The President may wish to remark that we continue to be interested in assisting Cambodia’s economic development and in helping to meet its security requirements.

2. Laos. Prince Sihanouk originated the idea of the 14-Nation Conference on Laos, participated in the initial meetings and helped to arrange the meeting of the three Princes in Zurich. In his conversation with the Secretary on September 18,2 he stated that, if the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. agreed on withdrawal of foreign troops from Laos, Cambodia would consider acting with Burma to assist in supervising the troop withdrawal, provided the Lao had no objection. He has expressed serious doubts about the reliability of Souvanna Phouma and Ambassador Harriman’s effort to disengage Souvanna Phouma from the Communist bloc.

3. Belgrade Neutralist Conference.3 Sihanouk took a moderate line at the Belgrade Conference, and stressed that the Conference should uphold principles rather than criticize particular nations. Since then, in his meeting with the Secretary, he has expressly indicated that he does not wish to be associated with any neutralist “bloc”. In his arrival statement, he pointedly remarked that he was not a “messenger” from the Conference and that Cambodians “do not regard ourselves as the conscience of the world”.

4. Cambodian Relations with Viet-Nam and Thailand. A major problem with implications for the stability of the entire SEA region is the ill feeling that characterizes relations between Cambodia and neighboring Thailand and Viet-Nam. While relations with Thailand have improved in the past year, relations with Viet-Nam have, if anything, deteriorated. Current irritants include Cambodian concern over treatment of the Khmer minority in South Viet-Nam, Vietnamese accusations that Cambodia has provided sanctuary for Viet Cong rebels from Viet-Nam, charges by the Government of Viet-Nam that the Cambodians are engaged in subversive activities against Viet-Nam, and unsettled financial issues resulting from the division of French Indochina into three independent states.

Any discussion of Cambodia’s relations with its neighbors approached with the utmost tact, since Sihanouk is highly emotional and sensitive on this subject. In view of the regional implications, however, it would be desirable for the President to mention U.S. concern over the poor relations between the various countries and to express confidence that neither Thailand nor Viet-Nam has aggressive designs against Cambodia, just as we have confidence that Cambodia has no designs against its neighbors. Hope should be expressed that the countries concerned will cooperate increasingly in the face of a common external Communist threat which transcends in importance their particular grievances.

5. Berlin. While Prince Sihanouk has paid tribute to Khrushchev for his “sincere desire” to find a solution to the problem of Berlin, he nevertheless publicly calls for the “strict and sincere application of the self-determination principle for Berlin as well as all other conflicts”. At the recent Belgrade Conference, he reiterated his advocacy of self-determination as a basis for the solution of the Berlin and German problems. A solution should also envisage German reunification and neutralization, thus creating a neutral buffer between the opposing blocs analogous to the neutral buffer zone he has advocated in Southeast Asia.

6. Soviet Nuclear Testing. Prince Sihanouk has refrained from public condemnation of the resumption of nuclear weapons testing by the Soviet Union and commented on the subject only casually at the Belgrade Conference (in a portion of his written speech not actually delivered). Nevertheless, he is presumably aware of and may have specifically sanctioned recent strongly worded expressions of criticism against the Soviet action that have appeared recently in the Cambodian press. It is likely that discussion of the U.S. position on this question will be useful and sympathetically received by the Prince.

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Cambodia Files: Lot 65 D 55, 22.4 Sihanouk Visits, 1961–1962. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and cleared by Cleveland, Anderson, Theodore J.C. Heavner of SEA, McConaughy, and Richard J. Gookin of the Under Secretary of State’s office. Sent to the White House under cover of a September 22 memorandum from Battle to Bundy.

1 Not printed.

2 The discussion was held during the meeting of the U.N. General Assembly. (Ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

3 Held September 1–6.

73. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 73. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, September 23, 1961.

I have just one suggestion with respect to the attached briefing paper for your visit with Sihanouk.1 That relates to the Cambodian-Vietnamese border problem. We are quite confident that Cambodia is being used as a safe haven for Viet Cong. The Cambodian army recently attacked a Viet Cong unit in the border area in an operation that received a good deal of publicity. There may have been another unpublicized fight since that time. The U.S. provided help in the first case in the form of intelligence on the location of the Viet Cong unit. (This is highly confidential information.) The Cambodians are, as the State paper indicates, very sensitive on this issue and reacted very strongly to a New York Times editorial which suggested that the recent attack by the Cambodian Army on the Viet Cong represented a welcome change in Cambodian policy.2

At least as much of the blame for bad Cambodian-Vietnamese relations rests with Diem as it does with Sihanouk. In a recent assessment our embassy in Saigon concluded that not much progress on the problem can be expected as long as Diem and Sihanouk are on the scene. However, last March there was a helpful meeting between Tho, the Vietnamese Vice President and Tioulong, the Cambodian Foreign Minister who are old personal friends. You might want to suggest in a rather gentle way that perhaps some improvement in relations between Cambodia and Viet-Nam could be achieved if there could be some continuing contact between appropriate high level officials of the two countries.

It is important to note a point made in the biographic material on Sihanouk—that he is highly susceptible to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] protocol.3 He was reportedly extremely gratified, for example, when Ambassador Harriman made a special trip to Rome to see him during the early stages of the Geneva negotiations. Any special attention given him will, therefore, have a favorable effect.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/24/61–10/23/61. Secret.

1 Printed as Document 72.

2 The New York Times, September 9, 1961.

3 [text not declassified].

74. Memorandum of Conversation 74. Memorandum of ConversationSource

New York, September 25, 1961, 4 p.m.

SecDel/MC/44

SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE SIXTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL. ASSEMBLY

New York, September 19–24, 1961

PARTICIPANTS

US The President

Ambassador Trimble

Mr. John M. Steeves, Deputy Assistant Secretary, FE

Ambassador Stevenson joined at 4:30

Cambodia His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sihanouk

Foreign Minister Nhiek Tioulong Ambassador Nong Kimny

SUBJECT

Security in Southeast Asia

After the opening felicitations, the Prince presented to the President a miniature carving of a buddha—a miniature but fine example of Angkor carving from the thirteenth century.

The President took the initiative in raising the subject of security in Southeast Asia and the dangerous situation in Laos. He pointed out to the Prince that we were seeking his advice. Cambodia’s geographic location and the Prince’s obvious resultant concern, plus the great efforts he had already put forth, made his advice of great value to us. He reminded the Prince that in Vienna he was pleased to be able to point to the neutrality of Cambodia as an example of that which we would be willing to accept in Laos in our search for a definition of neutrality which both we and the communist bloc could accept.1

The President outlined the efforts we had made to prove to all concerned that we were genuinely interested in a neutral Laos. He referred to the efforts made by the British and the French in their approaches to Souvanna Phouma and then referred in some detail to the purpose of the The President asked the Prince what he would do in view of the situation. Would he accept Souvanna Phouma’s word that these people would follow a neutral policy? Would he be able to keep the country from going completely communist and would we be taking too great a chance in accepting Souvanna Phouma’s assurances? The Prince did not answer the question directly, but wistfully opined that the only hope might be that once in the government under Souvanna’s leadership, they might be able to separate themselves from complete communist domination.

The President asked the Prince what his own estimate of Souvanna Phouma was. The Prince smilingly said that Souvanna Phouma was his friend, that he had attempted to do everything he possibly could to work with Souvanna Phouma, but that even when Souvanna had stayed in Phnom Penh he had not come to the Prince for advice, but that his association was with people like Ambassador Abramov. These were the people that he took his counsel from. He therefore felt that Souvanna Phouma had committed himself very far to communist support.

In commenting on Cambodia as an example of the type of neutral state we desired for Laos, the Prince restated his often-described conviction that there is a great difference between Cambodia and Laos. The Cambodians have been led to feel a dedicated loyalty to their own King and country and that this was the means that he had utilized in cementing the people of his country together. This, unfortunately, was not true in Laos and the conditions did not exist at present to make it so.

Turning again to the security situation in Laos, the President said that he had been doing some thinking and had talked to the Secretary of State about the possibility of enlarging the ICC to include representatives from Cambodia and Burma in order that people from the area might serve with the ICC in helping to identify the Viet Minh and communist elements from the north serving with the Pathet Lao and Souvanna Phouma forces. In the withdrawal of all foreign forces, we were working at a distinct disadvantage as compared with the Viet Minh for anybody could recognize us, whereas the physical characteristics of the Viet Minh made it possible for them to merge with the Lao. The Prince admitted that it was even difficult for Cambodians to recognize the difference, but admitted that they probably could be very helpful and would indeed be willing to serve in any helpful capacity if they were invited. The Prince, however, reminded the President that the Russians and Chinese would probably not be very happy with Cambodia and Burma serving in this capacity.

During the course of the conversation, the Prince expressed appreciation for the President’s speech to the General Assembly. His support for proper controls in any meaningful disarmament formula and his strong support for a properly constituted and equipped ICC were very much appreciated. The Prince said that while he was not present in the General Assembly during the President’s speech, he had watched it on TV and thought “it was a very good speech.”

During the discussion considerable time was given to the unsatisfactory relations between Cambodia and Viet-Nam. On being invited to explain some of their outstanding problems, the Prince recounted in great detail the points of friction between Cambodia and Viet-Nam. He referred, first of all, to the 600,000 Cambodians who were resident in Viet-Nam who were not accorded the normal freedoms, such as use of their own language, to be able to use their own script in writing and the denial of the right of Cambodian schools for their children. This particular minority was always blamed for harboring Viet Cong rebels. This led to a discussion of the troubled border situation between the two countries. The Viet Minh not only were invading South Viet-Nam, but occasionally made sorties into Cambodia as well. The Prince pointed out that some of his own forces had been killed recently in meeting a Viet Minh invasion. He pointed out that Cambodia was very vigilant with respect to its security and that it did not allow its territory to be used as a refuge for those escaping from Viet-Nam. He said there was absolutely no truth to the Vietnamese accusation that he assisted the rebels in making trouble in Viet-Nam.

The President asked him his opinion of the Ho Chi Minh trail. How much it was used. Where it came from and where it went. The Prince was not able to give any exact figures, but said that it had traditionally been the artery of communication between North Viet-Nam and the south. Here again he reminded the President that while Viet-Nam said that one branch of the Ho Chi Minh trail came into Cambodia, this was really not true.

He pointed out that Viet-Nam was continuously claiming islands offshore from Cambodia which had traditionally been part of Cambodia, even during the French period. In response to the President’s further search for ways to bring about better relations between Viet-Nam and Cambodia, the Prince said that he wanted this very much. Part of the difficulty stemmed from old historical reasons—Viet-Nam once being a part of Cambodia. Nevertheless, he was willing to do anything reasonable. He said that the Secretary of State had reminded him that while we were talking about summit meetings, it might be a good thing to have a summit meeting between the Thais, Cambodians and Vietnamese, and he agreed.

The President asked his frank opinion as to what was wrong in Viet-Nam. The Prince stated that in his opinion the situation in Viet-Nam would never become stable until the regime could gain popular support. Diem had not achieved this. He was not in touch with his people. The people throughout the country were not loyal. At one point Ambassador Stevenson asked the Prince if he thought that under these circumstances Viet-Nam could survive, and the Prince said he thought it could, but largely because of our support rather than for any indigenous reason.

At this point in the conversation, the President had stepped out for a moment and on returning put a question squarely to the Prince with respect to the security of Laos. He said that while we were seeking an understanding with Souvanna Phouma and attempting to work out an agreement with the communists, there was a real danger that with the coming of the dry season hostilities would break out in Laos. If such took place we would have to think of other alternatives and SEATO might have to act. He wanted to know what the Prince thought of this possibility.

The Prince was very categoric in his reply, saying that SEATO intervention would be very bad. He felt that SEATO involvement would trigger retaliation from the Chinese and that all of Southeast Asia would be overrun by the Chinese and the north Viet Minh. He said that if the people of these countries were not willing to fight for their own integrity as his people were willing to do in Cambodia and as, he believed, the Thais would in Thailand, foreign protection through an organization like SEATO could not accomplish it either. Although he was pressed for an answer to the obviously difficult question as to how a small country like Cambodia, no matter how loyal her people may be, could stand up against communist armies that far outnumber them, he had no ready answer, but merely responded by saying that he thought the communists would not go that far. He said the type of help they wanted from the outside was what we were giving them now. He was grateful for our support to his army, for the equipment and for the training. We were doing the same for Viet-Nam and Thailand. He had a small army. Viet-Nam and Thailand had much larger ones, but that the only support from the outside which they should get was material assistance and not alliances.

Throughout the entire conversation, the Prince was most forthcoming, obviously appreciated the President’s deep interest in his opinion and the conversation ended on a most cordial note. There was no mention of any other problem or matters associated with the United Nations, the talks being entirely confined to Southeast Asia.

On parting the President told the Prince that he was looking forward to seeing him some time next year during his state visit to the United States. The Prince thanked the President very cordially.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/24/61–10/23/61. Secret. Drafted by Steeves. The meeting was held in the Hotel Carlyle. President Kennedy was in New York to address the U.N. General Assembly. The text of the President’s speech is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 618–626.

1 The President is referring to his discussions with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at the June 3–4 Vienna summit. For the discussion of Laos and Southeast Asia at Vienna, see vol. XXIV, pp. 225–236.

75. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk 75. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hilsman) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, October 26, 1961.

INTELLIGENCE NOTE: CAMBODIAN MOVE TO LEFT PROBABLE

Rupture with Thais Provides Pretext. Rupture of relations with Thailand has provided Prince Sihanouk with a plausible pretext for closer accommodation to the Communist bloc.1 The spectacular staging of the rupture, preceded as it was by warning notes, indicates that it is probably more than the usual cyclical deterioration of Sihanouk’s relations with his pro-West neighbor. Sihanouk may well have brought about this crisis deliberately.

Real Reason is Communist Gains in SEA. Threats of “aggression” by Thailand provide Sihanouk a convenient excuse, but they would not be his real reason for establishing closer relations with the Communist bloc. He is convinced that Laos is coming under Communist control and that South Vietnam will eventually follow. It follows for him that Cambodia must readjust its position to growing Communist strength in Southeast Asia.

Sihanouk has shown concern over the Communist advance in Laos and given the West some cooperation while it appeared possible to halt this threat. Now that a settlement in Laos on terms advantageous to the Communists appears likely, he cannot be expected to continue this cooperation. Heretofore, Sihanouk’s neutralism always included friendship and cooperation with the bloc. He is likely now to adopt an even more friendly tone, and to go so far as to accept token Communist military aid or formalize Cambodia’s relations with North Vietnam.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/10–2661. Confidential. Sent to McGeorge Bundy at the White House with copies for Taylor, Schlesinger, Rostow, and others whom Bundy might think appropriate.

1 On October 23, Cambodia severed relations with Thailand. Extensive documentation on U.S. consultations with both Cambodian and Thai officials concerning the tension and break in relations is ibid., 651H.92.

76. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 76. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, October 31, 1961.

SUBJECT

Cambodia’s Dispute with its Neighbors

I. The Sequence of Events

1. The differences of Cambodia with Thailand and South Viet Nam are age old. Since differences between Cambodia and Thailand were mediated at the UN last year and a question of the disputed ownership of a temple on the Thai-Cambodian border has been referred to the World Court, relations between the two countries had gradually improved. This improvement was facilitated by the fact that Sihanouk appeared in recent months to recognize increasingly the danger that Communist activities in Southeast Asia pose to continued Cambodian independence. On the other hand, Sihanouk tends to view Communism as an inevitable wave of the future in Southeast Asia.

2. There has been continuing difficulty, of course, between Cambodia and Viet Nam over the use of Cambodian territory as a safe haven for the Viet Cong.

3. The immediate cause of the difficulty between Thailand and Cambodia was a press report from Tokyo alleging that Sihanouk had stated that Cambodia was more likely to have to use its arms against its neighbors than it was against Communist countries.1 It has been established that Sihanouk was actually mis-quoted, and said only that Cambodia was menaced at present more by its, neighbors than by the Communists.

4. Sarit, who had apparently become increasingly annoyed with Sihanouk, took the excuse provided by the Japanese press report to make a speech denouncing Cambodia.2 This led to the break in relations.

5. Since the break in relations, we have been engaged in an effort through local diplomatic representatives and the Cambodian Ambassador to cool down the dispute and to make use of the Norwegian representative at the UN,3 who mediated differences between Thailand and Cambodia a year ago, to again undertake mediation.

6. The cause of the latest flap was a speech last week by Sihanouk in which he referred to the U.S. in insulting terms (as “stupid”) and revived the old allegations that the U.S. was using Thailand and Viet Nam in an effort to overturn him.4 He threatened to turn to the Bloc for help. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Given Sihanouk’s sensitivity [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] his behavior is, in a psychological sense, understandable. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] He is also terribly sensitive to critical commentary in the U.S. press.

7. The Secretary on the 28th called in the Cambodian Ambassador for an explanation of Sihanouk’s speech (telegram is attached).5 There is a feeling in the FE Bureau that this may have done more harm than good. It is most difficult for Sihanouk to accept the loss of face that would be involved. He has given our embassy an explanation which blames part of the difficulty on faulty translation and the impromptu character of the speech.

8. McConaughy yesterday saw the Ambassador again to attempt to smooth over riffled feelings (telegram attached).6 Meanwhile, our Ambassador has suggested a follow-up talk with Sihanouk, perhaps with an indication he is speaking for the President. The SEA Office believes quite strongly that we would be better off letting the situation cool off for the moment and wait for the Cambodian Ambassador’s answer to the question that was put to him—whether there had been a change in basic Cambodian policy. If the answer to that question is favorable, a conciliatory Presidential message, perhaps in connection with Cambodia’s National Day, might be desirable.

II. Recommendation

9. I very much agree, on the basis of the brief study I have been able to give the problem, that a Presidential approach would not be desirable at this time. Given Sihanouk’s present state of mind it could produce a rebuff which would create a much more serious situation.

RHJ

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 10/29/61–10/31/61. Top Secret.

1 In the Times of Japan, October 8, as reported in telegram 1277 from Tokyo, October 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.00/10–2461)

2 Sarit’s speech was one of a number of remarks by Thai officials critical of Sihanouk. Telegram 615 from Bangkok, October 27, contains a summary of them. (Ibid., 651H.92/10–2761)

3 Norwegian Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Hans Kristian Engen.

4 A translated text of this speech, made at Kompong Speu Middle School on October 26, is in telegram 312 from Phnom Penh, October 27. Sihanouk’s characterization of the United States reads in part: “The U.S. is too stupid; they try to buy other people with money, but they have always failed. This is because they are stupid and are cheated by such as Sarit and Diem.” (Department of State, Central Files, 651H.92/10–2761)

5 As reported in a memorandum of conversation, October 28. (Ibid., 611.51H/10–2861) A copy of the speech was not attached, but see footnote 4 above.

6 As reported in a memorandum of conversation, October 30. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.51H/10–3061) An account of this discussion was sent to the Embassy in telegram 388 to Phnom Penh, October 30. (Ibid., 75H.11/10–3061)

77. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 77. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 2, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Cambodian Situation

Attached are the principal recent messages bearing on the Cambodian situation.1 The view that emerges from the messages from Bangkok and London is that Sihanouk’s outbursts are part of a carefully calculated strategy. The theories range from the view that he is seeking an accommodation with the Communists because he believes that the U.S. is not going to protect SEA against the Communists to the hypothesis that he is seeking to scare SEATO off from introducing forces into Viet Nam because he fears that SEATO contemplates actions that will compromise Cambodian neutrality.

The FE Bureau is of the view that his statements are not part of some carefully conceived plot or strategy, but a typical [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reaction to outside criticism. The Bureau believes that a policy of promoting calm is the right one. The release today by Thailand of a white paper on Thai-Cambodian relations is not likely to further this policy.2 I suggested about a week ago that, since it is our view that Sarit bears a considerable measure of the responsibility for the Thai-Cambodian situation, we ought to do some rather tough talking with him. I was informed that a telegram along these lines had been killed by Alexis Johnson on the grounds that the Thais were adequately informed of our Views. Sihanouk’s attack on the U.S. may make such a démarche more difficult, but it also makes it more necessary. Otherwise the Thais may think that the situation has given them greater freedom to attack Sihanouk.

It seems to me that it is quite possible to construct a reasonably accurate picture of Sihanouk’s state of mind. We know that he is a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] individual with a deep sense of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] insecurity [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. He is terribly sensitive to criticism and to the possibility that the traditional enemies of Cambodia, Thailand and Viet Nam are plotting against him. He has, in addition, some of the usual feelings of leaders of newly independent nations toward the U.S. as the most powerful representative of the former imperialist powers.

From Sihanouk’s point of view all of these fears received dramatic confirmation when, in 1958, shortly after a very friendly talk with Eisenhower, the U.S. seemed to be [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] using Thailand and Viet Nam as bases from which to launch an effort to overthrow him. His recent speeches as well as his private statements [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] indicate that he sees a close parallel between what has happened recently and what happened in 1958. He had an excellent reception from the President and now again feels threatened by Thailand and Viet Nam. What seems to be required is some form of convincing reassurance. I believe that a three-pronged attack on the problem is called for

a. Some new kind of Presidential reassurance to Sihanouk is required, either in the form of a message or a talk with the Cambodian Ambassador.

b. We should make a quite strong démarche to Sarit making it clear that we are not happy with what he has been doing, indicating that we desire to see an armistice on inflammatory statements, white papers, etc., and stating that we will never tolerate a military attack by him upon Cambodia. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] A related, though less stiff approach ought to be taken to Diem—less harsh because, I believe, he has been less of a source of the immediate trouble.

c. Continuation of efforts through the UN machinery or through the Norwegian representative at the UN to mediate the dispute between Cambodia and Thailand.

I have indicated to Bob Cleveland, who is the anchor man of the SEA office in State, that the White House might be receptive to some kind of Presidential role and mentioned the possibility of a Presidential talk with Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny. As he pointed out, there is an immediate psychological-political problem because the U.S. is at present an aggrieved party. An initiative by us for a Presidential visit could be rebuffed or exploited by Sihanouk as a vindication of the righteousness of his cause and a loss of face for the U.S. The FE Bureau has been awaiting a response from Nong Kimny to McConaughy’s request to him for clarification of whether Cambodia intends to change its policy of nonalignment.

There has been one recent small indication that Sihanouk may be seeking to crawl back from the end of the limb on which he finds himself. In response to a routine birthday greeting from U.S. Ambassador Trimble sent before the recent troubles, he has sent Trimble a warm telegram of appreciation.

After talking with his colleagues and with John Steeves, Cleveland has come up with two possibilities:

a. The President could send a message to Sihanouk on Cambodian National Day which is November 9. Some kind of message would be called for anyway and the occasion could be used to reaffirm our support for Cambodian neutrality and independence. In response to my earlier objection that November 9 could be too late, State has indicated that the message could be sent within the next couple of days even though intended for the November 9 celebration.

b. Ambassador Kimny should call in a day or two to request an appointment in the Department to deliver Sihanouk’s answer to McConaughy’s question. When he calls, the desk officer would seek to ascertain whether the response is favorable. If it is, the desk officer could indicate that the President has been concerned about recent developments affecting Cambodia and he could indicate that it would be possible for the Ambassador to call and have a short discussion with the

President. (The initiative for requesting a talk would be left, however, with Kimny.) This discussion with the President would be used to reassure Sihanouk that we support his continued independence and neutrality.

I prefer the second proposal as the basic approach. We will probably wish to send a statement on Cambodian National Day in any event. But a private discussion would permit somewhat greater frankness than a public statement. As to the tactics, however, I am not sure whether it wouldn’t be better to have Kimny come to the Department and tell his full story before it is suggested that he might ask for an appointment with the President. If his statement seems satisfactory, the Department officers with whom he talks could then indicate the possibility of such an appointment. We do have to be careful to avoid having Sihanouk exploit such a meeting in a way which would cause us to appear to be supplicants or cause further trouble with his neighbors. But if Kimny’s statement suggests that Sihanouk is making a real effort to undo the damage he has done to U.S.-Cambodian resolutions, that danger should be reduced.

As indicated above, I would favor in addition a démarche to Sarit and, if it seems necessary, to Diem. It is not going to be easy, I suspect, to get Young to deliver a tough statement to Sarit.

The above analysis of the roots of the problem may be wrong. It may be true that Sihanouk has finally decided to seek an accommodation with the Bloc. But if that is the case, there will be little we could do directly to prevent it. Meanwhile, we ought to test the validity of the alternative theory. Provided Sihanouk lays the basis for such an approach in his reaction to McConaughy’s démarche to Kimny, the risks involved would seem worth taking.

I suggest that, if you agree with these proposals, you take up with the President the question of his receptivity to a meeting with Ambassador Kimny if the latter’s impending talk within the Department suggests that such a talk would be useful; also, his reaction to a reassuring National Day message. You may wish to take up with him the question of a State Department message to Sarit and Diem. If you do not believe that this requires his attention, but you agree as to its desirability, you might pass the suggestion on to Alexis Johnson. Alternatively, I can call McConaughy.

RHJ

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Rostow and Bromley Smith.

1 Not attached. The telegrams are 1779 from London and 651 from Bangkok, both October 31. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/10–3161 and 651H.92/10–3161, respectively)

2 Not found.

78. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 78. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Cambodian Situation

Attached is a draft of an Independence Day Message from the President to Sihanouk.1 It is presently being cleared within the Department and should not yet be checked out with the President. I personally believe that this is a very good message and preserves the essence of what we sought to achieve by our draft.2

In view of the recommendation of Ambassador Trimble that our policy should be one of “courteous aloofness” and that the Independence Day Message should not “suggest that the U.S. considers itself any way responsible for the present imbroglio” and in view of State’s concern for the reaction of the Thais and Vietnamese, it is possible that there will be some resistance within State to sending even this message.

Perhaps our effort to draft a message and my discussion with Alexis Johnson on Thursday3 did have some additional effect for you may have noted that Johnson, when he received Ambassador Nong Kimny on Friday, reiterated in the “strongest possible terms” that “nobody in the U.S. Government was encouraging Thailand or Viet Nam to attack or threaten Cambodia in any way whatsoever”.4

I agree that Alexis Johnson’s talk with the Ambassador and the message to Sihanouk, if it goes out approximately as written, will accomplish what needs to be accomplished at present. I can no longer find anyone in State who favors additional action at this time.

[1 paragraph (10 lines of source text) not declassified]

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. Bundy wrote “done” on this memorandum. A copy was sent to Rostow.

1 Not printed. A copy of the draft message is ibid.

2 Robert Johnson added a handwritten note at the end of this first paragraph that reads: “It even uses some of our language.”

3 No full record of the Robert Johnson–U. Alexis Johnson discussion on November 2 has been found, but see Document 79.

4 An account of that November 3 discussion is in a memorandum of conversation, November 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.51H/11–361)

79. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 79. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 7, 1961.

SUBJECT

The President’s Message to Sihanouk

I have just been informed that the draft message to Sihanouk1 which I sent you yesterday was cleared by Mr. McConaughy. However, Alexis Johnson and the Secretary decided to kill it on the grounds that it was “too fulsome”. The redrafting of the message is now entirely in Mr. Johnson’s hands.

The message seemed to me to strike very much the right kind of a balance. I believe that Mr. Johnson’s reaction is compounded from two elements:

a. His concern over the reaction of the Vietnamese and the Thais to too friendly a message.

b. A fear that a friendly message of this kind has too much the flavor of “turning the other cheek”. This objection is related to the one in a because he fears that we will suffer a “loss of face” if we make too friendly an approach after what Sihanouk has said about the U.S. (When I talked with him on Thursday evening, Mr. Johnson seemed particularly incensed at the attached report2 on a radio bulletin and periodical article which he viewed as a personal attack on the Secretary. I do not view it that seriously. I fear that we may be reacting in somewhat the manner that we criticize Sihanouk for reacting, although admittedly Cambodian press and radio are much more likely to reflect Sihanouk’s view than our press and radio, our Government’s view.)

I think it would be useful if you could have a further talk with Alexis Johnson, perhaps at the Planning Luncheon today. It seems to me that the following essential points should be made in the message:

a. That the President viewed his discussion in New York with Sihanouk3 as a turning of the page on the past [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

b. That U.S. Government policy toward Sihanouk has not changed since the New York meeting.

c. That we genuinely accept Cambodia’s policy of neutrality.

I don’t know whether you will wish to talk to Mr. Johnson in terms of the State draft of which I sent you a bootleg copy yesterday. I would myself favor the FE draft without change. However, if it must be made somewhat cooler, a revision along the lines of the attached might do the job.4

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 11/1/61–11/7/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Rostow. Bundy doodled extensively on this memorandum.

1 See footnote 1, Document 78.

2 Not attached.

3 See Document 74.

4 No revised draft was attached, but the message was sent to Phnom Penh in telegram 413, November 7, for immediate transmission to Sihanouk. It reads as follows:

“On the eighth anniversary of independence of Cambodia achieved under the leadership of Your Royal Highness, I extend congratulations to you and your people on behalf of the American people and government.

“On such an historic occasion which symbolizes much to you and the Cambodian people, I wish to reaffirm our common dedication to freedom and to pay tribute to the spirit and the courage of those who won it and must maintain it.

“Our recent discussions have given me confidence that the friendship which has existed between Cambodia and the United States is based upon firm and lasting foundations. Americans, therefore, are happy to join with Cambodia in celebrating this day of independence.” (Department of State, Central Files, 851H.47411/11–761)

80. Telegram From the Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Cambodia (Scherrer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 80. Telegram From the Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Cambodia (Scherrer) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)Source

Phnom Penh, November 15, 1961.

2932. DA IN 176482. I feel the time has come when we in MAAG Cambodia should give our observations and evaluations of the situation in Cambodia.

A. As terms of reference we must face the facts that: (1) Few occidentals really understand Cambodia and Cambodians, and even fewer Cambodians really understand us.

(2) In spite of recent material modernizations, Cambodians are mentally still living in the distant past.

(3) Cambodia’s fear of her neighbors is real and deeply felt; in Cambodian minds, the historic struggle marked by often recurring wars between Cambodia and her neighbors over the past 1000 years still goes on and must always be given first consideration. The Cambodians feel that both Thailand and South Vietnam still harbor designs against Cambodian territory. Here is another indication of Cambodian attitude; General Lon Nol has on several occasions told me that the Thailand Government and military, especially the Thai Navy, are infiltrated by communists.

(4) The Cambodian people are strongly behind Prince Sihanouk and the vast majority feel he can never be wrong. Knowing this, as well as Sihanouk’s inability to accept criticism, RKG officials and military will not indicate that the Prince might be wrong even though they might think so.

B. During the past three weeks, our Cambodian military counterparts have been more friendly and talkative than usual. They have gone to great lengths to explain the environment in which they find themselves. We in MAAG view such explanations in the light of terms of reference, para A above. They indicate no desire for a change in environment, but only hope that we will understand and continue our friendship. Occasionally, we note a slight embarrassment vis-à-vis US in MAAG over the current crisis and some of Sihanouk’s statements.

C. Sihanouk does not think that communism or Communist China are threats to Cambodia at this time. He does think that they are in favor of the communists taking over S.E. Asia eventually, and probably hopes that he will somehow be able to keep Cambodia free, independent, Americanized and sovereign; although above all he will struggle to maintain Cambodia’s national identity, even if its sovereignty is seriously impaired. Sihanouk definitely does not want communism in Cambodia.

D. The Cambodian military (FARK) is anti-communist.

E. The RKG and FARK do not condone any violations of Cambodian borders and will take all possible action within their means to eject any Viet Cong or other foreign military forces discovered in Cambodia. Sihanouk is serious in his repeated invitations to anyone from anywhere to come to Cambodia anytime to see for themselves whether or not there are any communist bases in Cambodia. With the limited means available, the US Ambassador and his agencies, including MAAG, have continuously investigated, to include ground and aerial reconnaissance, allegations of Viet Cong bases and training areas in Cambodia. We have found none. We believe there are none.

F. In border areas where surveillance is extremely difficult due to rugged heavily forested terrain and where FARK is very thinly spread because of limited forces, there are undoubtedly cases of clandestine infiltration of individuals or small groups; but these infiltrations are not with the consent or approval of RKG or FARK. The N.E. region of Cambodia is particularly vulnerable to that type of transit or border violations. Such violations are likely to increase as the Viet Cong build up and increase operations into SVN from southern Laos. General Lon Nol is determined to prevent this; but it is our judgment that he cannot succeed without a significant increase in FARK. In any event such transits are not to be confused with bases. Any operational base, rest camp, or training camp probably will be discovered and eliminated by FARK.

G. For hundreds of years there have been family feuds and raids across the border. These are civilian actions and occasionally some local police become involved. These acts will continue and must not become concerned [confused?] with military operations. Neither GVN nor RKG can stop these any more than we can stop the feuds in the Kentucky hills. Unfortunately these incidents occasionally get blown up into serious incidents by both sides.

H. As we weather another crisis, we find Cambodia still neutral and desirous to remain that way in spite of some public statements that, on face, seem to the contrary. We frequently find it necessary to be very patient and to suppress emotions which becloud objectivity.

I. We feel it is absolutely vital to the free world interests in S.E. Asia to prevent the build up of emotional situation which would lead Cambodia into aligning herself, perhaps unwillingly, with the socialist bloc. To stop this we must keep U.S. objectives firmly in mind and not become stampeded by seemingly irrational outbursts of the Chief of State; we must recognize that there are leftist and anti-American advisors talking to the Chief of State; and that these advisors, along with the communist diplomatic and economic missions in Cambodia, will take every available opportunity to try to convince Sihanouk and other RKG officials that everything the U.S. does has a sinister purpose.

J. Cambodia needs our help to remain free and sovereign and recognize that its independence depends on this help.

K. Begin Noforn. The French military mission is cooperating with U.S. MAAG to the maximum degree that is possible without arousing suspicion that French and American military missions are “ganging up” on Cambodia. Most of the anti-American French military have been replaced although we unable assay this is facet of deliberate policy. End Noforn.

L. Gradually appearing in Cambodia is a young educated element which tends to be pro-leftist (Paris influence). This element will gradually increase. It is already influential in relation its size and its influence will grow steadily. Most of the opposition to Sihanouk will come from this group and it represents a potential threat to political stability unless Cambodia’s economic and social development can provide opportunities for its members. While the U.S. oriented educated element is very small, their numbers will start becoming substantial in 3 or 4 years.

M. Cambodia will mature but it will be very gradual and long-coming. Time may run out. Undoubtedly, the communists will try hard to make it learn to live with the Cambodian facts of life.

N. The foregoing text has been shown to U.S. Ambassador and U.S. ARMA.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to SecDef (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indochina. Secret; Routine; Noforn. Repeated to CHJUSMAAG Saigon and Bangkok and readdressed by CINCPAC on November 24 priority for JCS. Brigadier General E.C.D. Scherrer became the Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Cambodia in August 1961. He replaced Brigadier General Charles H. Chase.

81. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff (Collins) 81. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff (Collins)Source

Washington, November 29, 1961.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

Noting that the rather scholarly report (DAIN 176482) on Cambodia from Chief, MAAG, Phnom Penh, to CINCPAC,1 had JCS as an info addressee, and knowing JCS’s concern over problems in Southeast Asia, I thought some informal comment might be helpful.

The MAAG message states that MAAG and other U.S. organizations in Cambodia have investigated reports of Viet Cong bases and training areas in Cambodia. It concludes: “We have found none. We believe there are none.” In this, MAAG apparently has come to the same conclusion as did Trumbull of the New York Times, who wrote on this point recently.

What is disturbing is that we used to get similar reports from Laos. There was a time, not long ago, when nobody could find a Pathet Lao in the country and it became rather popular around town to poo-poo the idea that there were any Communist guerrillas in Laos. Now we get a similar poo-pooing from Cambodia.

I wonder if these folks who go looking really know what a Communist guerrilla looks like? In Cambodia, I feel certain that he looks, talks, and claims to be just like the other folks on rubber plantations, in villages, and in the rice paddies. In Cambodia, the provincial governors have received “economic aid” in the form of gold payments from Chinese Communists and it is doubtful that such “neutralists” could find a single Communist in their provinces if asked by well-meaning Americans. Most of the French, including the Deuxieme Bureau types, probably think it a good joke on us and keep the joke going.

Wouldn’t it be a good thing for the Chief of MAAG–Vietnam, who has access to Viet Cong prisoners, to provide some clues to Chief of MAAG–Cambodia? It might be okay for American civilians to be lulled into a real lotus-land picture, but our military need to look at the scene with hard realism.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to Sec Def (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indochina. Secret. A copy was sent to Admiral Heinz.

1 Document 80.

82. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, January 19, 1962, 2 p.m.

490. Since late October–November low in Cambodian-Free World relations, phased return to normality has been taking place. This initially reflected in my meeting with Sihanouk December 5 (Embassy telegram 419),1 and followed by abatement of anti-U.S. press attacks. Recently we have seen mounting evidence that Cambodian sentiment taking somewhat more pronounced pro-Free World turn. Developments highlighted by discovery Communist plot, but other significant manifestations of new look are repeated conciliatory references to Diem and GVN and increasingly effusive public expressions of friendship toward U.S. and on somewhat less tangible level we note further sharp drop [rise?] in press criticism of Viet Minh, and fact that official rebuttals of SVN press allegations have perceptibly moderated in tone and appear designed mainly for record. (We now informed (Embassy telegram 485)2 that GVN Chargé Nhan and RKG Information Minister Chau Seng agreed to informal press truce at January 17 meeting.)

Change in atmosphere, while naturally welcome, obviously signifies no change in neutrality policy. Trend consistent with Sihanouk’s past record of alternating tacks to left and right, and appears mainly motivated by desire readjust balance after period of strained relations with West. At same time, there are elements in situation which appear offer possibility that trend can be kept moving for a while in favorable direction.

First, Sihanouk in recent speeches has hit hard and consistently at local Communists. Since Communist party (Pracheachon Group) will be only opposition to Sangkum in forthcoming spring elections (date not yet fixed), speeches are to large extent election tactic. But they also reflect Prince’s growing preoccupation with threat to national unity posed by Communists and by dissension within Sangkum promoted by Leftist Sangkum members. Communist inspired anonymous letters against his close collaborators in government and discovery of Communist plot have undoubtedly sharpened his concern over problem.

Second, Sihanouk’s softer line toward GVN, which apparently being reciprocated, should help reduce frictions between RKG and West. Prince’s reasons for new approach at present not entirely clear, but may stem from appreciation that U.S. seriously committed to prevention Communist take-over of SVN, recent slight improvement security situation there, and renewed awareness that Cambodia’s own interests best served by survival of GVN. Despite historic volatility of RKG–GVN relations, revival of press truce, possibility of productive discussions on border control, and reports that GVN may soon be prepared undertake talks on Paris accords, hold out prospect of more peaceful co-existence and concurrent benefits for Free World.

Favorable trend may of course be interrupted or reversed at any time. Sihanouk has shown some signs that he may be entering another depressive stage, in which he capable of exploding over even minor issue, and Leftist press and advisers will certainly exploit every opportunity to trigger explosion. Accordingly, it highly important that every effort be made to avoid presenting them with exploitable opportunities. Urge, for example, that Thai and SVN press attacks against Cambodia subside or be toned down, that provocative actions and official statements be avoided, that Western press as a whole refrain from gloating over Sihanouk’s troubles with Communists and interpreting them as an indication of a change in policy, that SVN defoliation operations be conducted at sufficient distance from border as to insure against slightest possibility of spray entering Cambodia, that over-flights or flight along border construable as intrusions Cambodian territory be avoided.

More fundamental problem, however, which imposes severe limits on pro-Western trend, derives from Sihanouk’s apparently increasing conviction that Communism, particularly Chinese Communism, will inevitably dominate area. While he has made this point often in past, he emphasized it strongly in several recent speeches, and confided last week to Indian Ambassador opinion that U.S. and India fighting only “rear-guard action” against Communists. In knowledge of this, ex-Secretary Acheson took occasion of dinner conversation with Sihanouk to stress West’s tremendous economic and financial superiority over Bloc and steadily improving Western military posture. Also pointed out that Western productivity more than three times that of Bloc and that, Soviet claims notwithstanding, gap between two camps growing not narrowing, and over-all position of West steadily improving.

Given Sihanouk’s mercurial personality and policy fluctuations, we have no illusions about permanency present line. Nevertheless trend encouraging and its continuance worth fostering. Also find new climate pleasantly invigorating after last fall’s sticky weather.

Trimble

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/1–1962. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Geneva, Vientiane, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Trimble reported in telegram 419, December 6, that during their discussion Sihanouk was “relaxed and friendly” and “unusually moderate.” Trimble received the impression that Sihanouk wanted to resume relations with Thailand, but was reluctant to take the first step. Trimble predicted that the period of strain in U.S.-Cambodian relations was coming to an end. (Ibid., 751H.00/12–661)

2 Dated January 18. (Ibid., 651H.51K/1–1862)

83. Letter From the Ambassador to Cambodia (Trimble) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 83. Letter From the Ambassador to Cambodia (Trimble) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source

Phnom Penh, March 5, 1962.

Dear Alex: The following brief assessment of the Communist threat for Cambodia is submitted in accordance with the request contained in your letter of February 9.1 I trust that the views set forth therein may be of some use to Special Group which you mentioned.

The Communist threat in Cambodia, in terms of pressures operating within the country is limited at the present time. It takes various forms. There is a local Communist front group, the Pracheachon (People’s Party) which is small, poorly organized and largely discredited because of its identification with the detested Viet Minh. It is, however, the only opposition party and is capable, as recent disclosures have revealed, of undertaking a program of subversion which apparently has succeeded in some penetration of the Buddhist clergy, and according to a recent report may even have subverted several junior and non-commissioned officers in the Army. While the local Chinese and Vietnamese minorities are largely apolitical, both, in particular the Chinese, contain active pro-Commie cadres. There are also the Bloc missions and technicians, outwardly scrupulously observant of the non-interference principle, but who are engaged in intelligence and propaganda efforts directed towards influencing Cambodia toward the Bloc. Finally, and potentially the most dangerous are the so-called young intellectuals discussed below.

Sihanouk and his close collaborators are fully alert to these pressures and have the will and capability to contain them. The Prince commands the loyalty of the overwhelming portion of the Cambodian population, including the armed forces and the police. Furthermore, there is no hint of complacency in his approach to the problem. He periodically campaigns against the local Communists, emphasizing their “foreign” connections and the incompatibility of their program with the Cambodian way of life. His current campaign, which is the longest sustained in recent years, was touched off by the discovery of a Communist subversive plot early in January 1962.

Of particular concern to Sihanouk, and in a sense the principal object of his anti-Communist campaign, is the steadily growing group of “young intellectuals”—French-educated, leftist-oriented and personally ambitious. These are the people who dominate the information and education media, and who to a large extent are responsible for their anti-Western slant. Some of them are openly or tacitly aligned with the Communists. Most are associated with the Prince’s national front, the Sangkum, but their loyalties to it, its policies and even its leader are comparatively shallow. They are impatient with the pace of economic change and even more impatient with the restrictions imposed on them by the existing social and political structure.

Sihanouk has employed a variety of techniques and pressures—flattery, inclusion in the National Assembly and junior cabinet positions, repeated threats to resign, insistence on national unity, etc.—to prevent this group from getting out of control. So far he has been successful, and should continue to be so for the foreseeable future. There is a danger, however, that the increasing difficulties that Cambodia will almost certainly face in the pursuit of economic development will lead to increasing discontent and frustration among these intellectuals. Blocked, by Sihanouk’s dominance, from the normal avenues of political expression, the “intellectuals” will be increasingly vulnerable to the temptation to find solutions in Communism.

What happens if Sihanouk should disappear from the scene? There are no potential successors of his stature and influence, and without him the strains on Cambodian unity would unquestionably intensify. Even so, however, I would foresee no immediate upheaval. The prestige of the Throne, backed by the armed forces, would be sufficient to maintain order and stability until a new formula of national leadership could be devised. And from present indications, there is nothing to suggest that this formula would involve, at least initially, greater sympathy or receptivity to Communism.

The threat to Cambodia of external Communism is a somewhat different matter, although, at the moment, it also is limited. In 1954, as you know, shortly after obtaining its independence under Sihanouk’s personal leadership, Cambodia succeeded in repelling a Viet-Minh inspired rebellion. Since that time Cambodia has zealously defended its territorial integrity and resisted all border incursions, including those of the Viet Cong. While publicity, unfortunately, tends to concentrate on border difficulties with Cambodia’s two pro-Western neighbors, the fact is that a good part of the present border incidents are precipitated by Communist incursions.

The principal element in the equation, however, is the Bloc strategy of “laying off” Cambodia until a regional decision is achieved. By flattering Sihanouk, praising and supporting Cambodian neutralism, and providing economic and technical aid, the Bloc, especially Red China, has managed to create a public image of sincere and unqualified friendship for Cambodia. But there is no doubt, certainly not in Sihanouk’s mind, of the ultimate threat. A Communist take-over of Laos and South Viet Nam would exercise a greater influence on the future of Communism in Cambodia than any foreseeable internal developments. Although the thought of two or even one Communist state on his border is repugnant to Sihanouk, he considers such a development is almost inevitable. In the meanwhile, he is bending every effort to preserve Cambodia’s independence and neutrality.

I have long been convinced that Sihanouk, despite his [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] tirades against South Viet Nam, Thailand, and recurrently the United States, sees the greatest danger to Cambodia as that posed by the prospect of a Communist-controlled, unified Viet Nam. In my talk with him on February 16 (Embtel 548),2 he went further than I can ever recall in giving expression to these sentiments. He spoke of the Viet Minh as “a danger to us—we know them,” and added that in spite of his personal differences with Diem “we must support Diem” against the Viet Minh threat.

Support of Diem, as Sihanouk interprets it, obviously does not mean a willingness on his part to undertake a coordinated defense effort. Sihanouk cannot divest himself of his hostility and suspicions toward his pro-Western neighbors, nor would he, except perhaps in the case of direct and outright Communist aggression, even consider abandoning his policy of neutrality to join forces with them. He does, however, cling to two hopes: First, that the regional status quo can be substantially maintained. As Sihanouk sees it, the present balance of power in Southeast Asia safeguards Cambodia’s independence. Only in such an environment can Cambodia avoid being overwhelmed by its traditionally hostile neighbors. Thus, he will continue to resist all pressures that seek to draw Cambodia into one camp or the other. Second, in the event of Communist domination of Southeast Asia by Red China, of which he is mortally afraid, that Cambodia’s national identity, if not its independence or freedom of action, will be preserved. This lies behind his refusal to link the local Communists with any Communist movement except that in North Viet Nam, and his profuse and repeated expressions of friendship for and confidence in Communist China. China he regards as a major and permanent power in the area—a power that must at all costs be placated and that offers some hope of protection for Cambodia should the Viet Minh conquer South Viet Nam.

I believe it is clear from the foregoing that Cambodia not only is aware of the Communist threat in Southeast Asia, but also, within the framework of what it conceives to be its own interests, problems and prospects, is participating, although admittedly in a somewhat negative fashion, in the anti-Communist effort. Sihanouk himself is opposed to Communism, as are the Army and the people in general, apart from certain small groups earlier noted. Cambodia enjoys a greater degree of political stability than any country in the area. Its economy, while not moving ahead as rapidly as desired, is at the moment under less strains and pressures than most other Southeast Asian countries and is probably more stable than that of any other, with the exception of Thailand. As with all under-developed nations, it has high aspirations and desires to achieve them in accordance with its own traditions, and free of outside compulsion.

Cambodia’s voting record in the UN does tend to favor the Bloc, but this I believe is largely the product of its neutralist balancing technique.

On really vital issues, Cambodia usually abstains. But there have also been some on which it has supported the Western position, for example Sihanouk’s speech at the United Nations in 1961, in which he advocated the need for appropriate safeguards on disarmament and nuclear testing bans, and Cambodia’s opposition to the “Troika” concept.

In effect, while maintaining a posture of neutrality, Sihanouk has succeeded in preventing the Communists from using Cambodia as a springboard for aggression against the pro-Western countries of the area. (In this connection, I recall a comment you once made to me that the question of seeking Cambodia’s adherence to SEATO had never come up in the SEATO Council, and that its limited military capacities would tend to make it more of a liability than an asset if it were to ally itself openly with the West.)

This opposition to Communism, however, does not extend to the point of Cambodia’s aligning itself defensively with its non-Communist neighbors to forestall a Communist victory. However great the logic of a unified effort, it cannot, unfortunately, be sold to Sihanouk. We, of course, do not agree with the Cambodian thesis that the pro-Western neighbors are a serious threat to Cambodia’s independence, but we must recognize that the Cambodians are genuinely convinced that this threat exists, and that, because of their relative weakness, they are seeking to insure themselves of greater support against this threat.

Thus far, Cambodia has depended on the United States, and to a lesser degree the French, for military assistance. I am sure they prefer to keep it that way, but if they ever come to believe that their survival as a nation is at stake, they will turn for support to the other side. This reversal of policy could also be occasioned, given Sihanouk’s volatile personality, by a fit of pique against the West or the neighbors. We can deplore this attitude as unrealistic and self-defeating, but argument about it would be sterile. The problem essentially is what can be done, within the limits set by Cambodian policy and psychology, to insure that Cambodia’s opposition to Communist expansion is maintained and best utilized to bring about an improvement in its relations with Thailand and South Viet Nam.

We must recognize from the outset that the Cambodian will and ability to resist Communism is dependent on two assumptions: first, that a Communist regional victory is not inevitable, and second that Western, i.e., US support of Cambodian independence is genuine and effective. Sihanouk has told me, and, I believe, in all sincerity, that the maintenance of US military strength is essential to his country. With respect to the first assumption, Sihanouk has admittedly referred time and again to the inevitability of Communist domination, the “wave of the future” in SEA. But I think he calculates this as a probability, not a certainty, and is hoping against hope that his prediction is wrong. It is possible that he also aspires in this way to ingratiate himself with Red China. Although he has not so stated, and from his view cannot so state publicly, I am certain that the recent step-up in US assistance to SVN, as evidence of strengthened US purpose in the area, is a source of considerable comfort to him and other Cambodian leaders, and may also have encouraged him in his recent campaign against indigenous Communists.

The second assumption—genuine and effective US support of Cambodian independence—is complicated by the close ties existing between our country and Cambodia’s historically hostile, pro-Western neighbors, with the result that suspicions of US intentions are constantly rising to the surface. These suspicions will never, I suppose, be entirely erased, but they can be minimized. In a recent message to the Department (Embtel 530),3 I pointed to several developments relating to our military aid program which gave the impression that US support was half-hearted and grudging, and deliberately designed to keep Cambodia in a position of relative and constantly worsening inferiority vis-à-vis its neighbors. I should like to underscore again the importance of building Cambodian confidence in US intentions. Whatever aid we give, particularly in the crucial military assistance field, should not be hedged about with delays, reservations and equivocations.

As for specific recommendations, there are several steps that we can take to assure that Cambodia will maintain its independence, and that will help us meet our own strategic objectives in this area. If our analysis is correct, pressures will increase, and Cambodia can be expected to call on us for additional assistance in the counter-subversion field. Militarily, we should be prepared to welcome and assist any reasonable and financially feasible initiatives undertaken by Cambodia to strengthen its defensive capabilities. I do not mean to suggest that Cambodia be provided aid of the same relative magnitude as that now furnished Thailand, to say nothing of South Viet Nam. I do believe, however, that in trying to keep their demands at a reasonable level we should not be so obstructive as to drive them to accept offers of military hardware from the Communist Bloc. I believe that there are greater opportunities for the provision of impact items than we have heretofore utilized. In addition, we are now working out a Country Team study of the present policy of reducing military aid to Cambodia by 10 percent annually, and are considering whether to freeze the aid at its present level, or perhaps limit the annual reduction to 5 percent.

It is important to note that Cambodia’s impressive political unity and strong sense of nationalism has as one of its pillars the identification of the armed forces with the community as a whole. This pillar has been consciously erected by a most effective program of what we call civic action, a program that dates from the mid-’50’s. Continued MAP support of such a program is highly desirable. There is a possibility that the RKG will attempt to increase its armed force levels with the aim of intensifying its security-cum-development activities in the sparsely populated northeast regions. If these plans take shape, I would urge that we carefully and sympathetically explore possibilities for assisting in their implementation.

Another problem affecting Cambodia’s security capabilities is that of communications. Much of the country, particularly in the northeast, is lacking the road network essential for effective security operations, and seasonal weather problems limit the utility of such roads as do exist. One answer may be helicopters, and I am hopeful that we will be in the position to contribute to this solution. This would be one of the impact items referred to earlier.

There is also the possibility of putting the police establishment to more effective use. The Provincial Guard comprises a force of some 10,000 whose potential is clearly not being fully exploited. We have given thought for some time to the idea of expanding police capabilities for security and civic action activities. Our problem heretofore has been the unresponsiveness of the police authorities. Recent changes in the police leadership, combined with Sihanouk’s more active appreciation of the Communist threat, suggest that the time may be propitious to raise the subject again. Our suggestions, which are now under preparation, envisage training selected members of the police in certain educational and first-aid techniques. If favorably received, the training program could be expanded to include police participation in off-shore programs in counter-subversion techniques (propaganda, organization of militia and village defense, communications, weaponry, etc.).

We have, of course, no assurances that these ideas would be accepted by the RKG, and we hesitate even to broach them on the matter before ascertaining how large a program would be authorized by the Department. Nevertheless, the present era of good feeling toward the US should be utilized to explore these possibilities.

I do not recommend any increase in economic aid to Cambodia. On the contrary I am hopeful it can be gradually reduced over a period of years. I do recommend, however, that given the primacy of our political objectives in this area there should be a greater dovetailing of our economic aid activities with our political aims. Furthermore, I am convinced that it is to our interest to endeavor, insofar as possible, to concentrate our efforts in areas of activity with very strong social and economic impact, rather than to cover the waterfront.

Here I may note that we have been putting increased emphasis on the field of education and trying to enlarge US scholarship opportunities for Cambodian students. This is vitally important given the present and foreseeable problems of the young intellectuals and the danger—which Sihanouk feels acutely—that students returning from Europe are overly influenced by Communist doctrine and hostile to Western concepts of a free society. Increased scholarships to the United States offer a means of effectively counteracting pro-Communist tendencies among these intellectual cadres.

As a final suggestion, I think it imperative that we constantly bear in mind the key role played by Sihanouk in the determination of Cambodian policy. However reluctant we may be to engage in catering to his vanity, it would be fruitless to deny that in this case flattery represents a highly effective instrument of policy. I hope an official visit by Sihanouk to the United States, which would be extremely helpful in furthering our cause here, can be arranged in the not too distant future. I would also urge that greater use be made of the practice of personal messages from the President to Sihanouk, since the Prince is particularly susceptible to this form of recognition.

With warm regards,

Bill

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/3–562. Secret; Official–Informal.

1 In this letter, Johnson informed Trimble of the establishment of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) on January 18, 1962. Johnson outlined the membership of the group, described its responsibilities, and asked for an assessment of the Communist threat in Cambodia and any suggestions Trimble might have for the Special Group (CI) when it considered Cambodia. (Ibid., 751H.00/2–962) See footnote 1, Document 423.

2 Dated February 17. (Ibid., 651H.51K/2–1762)

3 Dated February 8. (Ibid., 751H.5/2–862)

84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 84. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, June 1, 1962, 8:30 p.m.

709. Information from [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] (Unger’s memcon May 22)1 tends confirm recent [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reports indicating stepped-up activities by organized Cambodian dissidents in SVN and Thailand with aim removing Sihanouk.

For Bangkok. Embassy requested approach RTG soonest and at whatever level necessary to ensure maximum impact.2 Inform RTG that we have for several months been receiving reports from many different sources that dissident Cambodians being armed and trained on Thai and Vietnamese soil for return to Cambodia. Reports indicate that GVN and RTG not only tolerating but may be encouraging this activity. Recent information indicates that movement of dissidents into Cambodia may be imminent. In view of these persistent reports and our concern for security of area as evidenced by presence US forces it no longer possible for us ignore this matter.

Department considers these plans unrealistic and dangerous to Free World interests, particularly to Thai and GVN interests. Unlikely that such action will attract any significant support in Cambodia where Sihanouk’s popular hold firm. Despite difficulties arising from age-old enmities between Cambodians and neighbors and from Sihanouk’s personality, we consider that Sihanouk can and will hold Cambodia to an acceptable neutrality hence keep country non-Communist. However Sihanouk has made clear he intends call on Communists for help in case of aggression by neighbors, and little doubt activation of these plans by dissidents will be seen by Sihanouk as aggression.

RTG should be asked forthrightly if these reports true and informed that in existing inflammable situation in SEA it is unthinkable that our allies should encourage or allow actions which might create new and serious dangers in area, implications of which are obvious and grave for Thai and Vietnamese security and for our ability contribute thereto. Stakes completely transcend importance of their difficulties with Sihanouk. In view of contribution which US making to Thai and Vietnamese security, we have right expect they will refrain from and prevent any activities on their soil which might greatly weaken Free World military and moral position in SEA. You should seek assurances that RTG will take steps necessary to ensure that activities of expatriate Cambodian groups are kept under firm control and prevented from threatening Cambodian security.

For Saigon. In view recent date your approach to GVN FonMin re dissidents (Saigon’s 1442),3 leave to you level appointment for this purpose. However suggest that at earliest opportunity you mention [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] information to appropriate official (protect source), recall your previous discussion, inquire whether [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] remarks based on outdated information, and make points similar those being made at Bangkok.4

For Phnom Penh. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] We run risk similar alienation of RKG at this time, especially since likely dissident movement penetrated by RKG (Saigon’s 753),5 which incidentally may in part explain Depeche editorial May 25 (Phnom Penh’s 713).6 It thus might be desirable at some point inform RKG in confidence of reports we have heard that dissidents about to be active in Cambodia with indication our disapproval any such moves. However, must be kept in mind that despite confidential nature of such approach RKG might make public mention of it. Your comments requested.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/6–162. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Arzac and Wright on May 31; cleared by Koren, Cleveland, Cottrell, and Heavner of the Vietnam Task Force; sent for information to Ainsworth of EA; and approved by Rice. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok and repeated to CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Not found. Leonard Unger was Counselor of the Embassy in Bangkok.

2 In telegram 1952 from Bangkok, June 8, the Embassy reported that it was approaching the Government of Thailand [text not declassified] so as to prepare Young for a high-level démarche. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/6–862)

3 In telegram 1442 from Saigon, May 8, Ambassador Nolting reported that he had met with Mau to convince South Vietnam to improve relations with Cambodia. Nolting reported that he told Mau that the United States had heard reports that South Vietnam and Thailand were supporting Cambodian dissidents. The United States was strongly opposed to such adventures if these reports were true. Mau denied the reports and stated that South Vietnam was seeking to improve relations with Cambodia. (Ibid., 651H.51K/5–1362)

4 In telegram 1569 from Saigon, June 6, Nolting reported that he had seen both Foreign Minister Mau and President Diem on separate occasions. Both categorically denied aiding or abetting any attempt by Khmer dissidents or anyone else to overthrow Sihanouk, invade Cambodia, or even “make trouble for RKG.” Nolting stated that he believed them. (Ibid., 651H.51K/6–662)

5 Dated December 3, 1961. (Ibid., 751K.00/12–361)

6 In telegram 713, May 25, the Embassy reported that the Depeche’s editorial charged that plans were underway in South Vietnam for a Khmer Serei attack on Cambodia with “underhand support” of the South Vietnamese armed forces. (Ibid., 651H.51K/5–2562)

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, June 5, 1962, 6 p.m.

726. Re Deptels 709, 710 and Embtel 722.1 Had 3/4 hour interview with Sihanouk this morning between meetings RKG Cabinet. After furnishing him farewell gift (Sears barbecue set acquired courtesy CINCPAC, which seemed appeal his love gadgetry) and thanking him for dinner for wife and self other evening, I said thought he would be interested in clippings I had received of May 27 article by Governor Harriman in NY Times Magazine and one by Lippmann carried Washington Post same day.2

Continued I had noted from his Battambang speeches, his toast to me June 3 and article Depeche May 25 that RKG disturbed reports that Khmer dissidents being encouraged subversive action against Cambodia. I authorized assure him that USG would strongly disapprove any such move. If he wished furnish me, or, after I had left, Chargé or my successor any evidence on which RKG concern based, it would immediately be communicated my government, which I felt sure would do everything it could to quash such activities.

Sihanouk replied he most grateful this assurance. RKG representative Saigon had reported plans for action by dissidents under leadership Son Ngoc Thanh and his brother and supported by elements within GVN. (He did not mention Sam Sary.) If Son Ngoc Thanh wished to replace him he should return to country and openly appeal to people but not try take over through clandestine means. Prince went on he had plenty of money to retire and live in exile if this desire Cambodian people. He not interested in power for power’s sake but only trying to work for his own country. All he wished was to be left alone and to live in peace and on good terms with neighbors, just as he now does with free world and Communist bloc. However, he could not help but have impression GVN trying to force him into arms of Commies, although he frankly mystified as to its motivation. He realized Diem did not like him but this did not stop him from wishing Diem success in campaign against VC. His greatest fear was of united, Commie-dominated Vietnam. He had, as I knew, advocated buffer zone Southeast Asia between East and West. He even more desirous maintenance buffer between his country and DRVN, represented by SVN. If Commies should overrun SEA he could assure me Cambodia would be last to fall. Cambodians have had their belly-full of Viet Minh and 98 percent Cambodian people anti-Communist. This did not mean Cambodia wishes to abandon neutrality which has served it well in past and should continue to do so in future. Furthermore, he felt that peaceful independent non-aligned Cambodia was of greater value to West than as a weak ally. Grasping throat, Sihanouk asserted that Commie domination Cambodia would mean its strangulation.

Continuing, Prince said that as he had publicly stated on various occasions, he will not break relations with GVN. Unlike situation with respect Thailand, there is mutually beneficial trade between SVN and Cambodia. Also latter dependent on Mekong lifeline. GVN representative Phnom Penh doing what he can to ameliorate relations but unfortunately has little or no influence his government. Sihanouk added flatteringly he wished GVN would appoint as representative here someone like me who possessed support his government.

Prince then turned to relations with Thailand and claimed no reason why countries should not get along well together. Former Thai Ambassador here had been washout (comment: I agree) while his predecessor, although seemingly friendly, had actually disliked this country (comment: probably true). Sihanouk admitted RKG also at fault in having previously maintained as Ambassador at Bangkok man who did not get along with RTG. But this all past history. Evidence RKG’s desire remove causes of friction between two countries found in its submission Preah Vihear case to ICJ and formal commitment to abide by court’s decision even though it should go against Cambodia. If, as he hoped, relations with Thailand are re-established, this must be done on firm basis, for no purpose would be served by agreement such as that reached at UN December 1960 which, within 10 days, had been broken by Thai press.

I interjected USG naturally desirous improvement relations between Cambodia and its neighbors and, referring his critical comments former Thai Ambassadors here, said seemed to me situation called for some one like Prince Wan. Sihanouk responded that he couldn’t agree more and that Wan or man of his caliber would be most welcome.

Sihanouk then referred briefly to Laos and asserted Phoumi’s intransigence and arrogance primarily responsible for present stalemate.

I responded blame must also be shared by Souphannouvong and aggressive designs his Viet Minh supporters. I mentioned this connection captured VC document indicating DRVN and ChiComs contemplating creation satellite state comprising Cambodia, Thailand, Burma and Laos, which would provide CPR and DRVN with agricultural products. ([1 line of source text not declassified] it apparent it has not yet been brought to Sihanouk’s attention, since he expressed considerable interest and suggested it be given wide publicity.)

I next alluded Sihanouk’s remarks re Commie takeover of SEA and said I definitely did not share this view. It consensus recent Baguio meeting U.S. Chiefs of Mission, as well as Washington representatives who present, that both Soviet and ChiComs were weaker today than they had been some years ago, while on other hand, U.S. military strength markedly greater. While it true Soviet, and to a far lesser extent, ChiComs have made advances industrially, Communist system incapable solution food problem as clearly demonstrated famine in Red China and recent drastic increase meat prices Soviet Union. Danger as I saw it was that ChiComs in effort to divert attention their people from regime’s failure would feel forced to embark on aggressive ventures. These, however, would stem from weakness, not strength, as ChiComs lacked agricultural base to sustain such moves. Also would be faced with a determined and militarily powerful West.

Sihanouk said he fully shared my opinion that agriculture is Achilles heel Communist system. Commies seem unable comprehend that methods employed to develop industry are not efficacious re agriculture, and completely overlook fact, as borne out in U.S., and also Cambodia, that if farmers are to have incentive to produce they must work for themselves and on their own land rather than for state. Although acknowledging U.S. military strength he did not comment on my observations re relative power posture East and West but appeared impressed points I had made.

Prince then reverted to my statement at opening re strong U.S. disapproval action by Khmer dissidents, repeating it was most reassuring and stating he would immediately inform his Cabinet.

Interview terminated with expression personal regard and appreciation my work here, which Sihanouk claimed had contributed much to better understanding between U.S. and his own country and to bringing relations to high level existing today. They sounded nice.

Trimble

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–562. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, CINCPAC POLAD, and Vientiane.

1 Telegram 709 is printed as Document 84. In telegram 710 to Phnom Penh, June 4, the Department approved the line proposed by Trimble in telegram 722 from Phnom Penh, June 4. In telegram 722, Trimble reported that in view of Sihanouk’s thinly-veiled accusations against Thailand and South Vietnam, he wished to “state categorically that the U.S. would strongly disapprove of any plot against Royal Government and that if RKG can provide me with evidence of plot, U.S. would take whatever step it could to squash such a move.” (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–462)

2 The article in The New York Times Magazine was entitled, “What We Are Doing in Southeast Asia,” and provided background information and justification for the Kennedy administration’s policy in Southeast Asia. Walter Lippmann’s article was the text of his address before the American Law Institute in Washington on May 25. It was entitled, “Lippmann Tells How the West Gained the Edge,” published in The Washington Post.

86. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 86. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of StateSource

Saigon, June 22, 1962, 8 p.m.

1646. CINCPAC for POLAD. Re Embtel 1569.1 On June 20, I raised again privately with Diem (Thanh being third person present) question possible GVN plotting against RKG. I told President that I had reported fully his categoric denial of any GVN complicity in any plot to overthrow Sihanouk. Since our talk, I had received from various sources other evidence2 which I felt compelled to bring to his attention. This evidence involved the training of certain cadres from SVN in Taiwan for subversive political activity in Cambodia, and the sending, or facilitating the visit of, Son Ngoc Thanh to Taipei to take part in or to direct, such plotting. I was greatly disturbed by this, particularly in view of the President’s recent assurances to me, and I asked him to look into the matter to verify that there is no action on part any branch GVN along these lines.

Diem responded immediately and without any hesitation that he had, after our last talk, checked into the matter thoroughly and was assured that nothing was going on along the lines I described. He said he could not guarantee what the Thais might be doing nor the Chinese, but that so far as GVN was concerned his original assurances to me stand. He did not press for source of my information, nor did I volunteer it.

Having given the above reassurance, Diem then launched, as is his wont, into lambasting RKG for constant provocation against GVN, the latest being the raid of members Cambodian armed forces into Viet Nam and the stealing of 100 or so cattle. At the close, he said again he realized this sort of thing, while extremely annoying, would not justify any such foolish move in present tense conditions as an attempt from outside to unseat Sihanouk.

Nolting

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/6–2262. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, Taipei, and CINCPAC.

1 See footnote 4, Document 84.

2 [text not declassified]

87. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 87. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, June 23, 1962.

JCSM–473–62

SUBJECT

Increase in Authorized MAP Force Basis for Cambodian Forces (U)

1. Reference is made to a memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), dated 13 June 1962, requesting recommendations with respect to the above subject.1

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that there is a valid military requirement for additional units to be deployed to the northeast area of Cambodia. The US Government should therefore approve an increase in MAP support to include a total of 3184 people at a cost of about $1.5 million, subject to the conditions outlined below.

3. This increase would include one additional frontier battalion, strength 550, three additional infantry battalions, strength 570 each, and the addition of 924 people to existing units. The plan should not be implemented in one package, but rather should include a phased increase. The first phase of support would include an increase in strength of the existing units (924 personnel), the addition of the frontier battalion (already authorized for FY 63), and one additional infantry battalion. This increase should be subject to the following conditions: a. That the RKG scrupulously observe the provisions of the Military Assistance Agreement of 1955, particularly that portion which granted full authority of advisory personnel to enable them to follow the execution of the program of assistance, including utilization of the assistance furnished, and to report thereon on a continuing basis.

b. The RKG would furnish pay, allowances and subsistence support.

c. New units should be employed in accordance with a Forces Royaume Armes Khmer (FARK) prepared plan approved by CHMAAG and CINCPAC.

d. FARK redeploy one or more existing battalions now in the interior of Cambodia to the northeast area.

4. Upon evidence of real determination to fight the communists and observance of the above-stated conditions, the second frontier battalion and two additional infantry battalions should be funded in FY 64.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have noted with concern the unrest in Thailand over the settlement of the Preah Vihear temple issue with Cambodia. An increase of MAP support to Cambodia in the near future, considering this unrest, could be misunderstood and jeopardize US–Thailand relations.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the MAP support of Cambodia to effect an increase of about 3184 people, at a cost of about $1.5 million, be approved and plans be made accordingly. However, in view of the tensions in present Cambodia–Thailand relations, it is recommended that the implementation of expansion plans be held in abeyance until the relations between Cambodia and Thailand are improved.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L.L. Lemnitzer
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Cambodia 091.3 MAP. Secret.

1 In this memorandum, William Bundy stated that, in view of Department of State and White House interest in the subject, he requested the views of the JCS. (Ibid.)

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 88. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, August 18, 1962, 6 p.m.

133. Department Telegram 82.1 We have no evidence to indicate that Son Ngoc Thanh enjoys any popular support or sympathy in Cambodia. While he may have backing of few scattered individuals, loyalists [loyalties] of Khmer people as a whole, including security forces, are firmly commanded by Sihanouk. Prince’s enormous popularity and prestige are, if anything, increasing, and his image as the symbol and indispensable leader and protector of Khmer Nation is being constantly reinforced.

In contrast, Thanh has become discredited in popular mind as agent of Cambodia’s historical enemies, Thailand and Vietnam. Any Thanhled campaign of armed dissidence would be linked with anti-Cambodian designs of neighbors and would rally nationalistic Cambodian people even more solidly behind Prince. Moreover, Cambodian belief that such campaign could not be launched without at least tacit approval of Western Powers, specifically US, could easily prompt Sihanouk to throw Cambodia into Communist camp in effort ward off what he is convinced is ultimate threat to survival of Khmer identity. There little doubt that if he reached such decision he could carry people with him.

For much same reason, assassination of Sihanouk by Thanh agents would produce serious anti-Western political repercussions. Popular feeling would be aroused against assassins and sponsors, and such situation obviously exploitable by Communists. Absence of any true successor to Sihanouk, in terms popular stature and appeal, could lead to political fragmentation from which Communists stand to benefit. Thanh himself could not hope supplant Sihanouk. Most likely immediate leadership would emerge from group of conservative (Old-Guard) leaders backed by throne and military, but even such leadership would be compelled recognize and to some extent yield to Leftist supported and stimulated popular resentment against West.

Important bear in mind that principal (though not immediate) threat to Sihanouk-centered Cambodian stability lies in increasing numbers of Western-educated intellectuals influenced by Communist doctrine and attracted to Communist techniques. Sihanouk has thus far been able to enforce their allegiance to him, no likely successor would be capable of exercising equally effective control.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/8–1862. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and Taipei.

1 In telegram 82, August 13, the Department informed the Embassy that it was disturbed at reports of Thai and South Vietnamese support of Son Ngoc Thanh’s plotting against Sihanouk. The Department concluded that Thanh had low-level contacts with Vietnamese, Thai, and Nationalist Chinese officials; that he was receiving limited funds from the Vietnamese and possibly the Thai; [text not declassified] and that Thanh had built up a small band of followers because of South Vietnamese support. (Ibid., 751H.00/8–1362)

89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 89. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, August 22, 1962, 10:21 p.m.

305. Sihanouk announced August 20 press conference he sending letters to Geneva powers (less Thailand) calling for conference guarantee neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia in same manner as recent action on Laos. Letter addressed August 20 to President1 being repeated to all addressees. Letter refers in general terms to threat hanging over nation for years from neighbors, leading him fear international conflict in near future. Although letter not specific on this point, probable that immediate cause for Sihanouk’s action is recent incidents on Cambodian-Thai border.2

Dept believes reply to Sihanouk’s letter should be made promptly in light anticipated fast actions by communists. This requires urgent coordination US position with that of friends among Geneva recipients.

Accordingly action addressees requested inquire host governments’ reaction to Sihanouk’s proposal. Embassies London, Paris and Ottawa should convey US view that such conference should be last resort, and that it unnecessarily complicates fairly simple situation by involvement too many parties. Laos situation was far different, involving major confrontation between non-communist world and bloc for purpose seeking solution that would save Laos from externally induced communist subversion and insurgency. Present situation is a bilateral problem Cambodia–Thailand and to lesser extent related to Viet-Nam. Sihanouk may also be seeking to arrange international protection against communist side as he is known to fear that things may go sour in Laos and/or Viet-Nam.

FYI. We are opposed to conference chiefly because it likely encourage extension of conference concept to South Viet-Nam. End FYI.

UK may be able sound out Soviet views on Sihanouk proposal in its role of Geneva co-chairman. Although at this point we fairly certain Hanoi and Peiping likely support Sihanouk proposal, we are not convinced USSR will do so.3

Embassies Rangoon, New Delhi, Vientiane, Bangkok and Saigon should exercise extreme caution and to extent feasible should avoid disclosing our present negative view re Sihanouk proposal. We do not wish Sihanouk to become aware of our views prematurely. We note Indian Ambassador at Phnom Penh displeased that Sihanouk move taken without consulting India (Phnom Penh’s 154).4 Embassies Rangoon and Vientiane could perhaps encourage neutral disapproval by mere inquiry whether such consultation took place.

We tend agree with UK FonOff position that main problem will be how respond to Sihanouk without arousing him (London 712).5 We wonder whether French who have considerable experience in dealing with Sihanouk may not be able help on this score and hope Paris can obtain Quai’s views earliest.

Sihanouk tends be extremely stubborn about his own proposals and reaction likely be exceptionally bad if bloc responsive to his proposal while non-communist nations oppose. However opposition for conference might be made more palatable if some alternative equally tempting to Sihanouk’s desires be center of world attention can be devised. Any suggestions for alternatives would be welcome. FYI. Dept hopes UNSYG may be willing intervene along lines Phnom Penh 1506 and will not be diverted from this by Sihanouk’s precipitate initiative. Fact US has suggested SYG intervention should not be revealed. End FYI.

Another idea that has been advanced is that in response Sihanouk letter US offer make public declaration of its own intention to respect Cambodian neutrality and invite other countries to do the same. Such declaration probably extremely hard to sell to Thailand and SVN, but they might be persuaded if convinced this best way avoid international conference suggested by Sihanouk.

Request urgent comments.7

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/8–2262. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Arzac; cleared in draft by Harriman and Rice and in substance by Anderson; and approved by Cleveland. Also sent priority to London, Paris, Ottawa, New Delhi, Saigon, Vientiane, and Rangoon and repeated to Phnom Penh, Moscow, Canberra, USUN, and Warsaw.

1 For text of the letter, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1002–1003. President Kennedy’s answer, August 31, is printed ibid., pp. 1003–1004. Harriman and Carl Kaysen discussed the Sihanouk letter by phone on August 22 as follows:

“Mr. Kaysen said he showed the President the message and told him that the Department thought that the conference would be a mistake.

“Gov. Harriman said the Thais will not agree to a conference and the British are opposed to it.

“Mr. Kaysen said maybe we should try another approach—agree with Sihanouk to be neutral.

“Governor Harriman said Sihanouk wants guarantee from everybody. Does not know what he is really afraid of—hard to tell what he has in mind. I think I would sleep on this for awhile.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations, June–Dec. 1962)

2 Cambodia charged that Thailand had invaded and overflown Cambodian territory as part of a long campaign of harassment by its two neighbors using U.S.-supplied weapons. Cambodia also requested information on how the United States planned to halt the illegal use of its weapons. (Telegram 167 and 168 from Phnom Penh, both August 26; Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/8–2662)

3 On August 25, Khrushchev sent a letter to Sihanouk agreeing to participate in an international conference to guarantee Cambodian territorial integrity and independence. It was released to the press on August 28. The translated text is in telegram 180 from Moscow, August 28. (Ibid., 651H.51K/8–2862)

4 Dated August 23. (Ibid., 651 H.92/8–2362)

5 Dated August 21. (Ibid., 751 H.00/8–2162)

6 In telegram 150, August 21, the Embassy suggested urging U.N. Acting Secretary–General U Thant to make a specific proposal establishing a U.N. presence in Cambodia and Thailand, possibly an Eastern European neutral with staff and necessary facilities. (Ibid., 651H.92/8–2162)

7 The Embassy in Bangkok reported that Thailand was opposed to the idea since it was tantamount to an admission that it had invaded Cambodia, which Thailand denied. (Telegram 336 from Bangkok, August 24; ibid., 751H.00/8–2462) The British Foreign Office was opposed to a conference, believed that the solution lay in Cambodia negotiating with Thailand and South Vietnam, but was prepared to guarantee Cambodia’s integrity. (Telegram 737 from London, August 23; ibid., 751H.00/8–2362) The French had the question under study. (Telegram 942 from Paris, August 23; ibid.) The Canadians received a similar letter and took a view of the conference similar to that of the United States. (Telegram 251 from Ottawa, August 25; ibid., 751H.00/8–2562) Souvanna Phouma believed that Sihanouk must be “given some satisfaction in his present difficult position.” (Telegram 287 from Vientiane, August 24; ibid., 751H.00/8–2462) South Vietnam planned to respond to Sihanouk’s letter in moderate terms with statements of respect for Cambodia’s neutrality and territorial integrity. (Telegram 205 from Saigon; August 27; ibid., 751J.00/8–2762)

90. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 90. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, September 7, 1962.

221. Policy. This message represents our evaluation of present situation and concludes with our views as to courses of action open to US which would be designed meet in part Sihanouk’s desires without involving US in commitments we could not give nor in actions damaging to our relations with our Thai and South Vietnamese allies.

Sihanouk’s present insistent demands for “guarantees” of Cambodian neutrality and territorial integrity and his threat to ask for Soviet and Chinese Communist troops as last resort to protect Cambodian independence may be large-scale blackmail. Possibility always exists however, he may do just what he says in event “guarantees” or some kind of assurances affording partial, if not full, satisfaction his needs are not forthcoming. To the extent we ignore this possibility, we are heading on collision course leading to possible disaster.

I have been struck in my round of calls by seriousness with which Cambodian leaders view, or profess to view, situation. While their comments to me might be part of planned campaign put RKG position in most favorable light, there is no doubt of intensity their feeling and their apprehension present situation. Some of this apprehension could represent their concern Sihanouk’s course may be leading Cambodia toward Communist camp. Underlying it all, however, is same obsession with Cambodian survival as is clearly evidenced by Sihanouk himself. Prince Monireth, elder statesman Penn Nouth and Queen, like other top officials, have stressed Cambodian fears their neighbors, which include North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao as well as Thais and South Vietnamese. They all paint picture of small, weak and relatively defenseless Cambodia menaced by two powerful neighbors on each side with historical record of aggressive designs against Cambodia. Cambodians recall that almost 100 years ago they sought French protectorate to avoid being absorbed by Thais and Annamites and with withdrawal of French protection they now again consider themselves faced by same danger. They all make particular point of Dap Chhuon overthrow government and fact that GVN representative, who expelled for participating in plot, is now Cabinet minister in Saigon. Penn Nouth says RKG has in possession map showing Thai and GVN plans for partition Cambodian territory. Sihanouk and Cambodians are evidently not unaware of Thai and GVN complicity in Son Ngoc Thanh efforts in SVN and Thailand to spark movement to overthrow Sihanouk. All top officials emphasize that repeated border incidents, for which they accept no responsibility and ascribe all blame to their neighbors, have led to present situation and RKG cannot continue suffer this constant harassment. Penn Nouth warned that when Sihanouk says he may take a certain course, this is not bluff. He recalled Sihanouk’s warning re recognition Communist China and his extension of such recognition when SVN troops occupied border areas Stung Treng Province in 1958. Penn Nouth struck ominous note “I have worked many years with my Prince and I know him well”.

While picture of small, weak Cambodia without means of defense against organized aggression across border may be convincing one, less convincing is Cambodian unwillingness accept any responsibility for border incidents or for actions which have contributed to present situation. Sihanouk’s constant public attacks on Thai leaders and GVN, coupled with Cambodian press campaign along similar lines, RKG’s failure return GVN planes and crew of seized fishing vessel are examples of RKG intransigeance which has added fuel to flame. Sihanouk recognized Cambodia’s greatest weapon is publicity and plays it to the hilt.

While US economic and military aid are our best assets in present situation, developments in recent months have tended to make these assets less effective than previously. Private and public statements by Sihanouk and Minister Defense and Chief of Staff General Lon Nol indicates some dissatisfaction with volume and types US military aid. They compare small amount aid given Cambodia with that given Thais and GVN and add these neighbors use US material for aggression against Cambodia. General Lon Nol recently observed to Chief MAAG Cambodia was receiving negative response to its requests. He pointed to RKG request for military allowances in connection with proposed troop increase and to US rejection Cambodian appeal for international conference. Belief USG is taking steps in Bangkok and Saigon in effort explore means finding solution for difficulties will help US position in Cambodia to certain degree, but larger question of where Cambodia is heading and what we can do to prevent its sliding into Communist camp remains.

US interests are best served at this stage of developments in SEA, particularly in view of situation SVN and in light uncertainties re outcome, of efforts achieve settlement Laotian problem, by truly neutral, genuinely independent Cambodia. However, only development likely impress Sihanouk would be resounding US success in area, as nothing succeeds like success with him, and specter of possible Communist success in SEA, giving him impression Communism may be wave of future, evidently has major influence on his thinking. Combined US-SVN victory in SVN would contribute more than anything else to US influence with Sihanouk, but even that would probably not lead to any basic change in his policy. Since such victory not yet at hand, we must seek best course presently available.

Recommend we go ahead full speed on effort adapt Laos Accord current situation. While this in itself does not appear be enough meet needs present situation, it would provide framework within which we could move to approach basic question of “guarantees” or assurances for Cambodian independence. Additionally, believe only way in which assurances satisfactory to both Cambodians and Thais and GVN could be provided would be through some type observation or control group stationed in area and empowered to move freely along border area in event of incidents requiring investigation and action. We would hope this mechanism could be established under UN auspices, which should insure neutral or impartial, international composition of observation or control group, and which in effect is only mechanism offering real possibility of acceptance by those concerned. (Any suggestion of extension of ICC would again raise question of conference and problem of body to which reports would be made.)

Bangkok’s 4251 opens way to move in desirable direction. Such course should provide means of bringing stability to border areas and lessen tension which has risen to such dangerous peak.

Obviously, solution of type suggested, which gives Sihanouk good part of what he has been clamoring for, may reinforce his belief that public demands coupled with blackmailing tactics are way to get what he wants from us. Yet, in situation we now face, apparent US concessions to these demands may be price we have to pay to keep Cambodia truly neutral and deny its space to Communists. And, at this writing we cannot be completely certain that even this price will be enough.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/9–762. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Vientiane, Paris, London, USUN, and CINCPAC POLAD. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received on September 8 at 1:37 a.m.

1 Telegram 425, September 6, transmitted the text of a note from Thailand to the U.N. Acting Secretary-General inviting him to send a U.N. representative to investigate Cambodian charges that Thailand was threatening Cambodian neutrality and independence. (Ibid., 751H.00/9–662)

91. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State Rusk 91. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Sihanouk’s Demand for Guarantees

As you know, Prince Sihanouk has made it plain he does not feel that a formal exchange of letters concerning his neutrality and independence would be sufficient without the inclusion of guarantees which we could not possibly give. He no longer holds to the necessity of a conference but as an alternative talks of adopting the 14-Power Lao Neutrality Declaration for his country, merely substituting Cambodia for Laos in the text. This would likewise give us impossible problems.

Accordingly we have been searching for some alternative which we could propose which might satisfy him and thus deflect another unfortunate initiative on his part. We have hit on an adaptation of the 1955 exchange of notes with Austria as the basis. A proposed text was sent to Paris and London with instructions that they explore this idea with the respective Foreign Offices.1 However, since the proposed text had not been approved the Embassies were instructed to consider this “FYI only”.

I would appreciate your considering our proposed revised text (Tab A). If you approve, we will send another telegram (Tab B) informing the Embassies that the revised text has been cleared and can be discussed directly with their Foreign Offices as a United States draft.2

Tab A3

Begin Cambodian Text

For the purpose of maintaining her sovereignty, independence and unity and in order to ensure the inviolability and integrity of her territory, the Kingdom of Cambodia reaffirms its declaration made at Geneva on July 21, 1954.

The Kingdom of Cambodia is resolved to continue to fulfill its obligations under the United Nations Charter and to follow the path of peace and neutrality in conformity with the interests and aspirations of the Cambodian people in order to build a neutral, independent, democratic, unified, and prosperous Cambodia at peace with all nations and in particular with its neighbors.

In order to guarantee the fulfillment of these national goals, the Kingdom of Cambodia appeals to the Government of the United States of America to recognize and respect the neutrality of the Kingdom of Cambodia as defined in the aforementioned declaration, to recognize and respect as well its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity, to conform to these principles in all respects, and to refrain from any action inconsistent therewith.

The Kingdom of Cambodia requests that, in the event of a violation or threat of violation of the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity or territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the Government of the United States of America agree to consult with it in order to consider measures which might be taken to ensure the observance of the principles and provisions of the Declaration.

Begin Proposed US Text

The Government of the United States of America has taken cognizance of the declaration made by the Royal Government of Cambodia on July 21, 1954 and, in compliance with the request expressed in the letter under acknowledgment, solemnly declares that it recognizes and will respect and observe in every way the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia and will refrain from any action inconsistent therewith.

The Government of the United States of America agrees, in the event of a violation or threat of violation of the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity, or territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia, to consult with it at its request in order to consider measures which might be taken to ensure the observance of the principles and provisions of the Declaration.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.51H/9–1262. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and Arzac and cleared in draft by Chayes and by Joseph J. Sisco, Director of the Office of UN Political and Security Affairs, and U. Alexis Johnson. Johnson wrote the following note on the memorandum: “Mr. Secretary: This is not a very happy situation but I believe this formula is about the best that can be done. Alex.”

1 Sent in telegram 1366 to London and 1477 to Paris, September 7. (Ibid., 751H.00/9–762)

2 A note on the source text indicates that the attached draft telegram (Tab B, not found) containing the proposed revised text was dispatched. It was sent as telegram 1471 to London and 1589 to Paris, September 13 at 7:32 p.m. The Department indicated that to head off a further initiative by Sihanouk it would be necessary to reach agreement with the French and British as soon as possible. The Department hoped that France and the United Kingdom would send Sihanouk a draft similar to the one it was proposing. (Ibid., 751H.00/9–1362)

3 Confidential. Drafted by Arzac and Salans on September 12.

92. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 92. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, September 13, 1962, 9 p.m.

256. Department pass White House for Ewell; DOD for Secretary McNamara and JCS for Lemnitzer. Bangkok pass General Taylor. Deptel 191.1 Following is account General Taylor’s one hour audience with Sihanouk at which I was present:

Audience was inhibited by presence for first ten minutes of two US correspondents and of several Cambodian press photographers during entire audience located within hearing range of Sihanouk’s audible exposition his views. General Taylor considered it desirable therefore to soft-pedal some points contained in Depreftel but in course general conversation covered most important aspects omitting only one point of real importance: That regarding US willingness to consult with RKG in event of actual aggression. (General Taylor did state US would view with grave concern actual aggression against Cambodia.) As US had not previously given assurances for consultation and as they seemed to conflict with assurances of consultation with UNSYG rep and RKG jointly envisaged in draft statement quoted in Deptel 177,2 we considered it advisable pass over this point.

After exchange of courtesies, General Taylor conveyed warm personal wishes from President Kennedy to Sihanouk and pleasure President derived from his talk with Sihanouk at UNGA last year,3 stressed President’s interest in Sihanouk’s views and explained he was on tour of exploration to familiarize himself with problems of area. He considered there was problem of common threat to peace and security of area and stressed US desire for good relations between its friends in SEA. Following these introductory remarks, two chief points emerging from conversation were: (1) Sihanouk’s revelation he was working on project which envisaged statement by each of Geneva powers along lines of draft he was preparing for submission to them. General Taylor and I both moved in on this one to stress that Washington had actively under study question of what step might next be taken and expected to have suggestion to discuss with Sihanouk very shortly. It was our hope to forestall action by him which would result in our again being faced with Sihanouk proposed formula which might or might not be acceptable to free world. Sihanouk explained he envisaged some adaptation of Laos Accord changed to take into account realities and possibilities of situation. We did not ask him whether his proposal included withdrawal of foreign military missions.

(2) General Taylor brought up question proposed GVN military mission, saying he had received impression at Saigon GVN intended to respond affirmatively.4 Sihanouk made clear RKG offer receive such mission still held good and added GVN should send Army General, or perhaps Colonel, to discuss procedures governing operations such mission with Minister Defense Lon Nol. He continued such mission could operate as mixed mission with FARK officers assigned thereto, would show RKG did not assist Viet Cong; operation such mission could bring stability to frontier area.

In reply to query re status Thai appeal to UNSYG, which RKG had supported, Sihanouk said he would welcome UN presence to investigate border situation although Thai appeal had simply spoken of investigation and nothing more. I pointed out Thai appeal had also spoken of seeing means improve relations between two countries. This brought suggestion from Sihanouk RKG and RTG might exchange high ranking representatives, with similar exchange between RKG and GVN, for purpose of exploring means improving relations. If UNSYG rep could work to this end, Sihanouk would welcome such effort. Either course would be acceptable to him.

General Taylor made particular point of informing Sihanouk of his impressions on improvement in SVN situation since he had visited Saigon ten months ago.5 He described his visit to strategic hamlets and progress being made in this field with indications of greater popular support of GVN, agreed with Sihanouk support of population was essential in such situation and expressed general optimism re situation SVN.

General Taylor complimented Sihanouk on FARK civic action program and expressed particular interest in RKG’s plans for civic action program in critical northeast area, where there seemed to be vacuum. Sihanouk described area as one susceptible of infiltration by Pathet Lao and Viet Cong and need for additional troops this area. He explained area was too large to cover with present forces available to RKG. Hoping to get some reaction from Sihanouk, I pointed out US had agreed furnish matériel for additional battalions for northeast area but Sihanouk merely nodded assent and did not continue subject.

Throughout conversation Sihanouk stressed his fear that one of many small border incidents might unavoidably lead to larger conflict. He stressed that actions of Cambodia’s neighbors tended to push Cambodia toward Communist camp and they were thus playing into Communist hands by such action. General Taylor expressed understanding his concern and pointed out he did not believe that either Thailand or GVN had aggressive designs on Cambodian territory. Sihanouk at one point said that while he appreciated US expressions respect and recognition his neutrality and territorial integrity he had never had any doubts US observance these principles, his real concern being such respect and recognition on the part of Thais and GVN.

Conversation was exceedingly pleasant throughout and Sihanouk was obviously pleased General Taylor had come to Cambodia and had given Sihanouk opportunity express his views to top US military figure close to President.

In view Sihanouk’s statements re proposed GVN military mission, General Taylor and I urge that we take advantage of present disposition of Sihanouk and RKG to receive such mission and, if Saigon concurs, suggest GVN take initial step of sending high ranking representative negotiate this matter at Phnom Penh. Sihanouk’s reaction causes us reverse our suggestion in Embtel 2536 re delaying such mission. In this connection Acting Prime Minister Chau Sen Cocsal told me today that he had on his desk for action papers which would authorize release SVN fishing crew of Metaco vessel seized by RKG two years ago. This possibility, along with RKG’s present willingness to make gesture of release GVN transport plane in order initiate action of discussions on debt settlement, argue for early action under present relatively favorable circumstances.

General Taylor concurs with foregoing.

In light foregoing indication Sihanouk has new project of draft proposal well under way with which we may be confronted at any time, I recommend every effort be made to obtain UK and French concurrence on draft statement along lines Deptel 177 which we could present to Sihanouk and that UNSYG be encouraged to act on basis Thai and RKG appeal. This might give us some chance of nipping in bud whatever Sihanouk now has in mind.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/9–1362. Secret; Niact. Relayed to the White House and the Office of the Secretary of Defense for McNamara and General Lemnitzer. Repeated priority to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, Vientiane, CINCPAC POLAD, and USUN.

1 Telegram 191, September 11, contained guidelines and talking points for Taylor’s discussion with Sihanouk. (Ibid., 751H.00/9–1162) Taylor was visiting the Far East August 31-September 21, prior to assuming the position as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2 Telegram 177 to Phnom Penh was a repeat of telegram 1366 to London and 1477 to Paris, September 7; see footnote 1, Document 91. The enclosures to Document 91 were quoted in telegram 177 to Phnom Penh.

3 See Document 74.

4 Taylor was in Saigon September 10–13; see vol. II, pp. 642–643.

5 Reference is presumably to the Taylor Mission, led by General Taylor, which arrived in Saigon on October 19, 1961; see vol. I, pp. 380 ff.

6 Dated September 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 651H:51K/9–1362)

93. Paper Prepared by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) 93. Paper Prepared by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)Source

September 20, 1962.1

IMPRESSIONS OF CAMBODIA

1. Sensitivity Towards Border Violations

There is no question but what Sihanouk and his Government are genuinely disturbed over the violations—real and imagined—of their territory by Vietnamese and Thai forces. It is entirely possible that if these violations continue and the U.S. does nothing in Sihanouk’s eyes to remedy this situation, Sihanouk, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] might throw out our MAAG and invite in Communist advisors. (For my meeting with Sihanouk, see appended cable.)2

2. The Mission of Military Aid

The expressed objectives of the Military Aid Program appear consistent with U.S. area objectives. The most urgent problem in the MAP field is the increase in the Cambodian Army now under discussion. The proposal is to add three infantry battalions, a frontier battalion, and some 924 augmentation spaces to the MAP-supported troop structure in order to allow Sihanouk to reinforce the northeastern provinces and to improve their capability of opposing VC infiltration. The total cost of the equipment which we are prepared to furnish through FY 68 is $1.7 million, but there is an additional $1.0 million for the first year with annual reductions thereafter in pay, allowances and soft goods necessary to support the increase which neither the U.S. nor the Cambodians have agreed to pay. The Cambodian position is that the U.S. should pay the same percentage (45-U.S.; 55-RKG) of these costs as that which the U.S. has been paying for the remainder of the Armed Forces of Cambodia. Whether or not to accede on this point is presently an unresolved problem.

3. Attitude of Minister Lon Nol

In my call on Lon Nol, his attitude was generally grumpy and unpleasant. I gathered that Sihanouk has borne down hard on him to prevent the border violations which are causing such a national rumpus.

In expressing his unhappiness, Lon Nol hinted broadly at the possible need for the Cambodians to look elsewhere for help because of the uncooperative attitude of the U.S. When I tried to get him to speak frankly on the subject of the proposed augmentation in Cambodian forces in order to understand his position, he was generally evasive. My impression was that for considerations of face, the Cambodians are unlikely to reply formally to our latest and—from their viewpoint—unsatisfactory offer.

4. Counterinsurgency Activities

The Cambodian Army has a very effective civic action program which dates back to about 1954. According to Lon Nol, the police are well trained and work well with the Army in holding down subversive insurgents. However, the large Vietnamese minority in the country affords an excellent background for the formation of VC cells throughout the country. The police are intermittently successful in rounding up these cells.

(See attached Memo on FARK & Police re CI roles)3

5. Conclusions

a. Sihanouk’s morbid fear of his neighbors—Thailand and Vietnam—have created a situation of tension and emotionalism which might blow up at any time.

b. Sihanouk would like to be counted an anti-Communist, neutral ally of the U.S. and a favored recipient of U.S. aid.

c. To deal with border incidents, we need to find some formula for policing the Cambodian frontier by a respected neutral authority. Perhaps the UN presence may be the answer. Sihanouk’s alleged willingness to receive SVN military representation should be explored and, if sincere, accepted.

d. It is worth our while to work out a solution with Sihanouk for the provision of forces for northeastern Cambodia. We have already paid the price for this reinforcement in terms of our relations with Thailand. The main problem is to reach agreement with Sihanouk which will not appear to him as a yielding to blackmail.

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Far East Trip, September 1962, T-022–69. Top Secret.

1 Taylor was on the second to last day of his trip and was probably in Hawaii or en route there.

2 See Document 92.

3 Not printed. Apparent reference to a Draft #3 by William Bundy, September 18. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Far East Trip, September 1962, T-022–69)

94. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs (Arzac) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren) 94. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs (Arzac) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren)Source

Washington, November 7, 1962.

SUBJECT

White House Meeting November 8: Cambodia1

General. Cambodia’s foreign policy stance, in particular its relationship with the United States, has reached a new turning point. The decision has been taken to seek to ensure Cambodia’s security through an international guarantee of its neutrality and territorial integrity. Such a guarantee will involve the withdrawal of the MAAG, which will in turn probably bring about a cessation of US support for Cambodia’s military budget and of our MAP. Cambodian leaders have made clear that if the desired guarantees are not forthcoming, Cambodia will call on the Bloc for protection, if necessary even abandoning its neutrality policy. The next few months are likely, therefore, to see Cambodia loom as a major problem for the US in Southeast Asia.

As in the past, the major determinant of Cambodia’s foreign policy is the state of its relations with its traditional enemies, Thailand and Viet-Nam (i.e., South Viet-Nam). Relations with Thailand have remained broken for over a year and there are no signs of improvement. Relations with South Viet-Nam are bad and deteriorating, and a break appears likely in the near future. Since these neighbors are closely allied with the US, any worsening of relations with them connotes difficulties for relations between Cambodia and the US. Not much improvement can be expected soon from the appointment of the UNSYG’s representative in the area.

Cambodia holds that its unfriendly neighbors harbor designs against Cambodia’s security, and every incident or untoward event between them adds impetus to this conviction. The RKG believes that the US could control these neighbors if it so desired, hence unfriendliness on their part is seen as an extension of US policy. Cambodia has in the past believed that so long as a military aid tie exists with the US, the US will exert sufficient pressure on the neighbors to ensure Cambodia’s security against them. Recent events have evidently convinced Cambodia this is no longer the case, and that Cambodia is in effect being “sacrificed” by the US in favor of our ties with SVN and Thailand. This appears to be the background for the presently expected proposals for international guarantees on Cambodia, modelled on the recent Laos Agreement.

The present searching by Cambodia for a new status has been accompanied by a recrudescence of old charges that US military aid is inadequate for Cambodia to defend itself against its immediate enemies. There has at no time been any specific request by Cambodia for an increase in military aid, except for the June request for an increase to man the northeast to which the US agreed insofar as MAP is concerned. In informal discussions the consequences of a withdrawal of the MAAG have been spelled out, as well as the unlikelihood that the US could subscribe to guarantees. This information has apparently been treated as US pressure in RKG official circles. The basic difficulty has been a lack of frank communication between the US and Cambodia, despite the numerous overtures of the US.

Cambodian suspicions of US intentions toward Cambodia are of long standing. They have been accompanied by a conviction that Communist China represents the “wave of the future” in Southeast Asia and by the growth of close relations with that country. Largely through the press and well-placed advisors, extreme leftists and other anti-US elements have come to have increasing influence in Cambodia, in particular on Prince Sihanouk who is the fount and voice of political decision. Sihanouk has given full vent to his proclivity for invective in his public statements on the US, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and to his underlying “David and Goliath” complex. There are signs that the present trend is not unopposed in Cambodia’s politically informed elite, but this opposition carries little weight with Sihanouk.

Neutrality Proposal. On October 23 the National Assembly, virtually without discussion, approved the draft neutrality proposal. The latest information is that it can be expected to be presented to the Geneva Powers (or, possibly, only to some of them in the first instance) next week. Our purloined text shows the proposal to be clearly unacceptable, as it constitutes an elaborate and comprehensive multilateral treaty in effect guaranteeing Cambodia’s neutrality and territorial integrity. It does not appear likely that such a treaty could be negotiated without an international conference. With the recent agreement on Laos as a model, the proposal would require the withdrawal of the MAAG but not of the FMM. It defines Cambodia’s frontiers, thus raising questions with Viet-Nam and Thailand. Cambodia can be expected to remain inflexible on the essentials of the proposal, and it will probably be difficult even to modify its general form. Whether Cambodia will go so far as to turn to the Bloc for protection if the proposal is not accepted remains to be seen, but this appears likely. The economic implications of the consequences of a withdrawal of the MAAG are apparently not clear to the RKG, which is already facing financial difficulties of major proportions.

South Viet-Nam. On October 25 the VNAF bombed two remote villages in northeast Cambodia, the RKG alleges, resulting in eight killed and other casualties. It is also alleged that on October 31 VNAF planes threatened FARK aircraft covering removal of the wounded from the villages, and that a FARK naval craft was fired on and detained by the FARVN on the Mekong. The RKG has issued a warning on these events, specifying that this constitutes the second serious notice to the GVN, and that one more incident will cause a break in relations. The first warning was issued after the Koh Rokar incident in September, concerning which the ICC is expected momentarily to forward to the Geneva Co-Chairmen a report holding the GVN responsible. Although the GVN appears convinced the October 25 attack took place in Vietnamese territory and alleges that on October 31 FARK planes violated Viet-Nam’s airspace, Embassy Saigon has been informed the GVN will send a conciliatory reply to the RKG’s protest, offering to undertake a joint investigation and to present compensation should the RKG’s allegations prove correct. In general, the RKG has been reluctant to sever its quasi-diplomatic relations with SVN due to the expected economic consequences (shipping down the Mekong, still Cambodia’s main access to the outside world, would particularly be affected), but Cambodian patience is growing short. As no progress is being made on the GVN military mission proposal, the time may have arrived for bringing the UNSYG’s representative in the area into play as a stopgap measure.

Sino-Indian Dispute. Cambodia will probably retain its formal neutrality on this issue, while deploring the conflict between two nations with which it is on friendly terms. Nevertheless, RKG leaders can be expected privately to have a pro-Chicom outlook, and this is also very evident in the leftist-controlled press. India’s coolness toward Cambodia’s neutrality guarantees initiative, as compared with Peking’s warm attitude and its readiness to extend military help in case of aggression against Cambodia, undoubtedly plays an important role in the situation. Moscow’s support of Peking in the issue will only confirm the Cambodian thesis that, in the final analysis, the USSR stands with Peking despite differences between them. Cambodia is not likely to view the Chicom campaign as aggression, but rather as a military effort to rectify a situation in territory to which Peking and its predecessors have always laid claim. Cambodia will watch the course of events with interest, as a test of its belief that Communist China must inevitably come to exercise the predominating influence in Southeast Asia. Maintenance of the friendliest relations with Peking will probably remain a keystone of Cambodia’s foreign policy.

Cuba. Cambodia is remaining neutral on the Cuban problem, but the RKG has instructed its UN Delegation to cooperate in the UN’s efforts to find a peaceful settlement. At the height of the crisis, on October 26, Cambodia announced its decision to exchange ambassadors with Cuba (relations were previously in principle at legation level, although representatives were apparently not accredited), but this has been explained as a coincidence; the RKG has been noncommittal about delaying the execution of this decision. Cambodia has tended to draw a parallel between the Cuban problem and its own difficulties with its neighbors, identifying itself with Cuba in this process, and this comparison appears even in Prince Kanthol’s reply to the President’s message.3 As late as November 5, in his press conference, Sihanouk warned the US against treating Cambodia like Cuba, saying that Peking would not be as “weak-livered” as Khrushchev. The Cambodian press, largely in the control of extreme leftists, has been bitterly anti-US in the crisis, to the point that the Information Department issued a warning against press attacks on countries with which Cambodia maintains friendly relations.

US Assistance. From FY56 to FY62, the US has extended a total of about $85 million in MAP assistance to Cambodia. The present figure for FY63 is $9.5 million. Economic aid has totalled some $252 million through FY62, including military budget support. In the early years the economic aid program was devoted largely to repairing physical damage resulting from the Indochina hostilities, military and internal security forces support, stabilization of the disorganized economy, and the expansion of some capital facilities to stimulate economic growth. The largest single project was, of course, the Friendship Highway (original construction cost $32.5 million). The proposed program for FY63 totals $21.7 million and is concentrated in the priority areas of human resources development (especially education), increased agricultural production, industrial growth, and maintenance of internal security. The total Bloc aid commitment to date is estimated at $65.2 million.

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Cambodia Files: Lot 65 D 55, 1.4 Neutral Policy of Cambodia, Nov.-Dec. 1962. Secret.

1 The meeting was held from 4 to 4:30 p.m. and attended by the President, McNamara, William Bundy, Harriman, Koren, William Sullivan, Seymour Janow, General Lucius Clay, Admiral Heinz, General Maxwell Taylor, and Hepworth of CIA. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) The participants at the meeting apparently discussed only Laos and Thailand; see vol. XXIV, pp. 911–915.

William Bundy received an unsigned briefing memorandum for the meeting November 7, probably from the Director of the Far East Region, ISA. This memorandum offered four possible courses of action: an interagency reassessment of a neutral Cambodia over the next 5 to 10 years, formulation of a diplomatic package attempting to settle U.S.-Cambodian differences on an unspoken quid pro quo basis, dispatch of a special U.S. emissary to Sihanouk to try to solve the problem, or consultation with the British and French to provide a prompt response to the neutrality proposal. (Department of State, FE/SEA/Cambodia Files: Lot 65 D 55, 1.4 Neutrality Policy of Cambodia, Nov.-Dec. 1962)

3 Not found.

95. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 95. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

446. Policy. This is first of series of three telegrams representing Country Team views.

Present situation in Cambodia, product largely of deep-seated Cambodian fears of its neighbors, which, however illogical and unreasonable they may seem to us, are fact of life with which we must deal, is compound of several factors: 1) Sihanouk must feel deep sense frustration re his neutrality project, which has become long, drawn-out affair and not matter of relatively brief duration he may have anticipated at outset.

2) Series border incidents, culminating in recent attack on what RKG claims are Cambodian villages, have deepened Cambodian fears and increased Sihanouk’s sense of frustration. To [garble] it all he feels he is put in position of being unable protect his people and territory and thus suffers considerable loss of face. In last two incidents (that is, Koh Rokar and Ratanakiri villages) GVN has been slow to react and its replies have not offered any face-saving escape for Sihanouk.

3) Resentment against US for what RKG considers to be US failure control its allies has appreciably increased, and US has come more and more under fire here for actions its Thai and SVN allies, culminating in unfounded charge US pilots participated in attack on Ratanakiri villages (Embtel 430).1 If Sihanouk knew extent to which Embassies Saigon and Bangkok have gone in respective capitals in effort reduce tensions between Cambodia and its neighbors and to find solution for border problems, US position vis-á-vis Sihanouk and RKG would be improved. US has been hampered by inability to make known to Sihanouk and RKG these extraordinary efforts. (Obviously full story could not be passed on to him without imperilling our relations with Diem and Sarit.) All Sihanouk sees are results of what I have continually depicted in very general terms as US efforts exert its influence at Bangkok and Saigon with view to finding solution for border problems which would be acceptable to all concerned. Sihanouk knows we are doing something but he and other Cambodians wonder whether we have really done all we could. Seeds of suspicion are sown on every occasion when US personnel are reported to have been present at scene of operations involving alleged border incidents. For that reason baseless charge US involvement attacks on two villages finds all too ready acceptance here. We are handicapped, of course, by Sihanouk’s own practice of revealing in his press conferences matters which have been passed on to him in diplomatic channels and presumably on confidential basis.

End result of our failure reveal to him our efforts in Bangkok and Saigon and lack of success in preventing border incidents is increased criticism of US, which in their peculiar way Sihanouk and RKG use as means of pressure on US. Ambassador Kimny’s recent criticism in UN of US over-arming of its allies and latter’s use of US weapons against Cambodia is further example of this type criticism and pressure.

4) Sihanouk neutrality project results from his obsessive desire achieve security, and thus national survival. He considers his previous policies have not produced adequate assurances on this score; hence his willingness include in his proposal provision which could lead to withdrawal MAAG and end US military aid program. Such provision could be bargaining ploy designed to put pressure on US to maximum possible degree acceptance neutrality proposal and for increased military aid; simultaneously, and in event US favorable response not forthcoming, it could be bait for bloc to fill military aid gap left by US. But while Sihanouk speaks in press conference of willingness also give up economic aid, it is difficulties facing RKG, he really expects or desires end of US economic aid. [sic] (It is even more difficult believe—his public statements notwithstanding—that he looks forward to taking actions that could lead to closure of vital Mekong River trade route.) We note that there is little in pattern of bloc aid to Laos or our own aid program to Laos which would encourage him to think that bloc prepared to substitute for US as economic aid donor or that bloc would pick up tab on budgetary support FARK or that we will continue military aid if MAAG withdrawn.

5) It is difficult estimate exactly how much of his neutrality project he really expects to be accepted by Western powers. Sihanouk continues single out French as having done most among Western powers to assist in meeting his wishes. French have receded considerably from de Gaulle reply to Sihanouk’s original invitation for conference, in which there was implication France would be prepared give guarantees sought, and latest reports French views (Depcirtel 908)2 indicate that French are no more willing than we to accept “guarantees or equivalent”. French here seem, however, to be playing odd game, since we have had no indication they have communicated to Sihanouk or fully impressed upon him their present position on his proposal. Sihanouk’s statements and semi-official press comment have recently emphasized that revision of neutrality proposal to meet reticence of certain powers (evidently US) regarding guarantees question should now make it easy for them (i.e., US) sign Sihanouk’s draft. French here must be aware that latest revision of draft eliminating word “guarantees” retains “equivalent” provisions, yet they continue tell us, and also Sihanouk, that we should be able accept revised draft.

6) As straw in wind, Indian Ambassador tells me that Sihanouk recently commented to him that what he wanted was adequate assurances from Thais of their respect for Cambodian independence and territorial integrity and that Gussing’s mission would fail unless he was able to obtain such assurances.

7) Further factor to be borne in mind is continued delay in presentation of proposal, which suggests Sihanouk still undecided whether to take dangerous and probably irrevocable plunge. This may be attributable to his uncertainty about impact on SEA of widening Sino-Soviet rift and his doubts whether Soviets will be willing play along with him. Hence remote possibility exists that in context current world situation he might prefer shelve proposal at least temporarily rather than risk its rejection and more serious loss of face resulting therefrom.

We will discuss in separate message conclusions we believe should be drawn from above described situation.3

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPAC POLAD, and Vientiane.

1 Dated November 18. (Ibid., 651H.51K/11–1862)

2 Dated November 14. (Ibid., 651H.51K/11–1462)

3 Document 96.

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 96. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

447. Policy. Embtel 446.1 We have been proceeding on assumption that essential objective US seeks in Cambodia is denial this country to Communist control, either by takeover or through voluntary entry into Communist camp. At least as long as US is involved in SVN struggle against Communists, denial Cambodia to Communists must be overriding US consideration. It follows, therefore, that actions which work against such end should be avoided to maximum degree possible, keeping in mind, of course, that Cambodian situation cannot be looked at in vacuum but must be considered within overall framework US policies for SEA.

Greatest obstacle US faces in effort achieve its objective is relations between Cambodia and its neighbors, US allies Thailand and SVN. Needless for us to review or describe state these relations or underlying reasons. It is imperative, however, to attempt find ways reduce tensions and improve relations if, indeed, this can be done under present circumstances. We realize affront to Thais and SVN of RKG charges of aggressive designs and necessity avoiding placing US in position supporting such charges. Seems to us, however, we can work quietly behind scene to achieve our essential objective without associating US with RKG charges.

When we analyze what RKG is after, question immediately arises: How much is form and how much is actual substance? There are, of course, residual territorial claims on both sides, involving most importantly off-shore islands administered by RKG but claimed by SVN, and portions Cochin China populated by Khmer Krom2 and claimed by RKG (presumably as offset to SVN claim on islands, since Sihanouk himself has admitted publicly RKG could never hope obtain return Cochin China areas from more powerful neighbor). What RKG is seeking primarily is formal renunciation by Thailand and SVN of what it suspects, largely on historical grounds, to be ambitions of both countries to subjugate and divide Cambodia. Despite frictions and animosities, this suspicion obviously without real foundation and should be laid to rest through formal Thai and SVN assurances. Secondly, while RKG clearly has no expectation that acceptance of neutrality proposal would result in total cessation of land and air border violations, it does desire recognition by neighbors that such violations, whatever their causes, infringe on Cambodian sovereignty and cannot be casually passed off as unimportant and only incidental to broader problems preoccupying neighbors. Finally, effort of all three countries is directed toward same end—preservation of security against external threats.

In light foregoing, what appears to be really at issue is not substantive aspirations but form of relationship among three countries. Neutrality proposal represents Cambodian effort resolve this issue in manner consistent with it’s estimate of respects in which present relationships unsatisfactory.

Seems evident US cannot accept neutrality project provisions for “guarantees or equivalent”, RKG control over ICC operations, commitment re present borders Cambodia, ICC posers [sic] stipulated in protocol. Do not believe, however, US should put itself in position rejecting outright RKG draft as nothing could better serve purpose Communists or be better designed push Cambodia into Communist arms. Essential that US exert utmost effort concert its position with UK, France, Canada and India in order avoid being isolated in this situation. We have noted continual French reluctance to keep fully in step with US and, to lesser extent with UK, since beginning neutrality project, but it should be forcibly brought home to them that what is at stake is entire Western position here not just that of US, as they appear to consider to be case in SVN. Their position in Hanoi should give them food for thought. Hardly seems likely Burmese would be prepared give assurances Sihanouk seeks, but they unlikely take lead or associate themselves with West in parallel or concerted action.

Most likely bloc countries will accept Sihanouk’s proposals, tongue-in-cheek or with minor revisions, and we may face following situation at some stage: (1) Sihanouk may simply end his project with statement he has received satisfactory assurances from bloc but not from West and that he considers bloc assurances offer guarantees he seeks against threatened aggression. This possibility is foreshadowed in Penn Nouth’s statement to me in October (Embtel 343).3 (2) In view lack of agreement on proposal Sihanouk will repeat invitation for conference. (3) If conference invitation renewed and not accepted, he might resort to solution described in (1) above. In latter event Cambodian alignment with Communist camp and abandonment its neutrality policy would seem almost inevitable with all that means in terms adverse effect on US position SVN and Thailand, regardless whether RKG calls in ChiCom troops or not.

Conclude, therefore, that essential (1) concert with Western Allies and Indians, putting maximum pressure on French to exert their special influence here, on common approach in this situation, (2) avoid outright rejection RKG proposal and (3) consider possible alternative we might propose to Sihanouk. Some such alternatives will be put forward in separate telegram.4

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPAC POLAD, and Vientiane.

1 Document 95.

2 The Khmer Krom were approximately 600,000 Cambodians living in South Vietnam. Their treatment by the Vietnamese was a constant source of friction in relations between Cambodia and South Vietnam.

3 Dated October 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/10–1362)

4 Document 97.

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 97. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 20, 1962, 1 p.m.

448. Policy. Embtels 446 and 447.1 When Sihanouk’s draft project is finally presented to interested powers, we can anticipate speedy favorable reaction from bloc countries. Our own response, which not likely in nature of things be favorable, should be prompt and as constructive as possible both in order avoid charges of foot-dragging and provide reasonable alternatives which will prevent crystallization of Cambodian positions around anticipated bloc acceptance. It therefore behooves us to study in advance various constructive alternatives or changes we might propose.

Since predominant theme public discussions of project has been centered on “Laos type” accord and since Sihanouk is publicly committed to this procedure, type of alternative most likely prove acceptable as basis for negotiation would be one based on Laos agreements suitably modified to meet special characteristics Cambodian situation and, eliminating clauses unacceptable to US, such as bar against MAAG and provision for multilateral consultation. (Department will recall that study of this type alternative was suggested Embtel 209.)2 If Department considers version of Laos accord filling these criteria can be drawn up and worth considering as alternative, would be helpful if such version could be drawn up and made subject consultation with French, British, Canadians, and Indians for appropriate use in commenting on draft project when it is presented to us before favorable Soviet bloc responses become publicly known.

In event Department considers undesirable attempt follow Laos format, we suggest effort to devise different type formula with view its possible use when and if it becomes apparent RKG proposal unacceptable to Western powers in its most important aspects. Such formula might call for reciprocal assurances by Cambodia, Thailand, and South Vietnam of respect for independence and territorial integrity of each other. It should be devised as means saving face for Sihanouk and should represent conciliatory approach for Thais and SVN. It would, of course, have to provide for some kind of border control mechanism which could function on both sides of border, as in case with present UNSYG representation here at invitation Thai and RKG Governments. Such mechanism would preferably be under UN direction if at all possible, as this only truly neutral body available, even despite past expressions of Sihanouk’s lack of confidence in UN ability take preventive action in advance of trouble. An alternative might be commission of representatives of governments, who would cast deciding vote in event differences of views. Formula and control body along these lines should be more palatable to Thais and GVN on grounds it would not be directed solely against them but would impartially cover border areas of three countries.

Third possibility we should contemplate in specific terms, either separately or in conjunction with one of preceding alternatives, is device for submitting border demarcation questions to international body or commission. Sihanouk might, of course, be reluctant accept border demarcation effort, but, if given satisfactory assurances by Thais and SVN re territorial integrity Cambodia, he might be willing accept risk of small loss of territory in exchange such assurances. Principal danger is that, in connection with border demarcation, as in whole matter his problems with his neighbors, he would seek to have US guarantee Thai and SVN assurances, which we presumably could not do.

Thais and Vietnamese might on their side consider complying with request for assurances as loss of face for them, but this objection could perhaps be overcome on grounds that assurances in question were reciprocal and that US had recently offered, with certain provisos, give such assurances in respect of Cuba. If Thais and SVN have no designs in Cambodian territory beyond those much [which?] could be met by impartial, neutral commission, foregoing would seem not unreasonable price for preventing Cambodian drift toward Communist camp.

In last few days, repeated delays in presentation of project have given rise to speculation project may not be presented until Sihanouk returns from trips to Indonesia and Singapore (November 26-December 9) or even that it may never be presented (Embtel 446). While Embassy regards both these possibilities as small (latter almost non-existent) in present extraordinary situation they should not be [garble] overlooked. Sublimation of problem by non-presentation of project, while it may be too much to hope for, would of course be ideal solution.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–2062. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, London, Paris, New Delhi, CINCPAC POLAD, and Vientiane.

1 Documents 95 and 96.

2 Dated September 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/9–462)

98. Memorandum of Conversation 98. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 30, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Neutrality Proposals

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

H.E. Herve Alphand, Ambassador of France

Mr. Marcel Barthelemy, First Secretary, French Embassy

Mr. Henry L.T. Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs

The Secretary (at the request of FE) called in Ambassador Alphand in order to emphasize the importance we attach to close consultation and maximum coordination with the French in our responses to Prince Sihanouk’s proposal for international recognition and guarantee of Cambodia’s independence, neutrality and territorial integrity.

The Secretary said that Sihanouk’s effort posed a major problem. His attempt to adapt the Geneva Agreements on Laos to Cambodia was awkward and created a very difficult situation. He stressed three specific US objections to the proposals: (1) The fact that the proposals would amount to a guarantee by the signatories of Cambodian neutrality and so on, even though the word “guarantee” did not actually appear in the texts. The Secretary said we had gone as far in this direction as we could under SEATO and there would be no prospect of Senate agreement to any form of US guarantees specifically for Cambodia. At this point Ambassador Alphand remarked that there was no such guarantee inherent in the Laos Agreements. The Secretary assented, and went on to say that if guarantees of this nature were given to Cambodia the idea might be picked up by all the 60-odd non-aligned nations and we would be faced with a chain reaction resulting in each seeking similar big power guarantees, and this we could not countenance. Ambassador Alphand expressed agreement.

(2) The Secretary noted that the Sihanouk proposals were actually aimed at the Thai and South Vietnamese. This made it even more difficult for us since we were allied with the former under SEATO and heavily engaged with the latter in their struggle for survival. Sihanouk’s tantrums with regard to these two countries, particularly over border incidents, had not made our job any easier.

(3) The question of the boundaries between these three neighbors was of central importance. The frontiers are not now clearly demarcated and a lot of work would be required to achieve exact delimitations. Yet in Sihanouk’s proposals we were being asked to make precise commitments of very imprecise border situations, and this was not attractive to us.

The Secretary continued that Sihanouk’s threat of calling in the Chicoms was an outrageous pressure tactic. If Sihanouk was really after means to ensure his independence and neutrality, this would be the last thing for him to do. If independence and neutrality were not indeed his goal, he had the wrong objective in his proposals.

Ambassador Alphand replied that the French shared many of the same difficulties with the proposals. He said that they had been working quietly with the Cambodians to achieve more manageable proposals, and recounted unsuccessful attempts that Roux had made with Cambodian Ambassador to the US Nong Kimny, when they met at the UN, to have the matter of guarantees removed and the categorical reference to the frontiers suitably amended. Ambassador Alphand said he would report immediately the strong US views and our desire to coordinate closely on the responses. He suggested that possibly the initial replies might be delayed until December 12 when the Secretary would have an opportunity to talk directly with Foreign Minister Couve de Murville in Paris.” At this point the Secretary handed Ambassador Alphand a copy of our proposed reply,1 noting that it was interim in nature.

It was not clear whether Ambassador Alphand in suggesting the possible delay until December 12 was referring to the interim replies or to the more definitive responses.

The Secretary closed the discussion on Cambodia by noting how unpredictable Sihanouk was and indicating we could not go further in this connection than we have already, since the US had no intention of becoming the “gendarmes of the universe.”

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–3062. Drafted by Koren on December 7 and approved in S on December 12.

1 See Document 99.

99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 99. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, December 6, 1962, 10:31 a.m.

393. Following is text of letter from the President to Sihanouk which you should deliver to Kanthol. In doing so request you make clear its confidential nature and that we do not expect its contents will be divulged or alluded to publicly.

“Your Royal Highness:

I have received Your Royal Highness’s letter of November 21, 1962, conveying to me certain proposals designed to ensure the independence, neutrality, and territorial integrity of Cambodia.1 This is a matter of high importance and one that deserves the most careful study by all the governments addressed by Your Royal Highness. I assure you that my Government and I will give these documents our urgent attention in order that the views of the United States may be communicated to the Royal Government of Cambodia as promptly as possible.

As your letter indicates, your proposals follow closely the agreements reached last July at Geneva on the neutrality of Laos. In this connection, I believe it pertinent to remark that in Cambodia the stability and unity achieved under the leadership of Your Royal Highness have produced a situation radically different from that which necessitated the type of international agreement achieved to settle the Lao problem. Moreover, with respect to the Lao Agreements, I have in mind that we have just witnessed flagrant aggression against neutral India by one of the parties to these agreements, which raises the question of how much reliance should be placed on the word of this party to respect the independence, neutrality and territorial integrity of any country.

The United States fully understands and supports the desire of Your Royal Highness that the Cambodian people may live in peace with all nations. I shall therefore give my personal attention to your proposals and direct the energies of my Government to attain this common objective.2

Please accept, Your Royal Highness, the assurances of my highest consideration and personal regard.”

Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 12/5/62–12/13/62. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Koren and cleared by Arzac, Rice, Forrestal and in draft by Harriman and Czyzak. Repeated to London, Paris, Bangkok, New Delhi, Saigon, Ottawa, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Text of Sihanouk’s letter is attached to a memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy, November 30. Attached to Sihanouk’s letter was a “Draft Declaration of Neutrality by the Royal Cambodian Government.” (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/11–3062)

2 In telegram 474 from Phnom Penh, November 30, the Embassy concurred with the idea of an interim reply that would give the United States time for consultation with friendly governments and would not give the impression of U.S. footdragging. The only problem the Embassy foresaw was that the second paragraph of the letter might be considered by Sihanouk as portending rejection and bring about an immediate riposte by him. (Ibid., 651H.00/1l-3062)

100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, December 6, 1962.

Cambodia

This is a follow up on our conversation yesterday about Sihanouk’s proposed declaration of neutrality.1

I think our problem can be summed up as follows:

Sihanouk is terrified of Thailand and South Vietnam—and with some reason.

Sihanouk and the rest of the world consider that Sarit and Diem are “our boys”, that we can control them, but that we haven’t done so.

Sihanouk figures the more people he can get to underwrite his security, the better. He has therefore proposed a round robin declaration of neutrality to be signed by everyone he can think of which would, in effect, provide for (1) a guarantee of his borders and his neutrality by all the signers, including ourselves, the USSR, Red China, Thailand, and South Vietnam; and (2) withdrawal of all foreign military people except for a useless French presence.

We are having a great deal of difficulty as it is in keeping the Thais and the South Vietnamese from causing more trouble on the Cambodian borders. The Thais and the South Vietnamese will certainly refuse to sign a Laos-type declaration, since it would be an admission of wrong-doing. If we signed it anyway, our ability to control them would, if anything, be lessened. At the same time Red China would have an opportunity to intervene in the situation with or without Sihanouk’s invitation.

There are several things we could do, ranging all the way from simply ignoring the Cambodian proposal to accepting it with whatever modifications we can get. The course we are now most actively working on is an attempt to divert attention from Sihanouk’s Laos-type proposal to a suggestion for the establishment of an international border commission (a British idea) and a tri-partite declaration by Thailand, Cambodia and South Vietnam that each will respect the neutrality of the others. Such a declaration might be accepted by the Other nations who were members of the Laos Conference.

This is basically an attempt to stall and avoid the worst aspect in Sihanouk’s proposal which gives a lever to the Red Chinese with which they might pry their way into Cambodia.2

Mike

* Source: Kennedy. Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 12/5/62–12/13/62. Secret.

1 No other record of the Forrestal-Kennedy conversation has been found.

2 The Department of State on December 7 informed interested posts of its decision to accept the general aims of Sihanouk’s neutrality proposal “in principle,” but to “revise proposal radically to remove objectionable features such as guarantee.” (Circular telegram 1060, December 7; Department of State, Central Files, 651F.00/12–762)

101. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State Rusk 101. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, January 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Neutrality Proposal

For the past few weeks we have been working on an adaptation of the Sihanouk Neutrality Proposal1 in order to achieve a draft which will not only meet our requirements but be acceptable to the Thai and Vietnamese and hopefully also Sihanouk. We have endeavored to follow as far as possible the Cambodian proposal but there are obvious and significant differences. The major ones are as follows: 1. Structurally, the Cambodian proposals include three documents modeled in general after the Laos agreements, i.e., a Cambodian declaration of neutrality, a multilateral responsive declaration by the Geneva powers, and a multilateral protocol providing for enforcement by the International Control Commission. Our adaptation retains the two declarations (modified in several important respects) but eliminates the ICC Protocol and substitutes bilateral Amity Agreements between Cambodia and its neighbors Thailand and South Viet-Nam.

2. Whereas the Cambodian drafts would require the Geneva powers to guarantee Cambodian neutrality, independence and territorial integrity, we have substituted a commitment to consult in the event of a threat to Cambodia’s neutrality, etc. The French and British concur with us on this and we believe that Sihanouk may be prevailed upon to agree to it.

3. In lieu of providing for an ICC we have attempted to get at the root of Cambodia’s bilateral difficulties with its neighbors by substituting, for the Protocol, individual Agreements of Amity between Cambodia and Viet-Nam and Thailand, respectively. Recognizing that Thailand and Viet-Nam will never accept the Geneva Co-Chairmen and the Geneva signatory powers as arbiters of their differences with Cambodia, we have likewise eliminated the Co-Chairmen as appellate parties in our proposed bilateral Amity Agreements and we have substituted the UNSYG and a representative of a neutral nation to be named by mutual consent.

4. The Cambodian draft defined Cambodia’s borders with her neighbors. The borders have been a source of frequent friction between the three countries, and Thailand and Viet-Nam will never accept the unilateral Cambodian definition. Therefore, our draft Amity Agreements provide not only for a Mixed Boundary Commission (utilizing a neutral nation representative as chairman) to delimit and demarcate the respective borders but also a Border Inquiry Commission (utilizing a UNSYG representative together with representatives of each party) which would investigate border incidents and thereby reduce the source of much of the trouble between these three countries. Sihanouk has already indicated his willingness to drop the unilateral border definition from his drafts, but we do not know what reception he will give to our idea of bilateral Amity Agreements.

5. Finally, the Cambodian draft, following the Lao precedent, calls for the withdrawal of our military assistance and MAAG to Cambodia. We feel this would be inimical to the best interests of both countries and therefore eliminate this provision in our draft.

In developing our position we have been in close touch with interested U.S. Embassies, with the UK, and, to a lesser extent, with the French. Our Embassies approve of the draft as do also the British, although the latter have some reservations on certain points. We have only just sent the draft to the French in anticipation of tripartite talks in Paris starting February 4, which the French originally suggested and the British concur in. We anticipate that the French will probably not accept our draft as it now stands, particularly in view of the fact that de Gaulle in his original reply to Sihanouk said that France accepted the Cambodian draft as a basis for further discussions. Neither we nor the British did so. Although we neither expect nor require complete tripartite unanimity, we believe the talks will be advantageous in order to arrive at the closest possible alignment of our respective positions and also to persuade the French to use their considerable influence with Sihanouk to induce him to accept a proposal that will not be rejected outright by Thailand and Viet-Nam. In this connection, the talks will also be helpful in lining up the most effective tactical approach to the three countries primarily concerned. It will, of course, be understood that all discussions are ad referendum.

Mr. Czyzak of L and Mr. Koren of FE will represent the Department. They will have a day of preliminary talks with the British before going on to Paris.

Recommendation

It is requested that you approve the attached draft of a neutrality agreement and protocols for Cambodia as the basis for the U.S. position during talks to be held with the British and French.2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 651H.51K/1–2363. Drafted by Koren and Hannah and cleared in draft by Czyzak and William C. Burdett, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs. Initialed by Harriman.

1 See footnote 1, Document 99.

2 The draft was attached but is not printed. Rusk initialed his approval on January 28. Tripartite talks began on February 4 in Paris and concluded on February 6. Although unable to agree on a joint text to be submitted to Sihanouk (either the attached U.S. text or a British compromise) Koren and Czyzak reported from Paris that the talks at least forced the French to focus on a problem that they had treated superficially up to that point. (Telegram 3146 from Paris, February 6; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

102. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 102. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, March 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

644. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 529.1 Conveyed to SecState FonAffairs Sambath this afternoon points outlined final two paragraphs Embtel 6392 re plot by Cambodian dissidents against Cambodia, stressing particularly US awareness Sihanouk role in unification and stability of country, recalling former Ambassador Trimble’s similar approach to Sihanouk in June 19623 and making clear I was acting under instructions my government.

When I first introduced subject, explaining I was doing so because press was implying US complicity, Sambath said he had not considered US involved in this affair. He thanked me for my approach and said he would report it to Sihanouk. When I said I would be willing make similar statement to Sihanouk during audience now scheduled for 11:30 a.m. tomorrow4 if Sambath thought it desirable, latter quickly said that he thought it sufficient I had made these statements to him, which he would pass on to Sihanouk. It was clear he thought preferable for me not to raise matter with Sihanouk.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

1 In this one-line telegram, March 2, the Department approved the course of action proposed by the Embassy in telegram 639 from Phnom Penh (see footnote 2 below). (Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-CHICOM)

2 In telegram 639, March 2, the Embassy suggested that in light of allegations by Sihanouk of plots against him, the United States should make an official confidential denial to the Cambodian Government at the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs level. Ambassador Sprouse proposed to tell Secretary of State Sambath that the U.S. Government “strongly disapproved of anti-Cambodian subversion on part of Khmer dissidents and if provided with information on which RKG concern based would do all in its power to quash them.” (Ibid.)

3 See Document 85.

4 See footnote 2, Document 105.

103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 103. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in VietnamSource

Washington, March 8, 1963, 6:52 p.m.

854. In address February 28 Sihanouk spoke of plot by Son Ngoc Thanh to overthrow him and of support for Thanh by GVN, Thailand and GRC as well as unnamed “imperialist power”, obviously US (Phnom Penh’s 633 to Dept.).1 Matter has already been played up in Cambodian press (Phnom Penh’s 639 to Dept.),2 which can be expected keep it alive in order deflect Sihanouk’s ire which at present aimed against leftists.

As you know, there is some factual basis for Sihanouk’s allegations on Thanh’s activities, including his references to Thanh’s trip to Taiwan via Hong Kong last summer. Between Chicom eagerness supply Sihanouk such information and probable penetration of “Free Khmer” groups in SVN by Cambodians loyal to RKG, Thanh plotting evidently cannot go undetected by Sihanouk.

You are requested to raise again with Diem the dangers implicit in Son Ngoc Thanh’s continued conspiratorial activities in Viet-Nam citing Sihanouk’s statement as evidence. Suggest you state you have information indicative GVN elements continuing use Thanh (as indicated Embtel 1646)3 and that you spell out again that this likely to be counterproductive for interests of GVN and US. (Discuss with CAS station chief what information from reports since your last talk with Diem can be revealed to him on this occasion.) Suggest you recommend consideration be given to removing irritant by expelling Thanh from SVN as undesirable alien, asking Diem let you have his reaction to this suggestion at his early convenience. Such action might, inter alia, help us greatly in dealing with Sihanouk’s neutrality proposals; you may of course use this among points you make to Diem if you think it would be helpful.4

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-CHICOM. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Arzac, cleared by Wood of the Vietnam Working Group and by Hannah and in draft by Koren, and approved by Rice. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Taipei.

1 Dated March 1. (Ibid.)

2 See footnote 2, Document 102.

3 Not found.

4 As reported in telegram 806 from Saigon, March 13, Nolting reviewed recent reports of Thanh’s involvement with the Government of Vietnam and concluded that the GVN had in fact changed its tactic and was now using Thanh as a means of rallying and ensuring the support of ethnic Cambodians in South Vietnam rather than as an agent provocateur against Cambodia. Nolting believed that a démarche to Diem would merely elicit a denial and might give Diem an occasion to complain about Cambodian activities directed against him. Nolting was submitting alternative proposals for handling the matter through CIA Saigon channels. (Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-CHICOM)

104. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 104. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source

Washington, April 10, 1963.

SUBJECT

JCS Discussion of Viet Cong Support in Cambodia, April 12, 1963

Discussion:

The Joint Chiefs of Staff are scheduled to discuss on April 12, 19631 diplomatic actions that might be taken to reduce the effectiveness of support for the Viet Cong in Cambodia.

Numerous reports have been received since 1956 regarding the organization of Viet Cong cells and fronts in Phnom Penh, recruitment for operations in South Viet-Nam, the collection of contributions, the procurement of supplies, medical care for Viet Cong wounded, and the lax state of border controls. These reports do not appear to indicate any intensification of such Viet Cong activity in Cambodia, but the problem remains of devising ways to reduce its effectiveness.

The most interesting recent reports have come from a Lao source who has identified the alleged location of a guerrilla camp about four kilometers inside the Cambodian border and has reported coastal supply operations across the border. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] angled aerial photographs of the area where the camp is supposed to be located are being considered, if they are feasible.

The present moment is not a good one for attempting to deal with the Cambodian Government directly through diplomatic channels on this problem. With the future of our MAAG at stake under the Cambodian neutrality proposals, we do not at present believe it advisable to undertake any approach to the Cambodians likely to irritate them. Such an approach would be related by the Cambodians to charges emanating from South Vietnamese intelligence sources in late 1961 that extensive Viet Cong bases existed in Cambodia with the knowledge and encouragement of the Cambodian Government, charges the falsity of which was conclusively proved by subsequent investigation and concerning which the Cambodian Government showed itself extraordinarily sensitive.2 We would not wish to stir up the uneasy relations between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam when they are relatively quiet due largely to the absence of serious border incidents over the past five to six months, and when there is some encouragement from Cambodia’s recent sudden acceptance of the Vietnamese proposal of late November 1962 to exchange military attachés.

With proper documentation, the South Vietnamese military attaché may in time be able to discuss some of these problems, particularly those relating to border crossings, with his Cambodian counterparts. For the present, it is proposed that our Embassy at Phnom Penh be authorized to take advantage of Prince Sihanouk’s receptivity to intelligence reports to prepare the way for any diplomatic action that may eventually be possible. Phnom Penh has in the past done this successfully, although not on the Viet Cong support problem. In this case, Phnom Penh would prepare materials [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and pass them to Prince Sihanouk for his personal attention. This is the only level at which such materials would be useful, and this effort could prove to be sufficient for our purpose. This proposal has been under discussion recently in informal correspondence with Phnom Penh.

Recommendation:3

It is recommended that you discourage any proposals from JCS for diplomatic action on the Viet Cong support problem at the present time, and that you inform JCS of our intention to authorize Phnom Penh to pass pertinent [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] materials to Prince Sihanouk as preparation for any eventual diplomatic action.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Arzac on April 9 and cleared by Koren and Wood. Initialed by Rice.

1 No record of this discussion has been found.

2 The four-day intensive investigation of the Cambodian side of the border, on the ground and by low-altitude flights, with particular attention to sites of alleged bases pinpointed by the South Vietnamese, was conducted by Robert Trumbull of the New York Times. That paper published the results on November 22, 1961, namely that no such bases were discovered. In addition, the Chief of MAAG/Cambodia made a press statement on November 1, 1961, based on his own inspection of the areas, denying the existence of the alleged installations. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Johnson approved this recommendation on April 12.

105. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 105. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, May 17, 1963, noon.

866. Reference: Embassy’s telegram 851.1 At conclusion my audience with Sihanouk May 8 he again, as he had done during my last audience with him March 5 (Embtel 648),2 asked me to convey to the President an expression of his best wishes. It will be noted that except for card of Christmas greetings no Presidential message has been sent to Sihanouk since despatch of President’s reply dated December 6, 1962 regarding neutrality proposal (Deptel 393).3 During this same period Sihanouk has exchanged messages with various world leaders, including Khrushchev, Sukarno, Nasser, Tito, Liu Shao-chi, Ne Win, Chou Enlai, Ho Chi Minh, Novotny, Nehru and Nkrumah, and has had personal contact with other Chiefs of State during his visits to Colombo, Indonesia, Singapore, Malaya, Communist China and India (Burma en route to India), and visits to Cambodia of Novotny, King Laos, Liu Shao-chi, Chen Yi, Lee Kwan-yu and Chief State Singapore. Looming ahead are visits by Ho Chi Minh, Sukarno and Brezhnev and perhaps Tito and Ne Win. Sihanouk has had meager fare from Western world during this period, having received only message from de Gaulle in December regarding neutrality proposal and interim reply from Macmillan in February on same subject.

Foregoing situation is described in order show how heavily weighted on neutralist and bloc side have been attentions centered on Sihanouk which, because of his own temperament and susceptibility to such influences, have undoubtedly had effect on his thinking and attitudes. This situation presented with full awareness that we do not follow practice sending Presidential messages at drop of hat as seems to be possible with so many bloc and neutralist countries, particularly those aware of Sihanouk’s susceptibilities and desirous of courting his favor.

In light foregoing, unless Presidential reply in connection with neutrality proposal seems likely in foreseeable future, I recommend serious consideration be given to sending Sihanouk an appropriate letter from the President in the very near future; it could express appreciation of Sihanouk’s two oral expressions of good wishes mentioned above and could be tied to suitable occasion which should present itself in June and which is described below. Such message would not be expected be panacea for all ills, but it would at least be attempt redress in part balance which has swung so heavily away from Western world.

I informed Sihanouk May 8 that we wished make presentation to him and his principal advisers in early June, following USAID Director’s return from Washington, of our economic aid program for FY 63 along lines presentation made to him last year (Emb desp 368, June 4, 1962).4 Sihanouk expressed immediate interest in such presentation and said he would later let me know date convenient for him. We anticipate presentation sometime after June 5. This would offer appropriate occasion for Presidential message which could logically be tied to our aid program and could be used to support our policy objectives in Cambodia. We believe message should include following points:

1. Purpose of American economic and military aid to Cambodia is to strengthen independence and promote progress and welfare of Cambodian people; these programs worked out in fruitful consultation between Cambodians and Americans and designed supplement great efforts being made by Cambodia itself.

2. United States accepts and understands Cambodia’s policy of neutrality as the USG has previously stated, and respects this country’s independence and territorial integrity.

3. Refer to President’s pleasure at having seen Sihanouk in 1961, thank Sihanouk for expression his best wishes conveyed orally by Ambassador, and express hope that if Sihanouk attends UNGA this year President will have pleasure of seeing him and exchanging views on problems mutual interest.

4. If we are willing to reopen neutrality project dialogue, we should add: in regard to neutrality proposals which were subject of exchange of letters last year the President looks forward to learning the reaction of Prince Sihanouk to the preliminary views of the USG on this subject which were conveyed to Sihanouk by the Ambassador on March 5 and which represented also the President’s views on this subject.

Pertinent to this recommendation and illustrative of Sihanouk’s sensitivity on subject proper regard for position Chief of State are:

1. Recent criticism by Sihanouk, voiced to very small luncheon group of which I was member, that UK Government has on various occasions failed treat him with courtesy and dignity due him, first as King and later as Chief of State. Among instances cited was extension of invitation to him for Princess Alexandra’s wedding through UK Ambassador rather than by Duchess of Kent herself.

2. Sihanouk’s statement to same group that, although he was opposed such conference, he had been unwilling reject Nkrumah’s invitation for Colombo-type conference in Accra on Sino-Indian conflict, which would have implied discourtesy (he added he had attempted discourage conference).

3. Sihanouk’s statement in 1961 Asia Society speech in New York that his reaction to unilateral Soviet abrogation of nuclear test ban moderated by personal letter from Khrushchev.

4. Sihanouk accepted de Gaulle’s request for removal guarantee provisions from neutrality proposal, apparently without any discussion or argument following receipt of de Gaulle’s letter containing that request.

5. Sihanouk has never acknowledged Macmillan’s letter late February proposing “UK Ambassador discuss these ideas (re neutrality proposal) with whatever RKG representative you (Sihanouk) may consider appropriate”. Nor did Sihanouk grant audience to UK Ambassador, who had raised with SecState FonAffairs question of reply and wished do likewise with Sihanouk, prior UK Ambassador’s departure on home leave late April.

Sihanouk’s susceptibility to attention and his sensitivity should be ever kept in mind, and they, in fact, argue for inclusion in Presidential message of reference to our preliminary views on neutrality proposal if, of course, Department willing reopen dialogue on neutrality project. I regret our preliminary views this subject conveyed to Sihanouk March 5 were not made subject Presidential message at that time since such vehicle would have increased likelihood its acceptability to Sihanouk (Embtel 637).5 We are entering difficult period when we must deal with delicate problems of MAAG’s future and questions arising out RKG acceptance MIGs. Even without reference to neutrality proposal, therefore, I recommend Presidential message as it can only be of assistance to us in difficult period ahead. For such message to have maximum effect we must be prepared have it published as is standard operating procedure here with such messages.6

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 CAMB. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 In telegram 851, May 10, Sprouse reported that in an audience with Sihanouk on May 8 he received the clear impression that Sihanouk was unwilling to discuss his neutrality proposal except with President Kennedy or Secretary Rusk. Sprouse suggested reopening the dialog with Sihanouk on his neutrality proposal by means of a letter from President Kennedy. (Ibid., POL 27–13 CAMB)

2 In telegram 648, March 5, Sprouse reported that he had told Sihanouk that the United States had given his neutrality proposals serious consideration. While the United States accepted the general concept of Cambodian neutrality, independence, and territorial integrity, the U.S. Government would like to suggest minor changes. (Ibid., 751H.00/3–363)

3 Document 99.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 811.0051H/6–462)

5 Not printed. (Ibid., POL 27–13 CAMB)

6 In telegram 726, June 7, the Department of State agreed with the Embassy’s view of Sihanouk’s susceptibility to personal attention, and thought that a Presidential message might be advisable, but not for the occasions and reasons suggested by the Embassy. Of the four points recommended by Sprouse, only point 3, a possible Sihanouk visit to Washington in conjunction with the U.N. General Assembly meeting, seemed appropriate for a Presidential message at some time. (Ibid., POL 15–1 CAMB)

106. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 106. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, June 29, 1963, 11 a.m.

1017. Deptel 767.1 Three major questions are posed by indication RKG intention revive neutrality proposals:

(1) What is motivation such move?

(2) Is it worthwhile for us, either together with French and British or alone, attempt influence form in which revised proposals will be put forward?

(3) If answer (2) positive, along what lines should we attempt influence RKG?

Re (1), believe most important feature influencing revival neutrality project is pessimistic RKG view of present situation Laos and recent developments involving Buddhists in SVN, both of which have increased RKG concern re future these two countries and eventual repercussions on Cambodia. Recent increase SVN border incidents may have served reinforce these RKG fears. Also, RKG has already received satisfactory replies from bloc but wishes obtain maximum possible assurances from free world, primarily US, for Cambodia’s survival before writing finis to neutrality project. This would presumably represent beginning of final effort bring project to fruition as well as continuation of negotiations, which Sihanouk has previously said would require considerable time (Embtel 517).2 By revising draft to meet objections made known to him, Sihanouk may be seeking as many signatures as possible, although he may now consider Thai and SVN signatures unlikely and not really needed if assurances forthcoming from US and other free world powers.

Re (2), question is posed of what we would achieve by introducing counterproposal at this point. We tried steer project in right direction last year prior RKG presentation draft proposal but did not succeed in making any changes in two vital aspects: guarantees and elimination of provision for withdrawal MAAG. No reason believe advance efforts to steer project would meet any greater success. On other hand risk involved such effort might ensure revival of project; as matters now stand there is at least outside chance that such revival might not be undertaken despite Sambath’s statement.

In considering whether we should take initiative in this direction, account should be taken of extent of agreement among ourselves, British and French as to tactical situation, timing, and content of new proposals to be made. All three of us, to varying degree, consider ball now in Cambodian court: British PriMin Macmillan has suggested RKG designate representative to discuss matter with British Ambassador; de Gaulle has made certain comments on draft which, although publicly accepted in principle by Sihanouk, have not been embodied in new language; and US waiting for Cambodian response to approach made to Sihanouk (Embtel 648).3

In matter substance of approach, if one decided on, we seem have two principal alternatives. First is to put forward proposals as developed last year based essentially on bilaterals between Cambodia on one hand and Thais and Vietnamese on other. Advantages these proposals are (a) they provide machinery handle border questions and deal with incidents; (b) they do not involve USG in guarantees we are unwilling to give. Disadvantages are: (a) possible reluctance Thais and SVN accept these (as indicated last year when being drafted); (b) despite recently demonstrated ineffectiveness ICC Laos, RKG may still prefer ICC procedure subject Cambodian initiative as provided for in its proposal.

Second alternative is proposal by US (preferably with similar action by British and French) of text based on Laos Accords or on Sihanouk’s original proposals, to extent either can be suitably modified in desired direction, from which would have been omitted such objectionable features as guarantees, elimination of MAAG, border declarations, implication of Thai and Vietnamese guilt, and undertaking consultations jointly with other signatories in case of infractions. Consideration might be given to omission ICC procedure in favor general undertaking by countries in region seek establish modalities for settling border disputes and investigation alleged incidents, although in eyes RKG this might so water down project as to make it no more satisfactory than general assurances contained in President’s letter to Sihanouk September 2 [August 31], 1962.4 Advantages this type proposal would be:

(a) Possibility reaching agreement by all Geneva powers thus providing face-saving out for Sihanouk to obtain maximum he could hope to achieve from his initiative;

(b) Sihanouk may, if he is now convinced (as he should be) that he cannot obtain real guarantees in any case, be content settle for document endorsing his neutrality and expressing willingness signatory powers consult with RKG in event threats against it;

(c) He probably wishes to wring maximum possible commitments from non-bloc countries, primarily US, and this would offer him such opportunity;

(d) Although basically representing little more than gesture, such document might present minimum negotiating problems and thus make possible conclusion agreement and elimination this question from repertory of problems between Sihanouk and free world.

In any event we would presumably have gone as far as we could to meet Sihanouk’s wishes and will have made effort to provide him possible face-saving out if that is what he is seeking.

Foregoing presented as our evaluation this problem and for use in sounding out views French and British, subject, of course, to any further indications we may receive of Cambodian intentions.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, New Delhi, Paris, Saigon, USUN, CINCPAC, and Vientiane and pouched to Ottawa.

1 In telegram 767, June 22, the Department suggested that since Cambodian ideas on the neutrality proposal were not forthcoming it might be wise to pass on ideas that U.S. officials had been discussing with the French and British to Cambodian officials. (Ibid.)

2 Telegram 517, December 31, 1962, quotes a speech of Sihanouk as follows: “negotiations to obtain an international agreement on our country will be long, even very long, because this procedure that certain Western and neutralists have morally forced us to adopt.” The Embassy explained that Sihanouk was referring to the need for extended diplomatic correspondence instead of a conference. (Ibid., 651H.00/12–3162)

3 See footnote 2, Document 105.

4 See footnote 1, Document 89.

107. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 107. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, July 2, 1963, 6 p.m.

9. Embtel 4.1 Sihanouk’s July 1 statements on neutrality proposals indicate they have been indefinitely and perhaps permanently shelved. Action may have resulted from fruitless attempts to weave objections and “counter-proposals” of potential signatories into original document. This analysis shared by British Chargé, who states he had earlier obtained from independent source confirmation Cambodians have been engaged in reworking draft. (Sambath intimated to me last night he had no foreknowledge of Prince’s July 1 speech and avoided comment on subject.) In view foregoing we see no need for US, UK and French counterdrafts designed forestall fresh Cambodian initiative on neutrality proposals.

Points worth noting in Sihanouk’s remarks on proposals were continued praise of French (despite fact objections he described as gutting proposals were advanced in de Gaulle letter), obvious identification of US and India as chief obstructionists, and specific reference to RDVN “guarantee” of Cambodian frontiers. Sihanouk evidently still pursuing policy of seeking commit Hanoi to respect Cambodian borders through his own statements in absence clear-cut commitment from RDVN itself. Renewed emphasis on frontier issue, in respect both Thailand and Vietnam indicative of importance Sihanouk attaches to it. “Counter-proposals” cited by Sihanouk must refer de Gaulle’s substitution of “consultations” for “guarantees” and possibly included paper passed to Nong Kimny by French last February (Paris 4122 to Department).2

We still convinced over course of events in Laos and South Vietnam primary factor shaping Sihanouk’s assessment of threat to Cambodia. His concern over Cambodian borders reinforces this view. With abandonment neutrality proposals (which justified as having served purpose of distinguishing true friends from false) stepped-up effort to assure Cambodian survival by means different formula not unlikely. Renewed appeal for Asian conference, stressed by Sihanouk in different section July 1 speech, one possibility.3

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 4, July 1, the Embassy sent a translation of remarks by Sihanouk to the National Congress on July 1 concerning his neutrality proposal. (Ibid.)

2 Not found.

3 The Department agreed in telegram 9 to Phnom Penh, July 2, that Sihanouk’s statement obviated the need for any further Western effort on neutrality proposals. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, October 12, 1963, 5 p.m.

284. Embtel 283.1 Message in two sections. Section one.

In his recent series of spoken and written tirades against Khmer Serei-Son Ngoc Thanh-Sam Sary and particularly in Neak Cheat Niyum article reported reftel, Sihanouk has employed emotional and defensive tone which betrays almost obsessive concern. Most likely explanation this phenomenon lies in his violent reaction to any development appearing contradict or threaten picture of Cambodia and Cambodians completely unified under his leadership and which thus could represent challenge and threat to him. Also, although we have no evidence support for Khmer Serei inside Cambodia (which in any case likely be handicapped by association this movement with Thais and Vietnamese), Sihanoukmay actually fear it represents threat to him either politically or personally, particularly if he believes it has significant external backing. Timing recent campaign consistent this analysis inasmuch as it appears to have begun about time resumption Khmer Serei broadcasts from Viet-Nam (mid-August) and to have been greatly stimulated by Khmer Krom loyalty demonstration to Diem (Embtel [source text illegible]), which Sihanouk has repeatedly and violently denounced as forced.

Purposes of current campaign, to extent it represents more than instinctive lashing-out by Sihanouk against anything or anybody appearing oppose him inside Cambodia, could include following:

1. Discredit Khmer Serei and hold their accusations up to ridicule;

2. Apply pressure on us to cease our alleged support to (or make sure we do not begin to support) Khmer Serei and influence Thais and Vietnamese to put an end Khmer Serei activities on their territory;

3. Prepare way for possible future political move such as recognition Hanoi, recognition FLN, or some move for closer relations ChiComs, with an accompanying act against or bargaining away of portion of U.S. position here.

In regard 2 above, which Embassy views as paramount and most immediate purpose of campaign, likely Sihanouk’s fears may have been increased and he may have been emboldened make public accusation US involvement through CIA by recent public speculation CIA role Viet-Nam.

Sihanouk running certain risks by pursuing his campaign. Continued inflammatory attacks on GVN, accompanied by orchestrated campaign resolutions on part many organizations and communities in favor territorial claim to Cochin China, could conceivably irritate Diem to point of bringing on closing of Mekong (Embtel 260).2 Publicity given by Sihanouk’s speeches and writings to Khmer Serei broadcasts could stimulate Cambodians to devote more attention to content these broadcasts, which, according Sihanouk’s own statements, announce that troops of Khmer Serei “movement of liberation” ready to invade Cambodia to liberate it from Sihanouk’s corrupt, high-handed and immoral rule. Moreover, hard to believe Sihanouk does not recognize possibility adverse reaction by us to repeated and unjustified accusation might affect our willingness continue our aid to him.

Section two.

I do not see how we can ignore direct accusations by Chief of State of US complicity contained Neak Cheat Niyum editorial (reftel) which in effect charges US with aiding movement seeking overthrow Sihanouk and RKG. (Opening paragraph of his signed editorial reads: “After rather long disappearance the Khmer-Serei (‘free’ Cambodians) reappear noisily on the stage of this ‘anti-Sihanouk theater’ whose stage-managers are named: Diem, Sarit and CIA”. I recommend that Ambassador Nong Kimny be called in at highest possible level in Department and informed that USG deeply disturbed by completely unfounded accusations in published editorial signed by Chief of State of friendly country Should also be pointed out to Kimny that our support and assistance Cambodia and our respect its neutral position are matter public record and have not wavered and USG deplores and opposes activities of dissident groups representing threat to RKG and Sihanouk and to stability and unity of Cambodia. Further recommend I be instructed make simultaneous approach to Acting SecState FonAffs along same lines, informing him I am doing so under instructions. Approach to latter would ensure its being brought to Sihanouk’s attention and would further emphasize seriousness US concern at his accusations. Such approach is preferable to direct confrontation with Sihanouk, which would involve loss of face for him and might lead to unpredictable reaction.

While foregoing would serve place us on record with Cambodian Government that we are aware of and resent Sihanouk’s unfounded accusations, Sihanouk will still be looking for positive US action stop Khmer Serei activities and he may very likely publicize démarche as part of continuing public pressure campaign on US for such action, even to point repeating his previous disbelief US denials involvement in absence any indication cessation Khmer Serei activities (see reftel). It might therefore be helpful if we could at same time make some public gesture (possibly of type suggested Embtel 269)3 which would give expression in general terms our attitude toward Cambodian neutrality without directly linking such action to Sihanouk’s recent outpourings. This two-pronged action—in effect rebuking privately and soothing publicly—seems to me to be best we can do at present. Whether or not it will be effective in halting public charges against us is another matter. That will depend largely and unpredictably upon Sihanouk’s mood and motives. We know the former is now black, and we cannot be completely sure of latter. In meantime, dependent upon results investigations suggested Embtel 279. [4 lines of source text and footnote not declassified]

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 283, October 12, the Embassy sent the text of an editorial in the official paper Neak Cheat Niyum, entitled “Operation Khmer Serei,” which in effect charged the United States with aiding a movement seeking to overthrow Sihanouk and his government. (Ibid.)

2 Dated October 2. (Ibid., POL 17 S.VIET-CAMB)

3 In telegram 269, October 5, Sprouse suggested using one of President Kennedy’s or Secretary Rusk’s press conferences as an occasion for a firm public statement of U.S. support for Cambodian neutrality and to remind Cambodia of U.S. economic and military support supplied over the past years in full knowledge of that policy of independence. (Ibid., POL 1 CAMB)

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 109. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, October 21, 1963, 6 p.m.

306. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 202.1 I obtained interview with Acting SecState FonAffs Norodom Phurissara this morning and made presentation outlined Deptel 2002 as modified by reftel. I laid particular stress on fact I was acting under instructions, that USG could not ignore signed public accusations on the part of Chief of State of friendly government, and that effect of such public accusations and criticism was to hamper any efforts USG might make to attempt ease Khmer Serei problem as it had done in past.

Phurissara said RKG grateful for present and past US assistance; current suspicions arose, he said, not from direct evidence but from deductions and reasoning, implying RKG believed Thai and Vietnamese support Khmer Serei, of which Cambodians convinced, could not take place without US complicity or at least consent. In response my suggestion RKG supply information as to exact location Khmer Serei transmitters, Phurissara asked whether, if such information supplied, USG would see to it that broadcasts stopped. I said we could give no such guarantees but that information as to exact location and circumstances of broadcasts could assist us in determining whether there was any possibility for useful action on our part. Phurissara said broadcasts created resentment and confusion among Cambodian public and were highly irritating to Prince Sihanouk. He said relations between Cambodia and its neighbors would be improved if broadcasts were halted. I repeated that we desired more information in order to judge whether there was some way we could be helpful but that public accusations by high Cambodian officials hampered our efforts.

Interview closed on friendly note, with Phurissara expressing appreciation frank statement US views. His private secretary took notes throughout interview, and we can expect full report reach Sihanouk in spite latter’s retirement from public life for two-week “diet and rest cure”.3

Spivack

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-US. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 202, October 19, the Department informed the Embassy that its exploratory discussion with Nong Kimny as reported in telegram 200 to Phnom Penh (see footnote 2 below) was not a substitute for Embassy representations. [text not declassified] (Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-US)

2 In telegram 200, October 19, the Department reported on the discussion with Nong Kimny and outlined the basic approach that it believed the Embassy should make to Phurissara. (Ibid., AID (US)-CAMB)

3 In telegram 314 from Phnom Penh, October 28, Chargé Spivack reported on a conversation with Penn Nouth, who said he had been asked to make clear that Sihanouk’s accusations were directed only toward the CIA and not intended to apply to the U.S. Government. Penn Nouth stated that Cambodia was grateful for U.S. aid and support and appreciated its respect for Cambodian neutrality, but was convinced that the CIA was supporting the Khmer Serei. (Ibid., POL CAMB-US).

110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, October 28, 1963.

SUBJECT

Presidential Message to Prince Sihanouk and Marshal Sarit

I attach a memorandum from State1 containing both a personal message and a governmental message to Prince Sihanouk on the occasion of his birthday and Cambodia’s Independence Day, October 31st and November 9th, respectively.

I talked with Cambodia’s best friend in Washington2 and have, as you no doubt foresaw, been convinced that the President should send a private message. Since the State Department’s draft was a little limp, I have added a sentence which I don’t think would get us in great trouble with Sarit.3 I imagine we care less about Diem.

I also attach a proposed message to Marshal Sarit of which I heartily approve.4 In view of the excellent speech he made on Thai TV and radio and in view of Otto Passman’s hopeless remarks,5 this is the least we can do.

MVF

Attachment6

Washington, October 25, 1963.

Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

SUBJECT

Proposed Presidential Messages to Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia

Attached for approval are drafts of two proposed Presidential messages for Prince Sihanouk, Cambodian Chief of State. The first is a greeting to the Prince for his birthday, October 31. The second is a message of congratulations on Cambodia’s Independence Day, November 9.

In past years, Presidential messages have not been sent for Prince Sihanouk’s birthday, and felicitations on Cambodia’s Independence Day have been brief and routine. A birthday message and an Independence Day message somewhat longer than normal are recommended this year.

The purpose of this special attention is to reassure the Prince regarding the United States attitude toward Cambodia. Recently Sihanouk has been severely agitated by propaganda activity carried on by the “Khmer Serei” (Free Cambodia) movement based in Thailand and Viet-Nam. He was particularly incensed by a demonstration of loyalty to the Diem regime on the part of ethnic Cambodians living in Viet-Nam. In the course of condemning the Khmer Serei he has gone beyond to accuse the United States of supporting these activities in Thailand and Viet-Nam. He has said that the United States opposes him because it cannot tolerate Cambodia’s foreign neutral policy.

The two attached messages are based upon recommendations by the Embassy in Phnom Penh and have been drafted carefully to emphasize United States support for Cambodian independence and neutrality and at the same time to minimize any possibility of giving offense to either the Thai or Vietnamese governments.7

Marion Babelsky8

Attachment

1. Proposed Birthday Greeting

It gives me great pleasure to extend greetings to Your Royal Highness on the occasion of your birthday and to wish you many more years of good health and happiness in the service of the people of Cambodia. I want to assure you of my continuing regard for the leadership which you have given your country.

Attachment

2. Proposed Independence Day Message

On the occasion of this tenth anniversary of the recovery of Cambodia’s independence, I have the honor on behalf of the American people and the Government of the United States to convey congratulations and best wishes to Your Royal Highness and the Cambodian people and government.

The people of the United States of America well recall the early years of their own struggle to build a nation and maintain their independence. Against this background of historic memory the American people have watched with sympathy and respect the efforts of the people of Cambodia, under Your Royal Highness’ determined leadership, to build a foundation for internal peace and prosperity for their country. The record of United States assistance through the years to Cambodia’s national development attests unmistakably to the desire of the American people, with fullest respect for Cambodia’s foreign policy of non-alignment, to see Cambodia grow strong in freedom and advance the well-being of its people.

Please accept, Your Royal Highness, my personal felicitations on this occasion and assurances of my high personal regard and respect.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cambodia, 9/12/63–11/7/63. Confidential.

1 Not attached to the source text, but a copy of the memorandum from Department of State files is printed below.

2 Apparent reference to former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who represented the Government of Cambodia in its dispute with Thailand at the International Court of Justice over control of the Temple of Preah Vihear. The decision of the Court on June 15, 1962, was in favor of Cambodia.

3 The last sentence of the birthday message was added by Forrestal.

4 Not printed. A copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 8/63–11/63. The message was sent in telegram 684 to Bangkok, October 30. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 4 THAI)

5 Reference is to remarks by Congressman Otto Passman during hearings on Foreign Operations Appropriation for 1964. An undated transcript is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 8/63–11/63)

6 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–4 CAMB-US. Confidential. Drafted by Hannah and John B. Dexter of SEA and cleared by Hannah, Laurence G. Pickering, and Morgan L. Breckon of SEA, by Rice and by Frank P. Lockhart of FE/P, and by James E. Bowers of the Office of Chief of Protocol.

7 A cable combining both these messages was approved by Bundy and sent to Phnom Penh on October 30.

8 Babelsky signed for Read above Read’s typed signature.

111. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 111. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 13, 1963, 6 p.m.

348. CINCPAC for POLAD. This message represents my evaluation present situation following soundings taken since my return November 10 among diplomatic colleagues and senior members my staff. Principal factors leading Sihanouk issue his ultimatum regarding cessation US and French aid1 were: (1) Sihanouk’s real fear of assassination and attempted overthrow his regime in wake of coup d’etat at Saigon and death of Diem.2 Sihanoukconvinced of US complicity in coup d’etat and of CIA backing Khmer Serei activities.

(2) Sihanouk’s strong resentment French failure to provide desired economic and financial aid, which he had hoped would serve to replace US aid as it gradually phased out. French Ambassador denies any knowledge of direct Sihanouk request for such assistance but says that assiduous courting of France by Sihanouk over long period was evidently designed to produce French offers of financial aid. French are convinced he expected such aid.

(3) Foregoing two factors must be viewed in conjunction with Sihanouk’s own physical and mental state. Rigid diet cure taken at time he was already overworked and exhausted has left him in highly nervous and overwrought state of mind. This black mood coming at time of Diem overthrow and death helped to set in motion events which followed.

Sihanouk issued his ultimatum in his speech of November 5 without any consultation with his senior advisers or Cabinet ministers, who were all taken by surprise. Moderating influences are now at work on him, principally the Queen, Monireth, Penn Nouth, and perhaps Nhiek Tioulong, consensus of informed observers is that black mood will have to work itself out and that for time being best course is for foreign governments affected to avoid strong reaction and remain calm; moderating influences seeking to bring Sihanouk around to a more reasoned approach and economic and financial facts of Cambodia life (which are already beginning to come to surface with closing of banks and weakening of riel, being reported in separate telegram) should be given chance to bring him to face up to inevitable results of his proposed course of action. Implications of cessation US aid, as they become apparent to govt leaders, should serve useful purpose in weeks ahead in this connection.

Implications of situation remain serious with respect prospects continuation US aid programs. French Embassy Counselor says Sihanouk has asked Peiping for economic and financial experts to replace French advisers. Sihanouk continues speak of termination US economic and military aid by January first and in latest speech suggested French military advisers might be kept on under another guise. Tragedy of situation is that he has created crisis where one did not exist and in process may be opening up Pandora’s box which could serve (1) to create very internal opposition he fears (we have not yet had any evidence of organized opposition but many influential Cambodians are seriously concerned over these developments) and (2) to pave way for Communist regime and his own eventual elimination. In latest speech he says he does not intend to abandon his policy neutrality and nonalignment. Problem will be to find some avenue of retreat which would allow him to reverse his field without great loss of face.

One hopeful straw in wind is reliable report he is considering taking brief leave of absence, which might be spent in France. Although difficult to see how he could leave Cambodia at this stage, his presence in France would enable de Gaulle’s influence to be brought to bear on Sihanouk and this could be decisive in reversing present trend.

Expect to present in near future recommendations, on Country Team basis, for actions we should take in implementation economic and military aid programs during period prior December 31. In meantime all members of Country Team are continuing take maximum soundings regarding developing situation.

In light foregoing and until situation further clarified I recommend we make no representations to RKG for time being, either here or in Washington, although I expect see Acting SecState Foreign Affairs and Nhiek Tioulong and seek clarification latest developments. To join issue with Sihanouk now might push him out on limb and make more difficult, if not impossible, his retreat at later date. In meantime I strongly urge that serious consideration be given to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] effort to halt Khmer Serei activities, particularly broadcasts which helped to set off Sihanouk’s outburst. While they may no longer be decisive factor, continuation these broadcasts could still affect seriously situation here with very adverse effect on US position. While recognizing problems this will pose for Bangkok (Bangkok’s tel 724 to Dept),3 I consider US interests involved warrant such an approach.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Received at 9:07 a.m. and repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, CINCPAC, Saigon, and Vientiane.

1 On November 6, the Embassy reported that Sihanouk had published a public ultimatum stating that if Khmer Serei broadcasts were not ended by January 1, 1964, he would terminate United States and French aid to Cambodia. (Telegram 331, November 6; ibid., AID (FREE WORLD) CAMB)

2 Ngo Dinh Diem’s government in South Vietnam was overthrown on November 1.

3 In telegram 724 from Bangkok, November 11, the Embassy reported that Thanat had taken the Deputy Chief of Mission aside at a dinner in Bangkok to pass a message that Thailand believed Sihanouk would not join the Communist camp. Thanat stated that Thailand was not at fault and did not want the United States to get “jittery” and press Thailand on the matter. Thanat pointedly asked if the DCM got the message. When he received an affirmative reply, Thanat added, “Do you read me loud and clear?” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 112. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, November 13, 1963, 5:19 p.m.

3065. London 2312.1 Khmer Serei is creation of Cambodian dissident nationalist Son Ngoc Thanh. We know of no armed members of this band in Cambodia and estimate its following at under 400 men divided between Thailand and South Vietnam. Although its members and leaders have found refuge in Cambodia’s neighboring countries, Khmer Serei constitutes no significant military or political threat to Cambodian government.

Khmer Serei clandestine radio broadcasts have been heard off and on over a period of time, re-emerging in August after long silence. We do not know location of transmitter although it has been reported in both Thailand and South Vietnam. We understand immediate cause of Sihanouk’s irritation at the Khmer Serei has been comparisons between Son Ngoc Thanh’s record as Cambodian nationalist and that of Sihanouk’s, with invidious references to Sihanouk’s less consistent position.

We have no means of controlling broadcasts.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-THAI. Confidential. Drafted by John S. Thomson of INR; cleared in draft by Arzac and Thomas M. Judd of EUR/BNA; and approved by Allen S. Whiting, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for the Far East, INR. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Bangkok, and Saigon.

1 In telegram 2312, November 12, the Embassy in London passed on a request from the British Foreign Office for background on the Khmer Serei so that it could determine if there was substance to Sihanouk’s charges. (Ibid.)

113. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Dean Acheson and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice) 113. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Dean Acheson and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rice)Source

Washington, November 14, 1963, 11:25 a.m.

Mr. Acheson talked with Mr. Rice in Mr. Hilsman’s absence. He said that he had been asked by mutual friends of Roger’s and his to talk about Sihanouk’s latest explosion1 and before doing so he thought he would ask questions of Roger and now of Mr. Rice. Mr. Acheson said that he was confused by one paragraph in his speech in which, after saying that December 31 is the deadline before everything goes to pieces, he would be willing to leave temporarily and give Son Ngoc Thanh a chance to run the country for a month. Mr. Acheson asked who this fellow is.

Mr. Rice said that Son Ngoc Thanh was an independence leader against the French; he could be described as quite brilliant but the sort of man not willing to be number two to anyone else. According to Mr. Rice’s recollection he tried to stage an overthrow of Sihanouk in 1959 but lost out. He and Sam Sary have been in opposition since. Sary does not have much following. Son Ngoc Thanh has a few hundred supporters in Thailand and Viet-Nam, poorly armed and poorly disciplined; he may have a certain amount of latent support in Cambodia.

Mr. Acheson said that he took it as a figure of speech and that he does not really want to leave the country.

Mr. Rice said that Sihanouk had said many things, some wild, and it is indeed uncertain that he really would be willing to give Son Ngoc Thanh a chance to run the country for a month. Mr. Rice said that telegrams received last night indicated that Sihanouk is backtracking. However, he still appeared to be insisting on the cessation of Khmer Serei broadcasts if he was to continue receiving Western aid. This was a preliminary report based on USIA people monitoring broadcasts. Evidently people have been talking with Sihanouk and have been putting second thoughts in his mind.

Mr. Acheson remarked that Sihanouk would be a great guy, if he wasn’t such a damned fool and didn’t say so many crazy things.

Mr. Rice said that he is often crazy like a fox.

Mr. Acheson agreed.

Mr. Acheson asked if we can stop the broadcasts.

Mr. Rice said that we would first have to find out where these stations are. If we go to the Thais and merely make noises about their being beastly to Sihanouk they will fly into their tantrum. We are aware of the desirability of having these shut down. Actually, if these stations are outside Cambodia, in Thailand and Viet-Nam, they should be shut down, whether he makes threats or not.

[2 paragraphs (2–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Mr. Acheson said that he thought Ambassador Sprouse was very good.

In answer to Mr. Acheson’s question Mr. Rice said that when Phil went on leave he seemed to leave in good heart. Sihanouk sent him some expensive grapes from South Africa or Europe. Everything seemed friendly. While Phil was away things blew up. He has just returned and has sent a telegram or two assessing the situation.2

Mr. Acheson asked if the friendly greeting to Sihanouk went out last week.

Mr. Rice replied in the affirmative.3

Mr. Acheson thanked Mr. Rice and said he hoped he had not been indiscreet in asking these questions over the phone.

Mr. Rice said that he was not working on Far Eastern matters when Son Ngoc Thanh was in the limelight and what he gave Mr. Acheson was from memory but he did not think he was very far off.

* Source: Department of State, EA/Burma Union-Cambodia Files: Lot 66 D 492, 1963 Cambodia, July-December. No classification marking. Transcribed in Rice’s office.

1 Apparent reference to Sihanouk’s ultimatum on U.S. and French aid; see footnote 1, Document 111.

2 See Document 111.

3 See footnote 7, Document 110.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, November 16, 1963, 2:25 p.m.

235. CINCPAC for POLAD. Re Prince Sihanouk’s threats and Khmer Serei, following are basic US objectives and initial courses of action approved by the Secretary.

US objectives: 1. Major objective is dissuade Sihanouk from carrying out his threat.

2. Allow time for moderating influences already at work in Phnom Penh seek bring Sihanouk around to more reasonable approach and make him aware of serious economic, financial and political implications of course of action he has threatened. Until situation further clarified, no representations should be made to RKG, either at Phnom Penh or Washington, lest Sihanouk be pushed into making further decisions that will make it more difficult, if not impossible, for him to retreat.

Initial actions: 1. Views should be exchanged with major allies, particularly with British and French.

2. Prudent measures regarding US economic and military aid should be taken, to prevent any avoidable expenditures or deliveries before December 31, as already agreed with DOD and AID. Should Cambodian officials raise questions concerning slowdown, Phnom Penh should counter with questions designed to elicit clarification of RKG intentions.

3. We should continue present efforts to discover location of offending transmitters.

4. In view evidence of support by Diem regime of Khmer Serei activities, we should approach new Saigon regime with view eliminating this support at once. Point out that Khmer Serei are few and ineffective and that if GVN cooperates on this issue they will be in stronger position seek RKG cooperation concerning Viet Cong border crossings. We should try persuade new GVN to overlook Sihanouk’s statements and make conciliatory gesture toward Cambodia.

5. In view Thai sensitivity regarding Khmer Serei activities, we should limit present action at Bangkok to seeking opportunities discuss problem in general terms, pointing out that Sihanouk appears be withdrawing from full extent of his threat but we remain convinced that if he carries out his threats he will endanger Thai security.

Messages following up on above objectives and actions follow.1

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Arzac, cleared by Koren and U. Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rice. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 238 to Phnom Penh, November 16, the Department elaborated on possible action for the Embassy. The Department instructed the Embassy to postpone entering into new aid commitments or making avoidable aid expenditures prior to January 1, 1964. Defense and AID would similarly curtail their operations. Ambassador Sprouse could reconfirm the position that no agency of the U.S. Government was supporting the Khmer Serei. The Department concluded that it was “inconceivable to us that Cambodia should be led to commit national political suicide in response to the activities of a small dissident group that has no popular support in Cambodia and represents no threat to RKG, no matter how irritating its propaganda may.” If Cambodia wanted to terminate U.S. aid, the United States was prepared to do so, but Sihanouk should realize that turning to Chinese assistance would endanger Cambodia’s independence. (Ibid., AID (US) CAMB)

115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 115. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in VietnamSource

Washington, November 16, 1963, 2:26 p.m.

813. CINCPAC for POLAD. Relations with Cambodia. Deptel 235 to Phnom Penh rptd info Saigon 812;1 Saigon’s 980.2

We agree that Sihanouk has gone far toward destroying opportunity presented by new government in Viet-Nam for improving relations between Cambodia and Viet-Nam. We acknowledge that it is hard, under Sihanouk’s threat turn to Chicoms, for GVN take any action in this direction. It is equally hard for US urge such action.

We do believe however that GVN should be urged for following reasons to see to it that all Khmer Serei activities, including radio broadcasting, on Vietnamese territory be brought to an end: 1. This would not require any public act of reconciliation which would undoubtedly be distasteful to GVN at this time, but simply quiet desistance from activity which Sihanouk regards as most important of all elements he has raised in public statements.

2. Khmer Serei activities do not in any way serve or involve GVN interests. Objectively they represent at best pinpricks against Sihanouk, but he reacts to them in manner which may create serious world crisis in SEA.

3. Cessation of Khmer Serei activities would strengthen GVN position for seeking Cambodian cooperation regarding border crossings by Viet Cong.

4. New GVN would thus again demonstrate switch from methods of intrigue and plotting which characterized Diem-Nhu Government in its external as well as in its internal operations.

We believe it would be helpful also for new GVN overlook Sihanouk’s statements to extent of making some conciliatory gesture toward Cambodia.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Joseph A. Mendenhall of FE and Arzac, cleared in draft by Koren, and approved by Rice.

1 Document 114.

2 In telegram 980, November 8, the Embassy in Saigon stated that conditions posed for normal relations by Sihanouk in a November 3 speech (no assistance from Cambodia against the Viet Cong; prohibition of South Vietnamese “hot pursuit” of Viet Cong across the border, minor territorial concessions, rights for ethnic Cambodians in South Vietnam, acceptance of responsibility for future conduct of the Khmer Serei movement, and payment of funds to resolve longstanding debt claims) would be hard for any Vietnamese Government to accept. The Embassy described the “nub” of the problem for the South Vietnamese as their conviction that Cambodia was an important base for Viet Cong operations. (Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET)

116. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 116. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 17, 1963, 7 p.m.

370. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 238.1 Sihanouk’s press conference reported Embtel 3662 gives indication general course of action he hopes take re US aid programs. In light his statements and his evidently overwrought state of mind I recommend following courses be followed both at Washington and Phnom Penh at this stage.

1. We should adopt calm, non-vindictive attitude in all discussions with RKG officials and restrict public statements to minimum. We plan make no statement here and recommend Dept spokesmen’s statements be limited to comment we are seeking further clarification RKG position and problems US aid under study. We should keep in mind RKG desire be independent US aid is consistent with our ultimate objective in extending aid and that even if aid ended we would wish end it without recriminations or accompanying bitterness. Sihanouk has emphasized he expects continue policy neutrality and nonalignment and will not join Communist bloc. Even though this may be dream, we should not outwardly reject such possibility.

2. Without taking any position on aid matters I should approach Acting SecState Foreign Affairs explaining wish seek any further clarification RKG’s moves in present situation that might be useful to my government. At same time USAID Director would make similar approach to appropriate officials Ministry of Plan and Son Sann, seeking clarification on certain questions on which knowledge RKG position essential in connection with certain aspects aid program at this stage. My efforts over period several days see Acting SecState Foreign Affairs Phurissara, Nhiek Tioulong and Minister Commerce Touch Kim have been unsuccessful and USAID Director Champaigne has similarly found his Cambodian counterparts unavailable.

3. I do not believe we can or should wait for requests for explanation on slow downs or inaction on various aspects of military and economic aid projects as some explanation or request for clarification from RKG will be required in some cases at early date. Some actions will be required to avoid new commitments and avoidable expenditures which it may be desirable to explain in advance. To do otherwise would create unnecessary air of mystery and possibly inflame Sihanouk’s suspicions. We should be allowed flexibility here in this regard and I should be allowed take initiative in such discussions with RKG officials through USAID and MAAG when such action seems desirable. Concur we should seek centralize RKG replies on economic aid matters at responsible level and would hope do so in Ministry Plan and with Son Sann.

Concur we should not at this stage initiate discussions with RKG on transitional measures needed in event termination aid programs. This would be taken as threat to end aid and be counter-productive.

Our proposals for courses of action for MAAG and USAID at this stage were set forth in Embtel 364 and Toaid 501,3 and additional action regarding other aspects of program are being recommended in separate tels, rationale for which is explained in Embtel 365.4

4. Most important at this stage is to avoid actions or statements which will set Sihanouk off on another outburst [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has just sent one of her entourage to me this morning to express her concern and displeasure at Sihanouk’s statements, advising me to be calm in order to avoid other outbursts and informing me Queen trying to exert calming influence on him. In view Sihanouk’s present state of mind and strong need to avoid [sending] him off on another flurry of statements, I do not believe it desirable at this stage to use with SecState Fon Affrs arguments set forth in the Dept’s tel 238 as guidance for responses to RKG queries on US attitudes and actions. Even my call on Phurissara for clarification carries some element of risk in arousing Sihanouk as conversation would undoubtedly be reported to him, but I do not see how I can avoid seeking from SecState Foreign Affairs further clarification RKG position. I would hope that delicate points of any conversation I might have with Nhiek Tioulong, to whom I could [garble—pass?] on some points made in Deptel 238, would not be drawn to Sihanouk’s attention at this time. Basic to all our actions and statements at this stage is necessity of avoiding pushing Sihanouk farther out on limb and thus making his retreat more difficult. Too drastic actions by us in halting aid programs during cooling off period could defeat efforts being made to bring him to his senses.

5. In light latest Sihanouk statements, I believe Dept should call in Nong Kimny and, without taking any position on aid programs at this time and except for denials US complicity Khmer Serei activities without making points outlined Deptel 238 (which would likely be reported to Sihanouk), seek from him same clarification I expect seek from SecState FonAff here. To recall me for consultation at this stage would probably be too drastic a step and might keep Sihanouk on edge waiting for other shoe to drop.

For the long run, it is my preliminary view: 1. That we cannot accept continuation any form of military aid without presence of US military mission in some form.

2. That it is obviously impossible for us to accept as condition for continuation of aid cessation of Khmer Serei broadcasts. KS activities are not relevant to our aid programs and we are not responsible for or involved in them. To acquiesce in application such condition would leave us open to Sihanouk’s blackmail, if our aid should continue, on every occasion some action of RTG or GVN might displease him. We should, of course, as in past make clear we oppose and deplore KS activities and would do what we could to put an end to them insofar as it lay within our capabilities.

Department’s efforts to put an end to KS activities appreciated. Cessation KS broadcasts would at least give better hope of cooling Sihanouk off and thus allow moderating influences and sobering realities to begin to work on him.

Country Team concurs.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, CINCPAC, and Vientiane.

1 See footnote 1, Document 114.

2 In telegram 366, November 16; the Embassy reported that Sihanouk held a press conference on November 16 to “clear up confusion in the minds of Anglo-Saxon correspondents.” Sihanouk stated that as of December 31 U.S. aid would be terminated since Khmer Serei broadcasts had resumed from South Vietnam. Should the broadcasts stop and the United States wish to continue aid, Cambodia would accept “equipment aid” for such things as roads, bridges, schools, but no commercial, financial, or a military aid mission would be accepted. “Equipment aid” must be given without conditions. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB)

3 Both dated November 16. (Ibid.)

4 Dated November 16. (Ibid.)

117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 117. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, November 20, 1963, 8:24 p.m.

253. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtels 381, 382, 383, 384.1

1. On basis your recommendation and Hilsman’s talk Nov. 20 with Nong Kimny,2 Dept. concurs U.S. should immediately agree to Cambodian request. Although agree we should conduct negotiations so as to preserve best relations with Cambodia possible under circumstances, any delay in beginning talks or stalling during them would neither be in keeping with dignity of U.S. or defensible before U.S. Congress and public.

2. Dept. is cabling separately text of first person note which you should deliver under instructions soonest.3

3. In delivering note, you should make the following points with respect to charges against U.S. and investigation of them:

The President has a high regard for Prince Sihanouk and does not want any impairment of relations with him. He has therefore, himself, looked into the matter and he can find no evidence whatever of any complicity or involvement on the part of the United States Government or any of its officers. Therefore, if Prince Sihanouk has any evidence to the contrary the President would like to have it. The United States has of course given a variety of arms and communications equipment to the Vietnamese and Thai Governments just as it has to the Cambodians. Therefore, to be meaningful the evidence must be specific—exactly when and where did the Americans give the arms and radios as alleged? What were the names of the Americans alleged to have given this equipment? What instructions were these Americans alleged to have given to the recipients? If arms were received from Americans, what evidence is there that they were given for any purpose other than those related to the normal strategic hamlet program in South Viet-Nam and subsequently misappropriated by recipients? Etc.?

Johnson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah and Hilsman; cleared in draft by U. Alexis Johnson and Bromley Smith at the White House; and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for Secretary Rusk who was in Honolulu.

1 In these telegrams, all November 20, the Embassy reported on the formal notification it had received from Cambodia on termination of aid. In telegram 381, the Embassy sent the translated text of the note that claimed proof of U.S. complicity with the Khmer Serei, announced cessation of aid, asked for bilateral negotiations to bring about termination, and stated that diplomatic relations would be maintained. (Ibid.) In telegram 382, Sprouse described his discussion with Acting Secretary of State Phurissa upon receipt of the note. (Ibid.) In telegram 383, Sprouse recommended that the United States “meet head-on and forthrightly Sihanouk’s flimsy charges” and work patiently to reestablish better relations. (Ibid.) In telegram 384, the Embassy summarized the specific Cambodian charges of Khmer Serei activity and alleged U.S. and South Vietnamese complicity. (Ibid., POL CAMB-US)

2 On November 20, Assistant Secretary Hilsman called in Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny. Hilsman denied the charges of U.S. complicity and stated that the United States could not control South Vietnam or Thailand. Hilsman told the Ambassador that Cambodia was about to throw away the opportunity provided by Diem’s overthrow for better relations with South Vietnam. Hilsman left to talk to the President on the phone and then returned to his discussion. He informed Nong Kimny that the President asked what the United States could do to assure Sihanouk that the charges were false and preposterous. Nong Kimny suggested that the situation would improve in time and assured Hilsman that termination of U.S. aid would not mean that Cambodia would fall into the Communist camp. (Telegram 254 to Phnom Penh, November 20; ibid., AID (US) CAMB)

3 In telegram 252 to Phnom Penh, November 20. (Ibid.)

118. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 118. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)Source

Washington, November 21, 1963, 11:03 a.m.

Harriman told Hilsman he had a feeling Sprouse was not a good Amb. He said he doesn’t seem to have any communication with Sihanouk at all. Harriman said he was afraid we messed things up and he was unhappy about all of this. Harriman said if this country goes communist it doesn’t make sense.

Hilsman said he had had a long conversation with Nong Kimny1 who is close to Sihanouk. Nong Kimny is saying we are paying for the Eisenhower Administration and their inability to control the agency.

Harriman said they were doing things against Sihanouk. They were doing things that looked suspicious. He said it was crudely handled.

Hilsman said that Kimny said there is not going to be a break in relations and they were not going communist. In effect, he was saying we may be back very soon to restore aid. Hilsman said he had a suspicion there is a fair chance that when negotiations begin he will say they don’t want to break relations.

Hilsman asked Harriman if he knew Howard Riggins. He said he was on the policy planning staff. Hilsman said Howard and his wife are charming and are bilingual. He wrote a book on Ceylon. He has experience in Asian matters. More than this, he is a Quaker and has sympathy and understanding. Hilsman said the next time he had the opportunity, he wanted the Gov to meet Riggins.

Harriman said he had accepted Sprouse but got the feeling he didn’t seem to have any contact with Sihanouk at all.

Hilsman said Acheson was never satisfied with his relations with Sihanouk. He never had a talk with Sihanouk. Hilsman said he was very dissatisfied.

Harriman said he never told him that. He asked Hilsman who told him this.

Hilsman said he was very happy about his reception but unhappy that he never had a talk with Sihanouk himself. Hilsman said Forrestal was on his way to Saigon and what he would like for him to do is stop off at Phnom Penh and then have Acheson go a week or ten days later.

Harriman said that maybe Mike could do this.2

[Here follows a brief discussion of Indonesian-Malaysian relations.]

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

1 See footnote 2, Document 117.

2 In a November 18 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, the subject of which Forrestal called “Thoughts on the Situation in the Far East,” Forrestal informed Bundy of preliminary discussions with Acheson about a visit to Cambodia. The portion of the memorandum on Cambodia reads:

“In Cambodia Sihanouk has been neglected by the West for the past thirteen months; and being a typical Asian leader, he is beginning to flail about. It seems to me imperative that we make some personal gesture toward him soon. If we do not, we may have to make some very much more expensive gestures to salvage the West’s position.

“First on my list would be to send some appropriate official (or semi-official) visitors to Sihanouk fairly soon. I have mentioned the problem to Dean Acheson; and he has said that he would be happy to visit Cambodia in January provided he was not given an impossible task to perform.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, MV Forrestal, 11/62–11/63)

119. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 119. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Cambodia—Late Developments

REFERENCE

Mr. Bromley Smith’s Telephone Call Today1

Aid

Ambassador Sprouse delivered to the Acting Foreign Secretary today the note informing the Cambodian Government of our agreement to commence bilateral conversations on the termination of American aid programs.2

Neutrality

Wire services report that Prince Norodom Sihanouk intends to relaunch his proposal of August 1962 for a conference of the Geneva Powers to guarantee the neutrality of Cambodia. The only official information on this possibility we have received so far is a telegram from our Embassy at Phnom Penh, reporting that according to the French Embassy there the Cambodian Foreign Minister intends to circulate a note today or tomorrow proposing such a conference.3 Our Embassy adds that Phnom Penh Radio this morning broadcast a report that Sihanouk is going to make such a proposal, although the Embassy has not yet received any note from the Foreign Ministry on this subject. Formulation of the Department’s position necessarily awaits study of the expected note; we saw many difficulties in agreeing to such a conference when originally proposed last year or in participating in an international guarantee of Cambodia’s neutrality.4

John McKisson5

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Arzac and cleared by Koren and Hilsman.

1 No record of this call has been found.

2 As reported in telegram 392 from Phnom Penh, November 21. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB)

3 Not further identified.

4 Not included in this summary, but arriving at the Department at 10:55 a.m. on November 21, was telegram 394 from Phnom Penh, in which the Embassy reported on a conversation between MAAG Chief General Taber and Defense Minister Lon Nol. Lon Nol assured Taber that Cambodians were nationalists and would never become Communists. If Communist strength increased, Cambodia would take the necessary action, including perhaps “calling on the West for help.” Lon Nol also stated that Cambodians were friends of the United States. The Embassy considered Lon Nol’s professions of friendship as evidence of a reservoir of good will in FARK and reassurance that Sihanouk’s policies were beginning to cause potential opposition in the Cambodian armed forces. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US-CAMB)

5 McKisson signed for Read above Read’s typed signature.

120. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 120. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, November 25, 1963, 7:08 p.m.

263. For Forrestal. CINCPAC for POLAD. Re your visit Phnom Penh. Sihanouk’s gestures in our present tragedy1 (personal message, declaration of three days national mourning and designation of Kanthol to represent him at funeral ceremonies) may offer special opportunity to ease somewhat present tensions in our relations with Cambodia. Accordingly we desire take fullest advantage your visit. As Presidential adviser on FE matters, you should see Sihanouk and also such close advisers, e.g., Penn Nouth, Nhiek Tioulong Sonn San as Ambassador Sprouse recommends.

When you see Sihanouk suggest you reiterate how deeply touched President Johnson was at his message and draw on your personal knowledge of President Kennedy’s own feelings toward Sihanouk. You may reemphasize that he will continue to receive same full sympathy and consideration as before. In our note on aid we indicated that request for withdrawal of our aid does not alter our desire to maintain warm and friendly relations with RKG or diminish our interest in maintenance of Cambodia’s independence and neutrality. Assure him our assistance is being withdrawn without recrimination and with due attention to minimizing harmful effects therefrom. Assure him also that the new administration is as determined as previous administration that Chicoms shall not establish hegemony in Southeast Asia. If, as likely, Sihanouk brings up desire for neutrality guarantees you should say we will study any proposal sympathetically and carefully. He is aware of the difficulties that his previous proposal posed for us, but we desire to be as responsive as possible and it is this attitude that will motivate our consideration of his new proposal. (FYI only. In view of evidence that smuggling from Cambodia is important source of Viet Cong supplies, we may find it desirable to agree to neutrality proposals if they are otherwise manageable and can be used to obtain effective sealing of Cambodian-Vietnam border. End FYI.)

Recalling Hilsman’s conversation with Nong Kimny (Deptel 254 to Phnom Penh, 845 to Saigon)2 inform Sihanouk from your personal knowledge how concerned President Kennedy was about Sihanouk’s unfounded suspicions of US connection with plotting against him and his government. You may say that President Johnson shares this concern. You might add that President Kennedy had personally assured himself no evidence exists of any involvement of the US or its officers with Khmer Serei. You may draw on Deptel 253 to Phnom Penh, info 844 Saigon3 and also Saigon’s 1065 to Dept, 140 to Phnom Penh.4 Say that in interest of good relations between us it only reasonable we should have explicit information on any alleged evidence US complicity. We feel sure we can refute completely any such charges and we should be given an opportunity to do so. Tell Sihanouk that we consider tranquillity SEA and good relations between its neighboring states of paramount importance. We deplore therefore the Khmer Serei provocative broadcasts. If Sihanouk asks what we are doing about them you may say we are doing what we can to locate and silence transmitters. Be receptive to any indication Sihanouk would like help in his own efforts to find them. Make clear if need be that although we are no more able to give commands to Thai and Vietnamese than we are to Cambodians we will do what we can. FYI. In this connection see Deptel 837 to Bangkok, 262 to Phnom Penh.5 End FYI.

Finally, we hope Sihanouk shares our belief that charges and counter-charges between states and unbridled public accusations can only lead to turmoil on which communism thrives. We are sure that he does not wish to see his country or SEA in general a breeding ground for communism and it is our fervent hope that he will exercise restraint and thereby contribute to improved atmosphere in the area.

If question aid arises and context seems opportune, you should tell him (without commitment) he should not hesitate return to seek such aid from US if Cambodia finds itself in difficulties because assistance is not forthcoming from France or other non-communist countries.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Koren; cleared by Arzac, Hilsman, and Robert Komer of the NSC Staff; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

1 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22. Forrestal had cabled Washington asking to return to Washington. Both McGeorge Bundy and Hilsman asked him to go to Phnom Penh, noting that “President Kennedy would have wanted you to carry on.” (Telegram 859 to Saigon, November 23; ibid.)

2 See footnote 2, Document 117.

3 Document 117.

4 In telegram 1065 from Saigon, November 23, the Embassy reported that a review of available information on Khmer Serei activities in South Vietnam indicated the following general picture:

“Son Ngoc Thanh has for past several years (probably since 1959) supported group of about 200 rebels, half of whom are armed, deployed along border in Phuoc Long-Binh Long-Tay Ninh area. Group was apparently used by GVN to acquire intelligence (with little success) and to provide escorts for deliveries of unidentified packages (possibly opium) across border. Under Diem regime group was supported partly by GVN and partly through contributions solicited from ethnic Cambodians living in Viet Nam. Thanh’s brother Son Thai Nguyen was also subsidized by former GVN and worked among Khmer Krom in delta supplementing Thanh’s work and counteracting to some extent work of Khmer Kampuchea Krom (KKK), Cambodian irredentist movement supported clandestinely by RKG. While no hard evidence available, there are grounds for believing GVN support to KS included radio equipment.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMBS.VIET)

5 In telegram 837 to Bangkok, November 25, the Department suggested that the change of government in South Vietnam and withdrawal of U.S. aid to Cambodia called for closer U.S.-Thai consultation. Ambassador Graham Martin was to discuss the situation with the highest effective level Thai officials and solicit Thai cooperation for dealing with Sihanouk. (Ibid., POL 1 FAR EAST-US)

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 121. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 26, 1963.

416. CINCPAC for POLAD. Viewed in domestic Cambodian context, Sihanouk’s recent actions and statements, notably renouncement US aid but also to certain extent his nationalization measures and pronounced leaning toward Communist bloc, could awaken political consciousness and create active opposition in this country, where for all practical purposes, neither has existed for years, if ever. At moment only few signs indicate this process may have begun. However, there are more signs that Sihanouk’s actions are neither fully understood nor approved by educated class, which for most part lives in Phnom Penh and is also found in armed forces and government service throughout the country. It is same group which individually will feel major economic impact of cessation US aid programs and Sihanouk’s nationalization and other economic measures. They will witness, firsthand, consequences in armed forces, commerce, schools and development projects, as well as to their own urbanized style of life and private fortunes. If, as seems reasonable possibility, substantial portion of this group proceeds from an attitude of not fully understanding and not approving Sihanouk’s behavior to one of positive disagreement, result, in terms of domestic political structure, may be both unprecedented and at this point unpredictable.

Sihanouk himself, as if aware of these reactions and this prospect, has in true demagogic style reached over heads of educated and propertied by holding November 19 Special National Congress, which traditionally is forum of and for masses rather than leaders. Significant that Sihanouk chose this occasion to surface two Khmer Serei agents and, in effect, to announce his decision to cancel US aid programs, all in manner which could only have been calculated to charge mass emotions at risk of shocking less primitive people of Phnom Penh. We have [garble] reports that this emotionally charged meeting and Sihanouk’s public build up of imminent danger KS cum SVN invasion Cambodia have aroused real fear among Cambodians, even to point some express fear for foreigners in Cambodia, particularly Americans, because of Sihanouk’s appeal to masses coupled with inflammatory statements against US. In marathon-like speeches Sihanouk has publicly accused US of plotting against him for years and of direct involvement in plot with Khmer Serei and GVN to overthrow him and has described US aid as humiliating, irritating and source danger to Cambodia, which cannot in honor continue to receive it. His public reiteration these accusations day after day during past two weeks has inevitably had effect on man in street.

[5-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] More than ever, one such source of frustration to the better-motivated leaders would be that of border incidents involving South Vietnamese or Thai armed forces. I recommend therefore that Dept, in consultation with Saigon, consider what measures could be taken by US military authorities Saigon, without requiring any approach to GVN, which could reduce to minimum possibility further border incidents, most especially during coming weeks as we engage in negotiations with RKG (including MND) officials regarding phasing out US aid programs. We are now receiving notes from Foreign Office charging SVN violations border by planes and armed units between October 10 and November 11 resulting in deaths three Cambodians. Continuation these incidents can only provide support Sihanouk’s demagogic appeal to masses over heads of moderate elements and could lead to further unpredictable action by him.

Above analysis deals with extremely sensitive situation, public knowledge of which could be extremely damaging under any circumstances, and disastrous if attributed to USG. We are therefore severely limiting distribution this message here and urge similar procedure by addressees.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC. No time of transmission is on the source text; the telegram was received at 8:58 a.m.

122. Memorandum of Conversation 122. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 27, 1963, 3:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

United States-Cambodian Relations

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Prince Norodom Kantol, Prime Minister of Cambodia

His Excellency Nong Kimny, Ambassador of Cambodia

Mr. Roger Hilsman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

The Prince expressed condolences on the death of President Kennedy, and said that Prince Sihanouk had sent him, even though airline connections prevented his attending the religious services, to underline the friendship the government and people of Cambodia hold for the United States.

The President thanked the Prince for his kind thoughts and for the long trip that he had undertaken. The United States was grateful and valued its friendship with Cambodia.

The President asked if the Prince had any matters of substance that he wished to discuss. The Prince said that he had none; that he had come only to express condolences.

The President said that President Kennedy had had a high regard for Prince Sihanouk and that he, President Johnson, shared that regard. The President hoped the friendly relations between the two governments would continue.

One thing, however, the President wished to say and that was concerning the charges of United States complicity in the Khmer Serei plotting. President Kennedy had personally investigated these charges and had found they were baseless. President Kennedy had given Prince Sihanouk his categorical denial of any complicity of any United States Government agencies or officers. President Johnson had also asked for a report and had been assured to his satisfaction that there was no complicity on the part of any American Government department or officer, and he, too, categorically denied the charges.

The President said that if the Cambodians had any real evidence of complicity on the part of any American—apart from the false charges of traitors—the United States had a right to see that evidence so it could be investigated. With a smile the President said that there were so many things in the world for which we were responsible that had to be explained to our friends that it was unbearable to have to explain things for which we had no responsibility whatsoever.

Prince Kantol said that he noted President Johnson’s statements, and could assure him that they would be given careful study in Cambodia.

The meeting ended with an exchange of pleasantries.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-US. Confidential. Drafted by Hilsman and approved in the White House on December 2. Prime Minister Kantol was attending President Kennedy’s funeral. In a cable to Forrestal, Hilsman reported that the meeting between President Johnson and Kantol was arranged with “herculean efforts.” (Telegram 275 to Phnon Penh, November 27; ibid., AID (US) CAMB)

1 After the meeting, Kantol met with Harriman who expressed surprise and shock at Sihanouk’s charges of a U.S. relationship with the Khmer Serei. Kantol assured Harriman that Cambodia would remain independent and not become Communist. Harriman stated that if Cambodia wished to terminate U.S. aid, the United States considered that “all right,” but it could not accept false charges against it. Harriman urged Kantol to recommend to Sihanouk that he speak with Forrestal in order to dismiss the charges. The two men also discussed the border friction between Cambodia and South Vietnam. Harriman stated it was not his intention to take sides or allot blame, rather he offered to help alleviate the tension in any possible way. (Telegram 269 to Phnom Penh, November 26; ibid.)

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 30, 1963, 7:20 p.m.

435. Dept for Harriman, Hilsman, White House pass Bundy. Bangkok for Ambassador. Saigon for Ambassador. From Forrestal.

Strongly urge we make immediate and intense effort locate and suppress KS radio and political activities Son Ngoc Thanh. Believe GVN willing cooperate, but we must make absolutely clear that this is our policy and in interest SVN and free world. Generals Kim and Don specifically asked Trueheart and myself that US make its position clear this point.

If cessation of jamming by RKG required in order locate transmitter, believe they will cooperate, but there must be very close coordination between Embassies Saigon and Phnom Penh in order avoid misunderstandings and failure of effort which could be dangerous. Would be ideal if radio could be located by other intelligence.

RKG going through extremely emotional and tense period brought about by accumulation of irritants. Trend must be reversed very soon to avoid unforeseeable consequences. Sihanouk’s ill-advised request for termination US aid is bound produce additional friction as implementing negotiations continue. Therefore it is essential that US begin immediately a series of actions designed provide continuing reminder our basic good will. Ambassador strongly concurs.

First and, I hope, easiest step is real effort improve relations SVN.

Second step is serious and essentially favorable consideration Sihanouk conference proposal. Realize many mechanical traps exist but I am impressed with essential political realism underlying Sihanouk’s theatrical demand. He did not emphasize guarantees this time, merely recognition of Cambodian neutrality and placed his hopes on an effective ICC which would have complete support his government unlike ICC in Laos. He recognized need firmly to exclude extraneous questions such as SVN before meeting and assured us of no further Cambodian polemics. We should answer his proposal favorably and soon.

In meantime aid cessation will hurt. Do not believe Sihanouk will give us reasonable opening to resume in near future on any but unacceptable terms. Therefore important chivvy French into some new gesture in economic and military field. Eventually and perhaps before long we may be able come back with much reduced program.

But during period of withdrawal there will be grave dangers of misunderstanding compounded by our own problems with Congress and US opinion. Some of these have already started.

In short all is not lost here but matters have slipped to edge of precipice.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB-S.VIET. Secret; Limit Distribution. Received at 11:36 p.m. and repeated to Bangkok and Saigon. Passed to the White House at 12:20 a.m. on December 1.

124. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 124. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, November 30, 1963, 8 p.m.

437. I accompanied Forrestal to audience with Sihanouk 11 o’clock this morning at Palace. Prince seemed unusually nervous and somewhat excitable but showed his usual courtesy throughout hour and quarter exchange. Two major points were discussed, his troubles with SVN and his ardent hopes for international conference (subject septel).1

After opening courtesies, Forrestal explained that he had come Phnom Penh because of President Kennedy’s great personal interest in Cambodia and leadership shown by Prince. President Kennedy had been gravely concerned at the charges against United States recently made by him especially since had made a personal investigation of them and given his own assurances that they were baseless. President Johnson had directed Forrestal in Saigon immediately after the tragedy in the US to continue with mission and to add President Johnson’s own assurances of continued sincere US concern for the independence and neutrality of Cambodia and his strong desire for continued friendly relations with Sihanouk and his government.

Sihanouk replied that he had never doubted sincerity of President Kennedy or of USG despite differences in political viewpoint toward problems of SEA. Khmer Serei did not represent real threat his regime since they had no support within Cambodia. But their activities were continuing offense to Cambodian people who resented attacks upon their sovereignty. Although US might not be directly involved, fact remained that KS broadcasts and Son Ngoc Thanh activities in SVN continued. Sihanouk could not believe we were without influence there, and could not understand why we and GVN permitted such activities which only helped Communists and enemies of Cambodia.

Forrestal pointed out that for some time US had experienced great difficulties convincing Diem regime in SVN take sensible positions in foreign affairs. Although we had no direct evidence of KS activities in SVN, we had tried hard to persuade GVN to locate and suppress them. New regime in Saigon gave greater hope. Forrestal discussed problem with principal leaders Revolutionary Council earlier this week and had distinct impression they honestly unaware of location KS transmitters. They seemed anxious to cooperate in effort to locate and suppress broadcasts and make effort to neutralize political activities Son Ngoc Thanh. They were also anxious to seek ways of achieving détente in SVN/RKG relations generally.

Sihanouk said he too had great hopes for new regime in Saigon and had made arrangements send three-man delegation headed by Son Sann to open quiet negotiations. This frustrated by disclosures Khmer Serei agent, Preap Inn, which he could not ignore. (Yesterday Nhiek Tioulong and Penn Nouth said break-off was result publication Saigon press of coup rumors in Phnom Penh.)

Forrestal asked if Saigon authorities attempted locate radio, and neutralize Son Ngoc Thanh, would Sihanouk cooperate by suspending jamming KS radio and avoid further attacks on GVN for few weeks. Then it would be possible revive bilateral conversations.

Sihanouk replied he would be happy suspend jamming and observed that all of his five-point request of SVN would have been met if radio silenced and political activities ceased since other points not a problem. Negotiations could then be resumed.2

In separate conversations Forrestal and I had yesterday with elder statesmen Penn Nouth and Nhiek Tioulong, during which Forrestal acquainted them with general trend his conversations in Saigon and impressions of desire new regime be responsive to efforts improve Cambodian-SVN relations, both Penn Nouth and Nhiek Tioulong emphasized that if Khmer Serei radio silenced and Son Ngoc Thanh activities ended, RKG would be most willing resume conversations for improvement relations between two countries. We had impression that they consider these two first steps essential to any effort improve relations.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 3:02 a.m. on December 1 and repeated to Paris, Bangkok, London, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 438 from Phnom Penh, Sprouse reported separately on this topic. Sprouse noted that Sihanouk emphasized that what he most desired was U.S. support of his neutrality proposal. Sihanouk suggested that a newly empowered and enlarged ICC could ensure effective control of the South Vietnamese-Cambodian border and thus reassure the United States about Viet Cong infiltration into South Vietnam. Sihanouk preferred a conference along the lines of the 1961–1962 Geneva Conference on Laos, to be held not at Geneva or Phnom Penh (for cost reasons), but perhaps at Bandung, Indonesia. (Ibid., POL 27–13 CAMB)

2 In telegram 436 from Phnom Penh, November 30, Sprouse reported separately on the discussion with Sihanouk on the termination of U.S. aid. Sihanouk stressed a number of times that the termination did not mean a change in U.S.-Cambodian friendship. Once relations were established on a more solid basis, a new formula could be found to provide aid without a large U.S. aid mission. (Ibid., AID (US) CAMB)

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, December 1, 1963, 6:04 p.m.

863. In view of Cambodian proposal to UK and USSR of new conference on Cambodia,1 Department believes it important to commence process consultation with Thailand and South Viet-Nam on this subject. UK has solicited Department’s reaction to its proposed reply to RKG which would accede to Cambodian proposal of a conference. We have told UK that we wished to consult with RTG and GVN before they replied. We also pointed out that we could not participate as long as Cambodian charges against US remain outstanding, particularly in view of indirect repetition of charges in RKG note proposing conference.

Embassies Bangkok and Saigon are instructed approach RTG and GVN at appropriate high level conveying US views as indicated below and soliciting their reactions urgently:

1. While U.S. does not look forward to new conference we believe it will be difficult avoid conference at this time. British and French already inclined agree and Communist Bloc will surely do so. India, Canada, Burma and Laos cannot be expected exert effective influence against conference.

2. Failure obtain some international statute at this time would probably be followed by rapidly increasing Cambodian reliance on Bloc which might give Cambodia Communist guaranty. Sihanouk’s precipitate actions and statements indicate feeling of desperation which motivates him. With termination US aid free world influence has declined.

3. It would be extremely dangerous risk free world security in SEA on a gamble that situation will change within Cambodia if left alone. Moreover, as indicated Deptel 837,2 free world has great stake in South Viet-Nam and Laos which would be undermined if Cambodia were left open to increasing Communist influence.

4. There are considerable advantages in going to a conference and seeking to mold the result, rather than becoming isolated by refusing participate and removing all restraint on Sihanouk.

5. Agreement to participate does not involve commitment in advance to any formula contrary to their national interest. While we would seek to reach agreement, we would not accept any terms merely for sake of agreement. We should have at least certain essentials agreed to with Sihanouk in advance such as no consideration of SVN.

6. If agreement could be reached, free world could maintain considerable political influence in Cambodia through international neutralization machinery, whereas a Cambodia dependent on Bloc support and guarantees would afford little opportunity for free world influence.

7. US commitments to Thailand and South Viet-Nam and determination to meet them would, in any case, remain absolutely unimpaired and our ability to play an effective role in maintaining peace and security in Southeast Asia would be enhanced by satisfactory Cambodian neutralization statute.

In course making above presentation, emphasize US has not come to any final conclusion regarding a conference, and as an ally, US desires consult and coordinate with RTG and GVN but feels obliged speak frankly. You should say US believes that on balance it would be more to advantage US, RTG and GVN to agree to conference than to become isolated by refusing, particularly when refusal may well result in further precipitate reduction free world influence in Cambodia. We hope RTG and GVN will agree but, if not, we would welcome constructive alternative ideas. We are not asking either Thailand or South Viet-Nam to agree in advance to any formula that may be produced in conference. The various possible formulae are subjects to be negotiated and, in any case, there should be continuing intimate exchange of views between US and RTG and GVN on all facets of problem beginning now. Finally, you should indicate that while idea of new Geneva type conference not appealing, nevertheless if in long run the Geneva formula serves to stabilize situation former French-Indo-China, it will be in interest of free world.

Because of urgency, we solicit Thai and Vietnamese views at earliest possible date so that UK can reply suggesting 1962 powers be invited. Important not to delay in view affirmative attitude Communist side.

For Bangkok—We anticipate strongest resistance from Thailand which will not wish accord ICC any role on Thailand—Cambodia border. We have in mind that possibly some special formula might be worked out with respect to Cambodian frontier with Thailand, perhaps under UN auspices rather than ICC. With this in mind, you should, if possible, combine this approach to RTG with démarche to be made under instructions Deptel 837. After suggesting Thai investigation Khmer Serei in cooperation Gussing Mission, you could lead into subject possible conference by pointing out that successful Khmer Serei investigation with Gussing Mission’s blessing would vastly improve free world position with respect to proposed conference. If for any reason no conference should be held, free world position would be stronger for having demonstrated effectiveness of Gussing Mission in dealing with Sihanouk’s charges. If a conference should take place free world would be in stronger position to insist on provisions protecting Thailand from unwanted ICC interference.

For Saigon—In view forthcoming attitude being taken by new government, we are hopeful GVN will take flexible attitude toward conference; nevertheless you will, of course, bear down heavily on the advantages of having a strong ICC active along Cambodia border with Viet-Nam and Laos for purpose sealing against Viet Cong.

Since above drafted, Phnom Penh’s 4353 and 4384 received. In strictest confidence you may draw upon applicable portions these messages reflecting Sihanouk’s attitude toward conference.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah; cleared by Koren, Czyzak, and Harriman; and approved by Hilsman. Also sent to Saigon as telegram 884 and repeated to London, Paris, Vientiane, Ottawa, Phnom Penh, New Delhi, and Moscow.

1 On November 24, Cambodia formally requested the co-chairmen of the 1954 Geneva Conference on Indochina to convene a 14-nation conference in a neutral Asian nation in order to consider increasing the resources of the ICC to better assure the neutralization of Cambodia. See American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, p. 742.

2 See footnote 5, Document 120.

3 Document 123.

4 See footnote 1, Document 124.

126. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 126. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

As events accelerate in Cambodia, there has been a fuzzing of a series of issues. Now it would make sense for us to separate out just what issues Snookie wants us to deal with and evaluate whether we are in a position to take action in a rational order of priority.

The following issues are of importance presently in our relations with Cambodia:

1. Khmer Serei radio broadcasts probably emanating from South Viet-Nam.

2. The presence of Son Ngoc Thanh in South Viet-Nam and the freedom he enjoys in propagating anti-Sihanouk propaganda.

3. The termination of our aid: (a) what aid can be terminated immediately; (b) what aid should be phased out in a three to six months period; (c) the removal of Americans from Cambodia who are connected with our aid program.

4. A new conference under the 1954 Geneva Agreement which would officially “neutralize” Cambodia and leave the supervision of the neutralization to the ICC.

5. Diplomatic and border relations with South Viet-Nam.

6. Diplomatic and border relations with Thailand.

We are dealing with someone who obviously is in an emotional state. Therefore, the order of our actions should be geared to lessening the emotional burdens on Sihanouk as he sees them.

The most emotional, but certainly not the most significant issue, is broadcasting by the Khmer Serei radio. Evidence points to transmitters being located in South Viet-Nam. In Phnom Penh 437,1 Sihanouk said he would be happy to suspend jamming of Khmer Serei broadcasts if Saigon authorities were willing to attempt to locate the radio and to neutralize the utterances of Son Ngoc Thanh. We should act on this immediately and carefully coordinate the cessation of jamming with an investigation by Saigon. A telegram to Forrestal on November 15 stated that it might be possible without three days of jamming to locate any transmitters in South Viet-Nam. Since we have made an offer and Sihanouk has replied favorably, it would be an act of good faith to very quietly attempt to assess where these transmitters are in South Viet-Nam and at the same time obtain some assurances from the Generals in Saigon that Son Ngoc Thanh will be seriously limited in his activities and perhaps further that the South Viet-Namese Government disassociate itself from any of his actions.

At the same time we should be talking in Saigon about renewal of diplomatic relations and meeting Sihanouk’s conditions precedent since the present atmosphere is the closest thing to a détente between South Viet-Nam and Cambodia in quite some time.

A decision on whether or not we should react favorably to the reinstitution of a Geneva type conference should be made after we have tried to solve the Khmer Serei, Son Ngoc Thanh, and Cambodia and South Viet-Nam diplomatic relations problems. AID negotiations can plod ahead but should try not to rock the boat by avoiding “conflict” issues as much as possible.

Cliff

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret.

1 Document 124.

127. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 127. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 2, 1963.

Mac—

Forrestal didn’t get too far with Sihanouk, who apparently is determined to get rid of US aid missions, even though he might deign to permit some continued aid. But Sihanouk seems to be getting more reasonable, and determined not to break with us, since he still wants insurance against Chicoms.

Despite inevitable appearance of yielding to pressure, our problem remains that of keeping Sihanouk from committing suicide. So we ought to take advantage of advent of new Vietnam regime to press them to stop any Khmer Serei transmitting and muzzle Son Ngoc Thanh (as Forrestal proposes in Phnom Penh 435).1 Latest is that transmitter may not be in VN after all.

Geneva-type conference on Cambodian neutrality is trickier, even if Sihanouk seems to be relaxing on “guarantees.” But one may well be inevitable; Harriman and Hilsman think so too.

RWK

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret.

1 Document 123.

128. Memorandum for the Record 128. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, December 3, 1963.

SUBJECT

Daily White House Staff Meeting, 3 December 1963

1. Mr. Bundy presided throughout the meeting.

2. Cambodia. Bundy asked Komer and Alexander to check with the State Department to see what line they are going to take on a neutral Cambodia. Bundy said he had talked with Hilsman, who was most cooperative about the messages sent out without White House clearance.1 Bundy said this was fortunate because this morning Lodge had come in with some complaints, citing the importance of Cambodia to Vietnam.

There seems to be some difference of opinion about our policy toward a neutral Cambodia. Some of the military leaders in Vietnam have stated that a neutral Cambodia would be a plus factor. Other Vietnam militarists disagree, however. The same division apparently exists within our State Department. Bundy said there is a line to be followed here—implying a neutral Cambodia—but that it had to be very carefully developed and followed. In Forrestal’s absence, he put Komer pretty much in charge of the operation.

3. Vietnam. Bromley Smith, arriving late, asked Bundy if the Vietnam situation had been discussed. Bundy said it had, referring to the discussion on Cambodia, which seemed in fact to deal with Vietnam only peripherally. Bundy commented that his main action had been to identify (Komer) who would get blamed if things went wrong in Vietnam, as he thought they would.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Cambodia.]

WYS

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman’s Staff Group, Dec. 1963, WH Staff Memos, T–213–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by William Y. Smith.

1 See Document 125.

129. Editorial Note 129. Editorial Note

In telegram 1107 from Saigon, December 4, Ambassador Lodge sent Harriman his opinion of the proposed conference on Cambodia and its impact on Vietnam and the conduct of the war there. He predicted the conference would be “disastrous” to the war effort because it would encourage neutralism in South Vietnam, open up other Southeast Asian questions such as the unification of Vietnam, and give the French (who would certainly be participants in the conference) an opportunity to “hamper all of our major policy objectives here.” Regarding Cambodia specifically, he noted: “An agreement to protect South Viet-Nam’s neutralists from infiltration from Cambodia which was actually enforced by an efficacious border patrol would have merit, but I have seen no serious suggestion that there is even a possibility of this. If there were a possibility of it, a conference would probably not be necessary to bring it about.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

The full text of telegram 1107 is printed in volume I, pages 661–663.

130. Memorandum of Conversation 130. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, December 4, 1963, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary

Assistant Secretary for European Affairs William R. Tyler

Frazier Meade, EUR/BNA

UK British Ambassador Sir David Ormsby Gore

The Secretary raised the subject of Cambodia and gave a brief summary of Sihanouk’s actions towards the United States and its aid program. Sir David asked what the United States attitude would be towards Sihanouk’s requests for a conference. Would the United States let Sihanouk stew? The Secretary said it was important to make clear to Sihanouk that there could be no conference if it was merely to exchange polemics. We were inclined to accept the French suggestion to hold an experts’ meeting on the conference and we planned to get someone over quickly. Procedurally, we ought first to decide what should be the results of the conference, we should then negotiate these aims with the participants prior to the conference and then we should let the conference meet to ratify these goals. We would not agree to a conference if we could not get prior agreement on the desired results.1

Sir David said he thought his government would prefer the conference be attended by the full 14 participants rather than a smaller-sized conference of 9. The Secretary said a larger conference would drag the Thais in. He thought we could go a long way to meet Thailand’s doubts without involving them in the conference.

Concerning the level of the Cambodia Conference, the Secretary said he would oppose a foreign ministers’ meeting. Sir David said the British would oppose a conference being held in Indonesia. When the Secretary suggested Geneva, Sir David said he thought it would be necessary to agree on an Asian site in view of Cambodia’s requests.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Frazier Meade of EUR/BNA and approved in S on December 9. The meeting was held in the Secretary’s office. The source text is labeled “Part 1 of 6.”

1 In a December 6 memorandum to Bundy, Clifford Alexander commented on a summary of this meeting:

“The momentum over at State to go along with a conference is rapidly getting beyond redemption. In our race to the conference table no one to my knowledge has given one sound benefit which we might derive from such a gathering.

“The Secretary told the British Ambassador yesterday that we were inclined to agree to a conference ‘provided reasonable results could be obtained.’ Certainly we should not commit ourselves to anyone else before Mike gets back and gives us a first-hand report of just how upset our friends will be if we take this seemingly pointless step.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I)

131. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 131. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, December 7, 1963, 7 p.m.

473. CINCPAC for POLAD. Once we made known to Sihanouk our ability and willingness take steps locate Khmer Serei transmitters, our involvement in this matter entered new phase and we no longer in position simply say we would like be helpful but have no knowledge their location. Our ability locate transmitters if RKG stopped jamming conveyed by Forrestal to Sihanouk and elder statesmen Penn Nouth and Nhiek Tioulong.1 Our reservations this matter have been based on possibility, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] one or perhaps all Khmer Serei radios located Thailand and not uncertainty whether Thais would be as cooperative as SVN Generals in stopping broadcasts if we so requested. Question also in our mind has been what reply we would make to Sihanouk, if radios silenced, in event he should ask where we found them.

If radios located only SVN and if GVN agreed stop Khmer Serei broadcasts and halt Khmer Serei activities, these actions would contribute importantly to improvement relations between GVN and RKG and give hope of restoration diplomatic relations between two countries with obvious benefit our overall position SEA. This benefit would accrue also to SVN and Thailand.

In any event we have now revealed to Sihanouk that we have ability locate radios if he stops jamming. This he may do at any minute now or he may have already done it, even in absence direct request from us for cessation jamming on specified dates. If Khmer Serei broadcasts then continue, we should not be surprised if he airs entire story, including Forrestal’s approach to him on matter. Such publicity could make even more difficult improvement in relations between GVN & RKG. Should Sihanouk state publicly that US has failed to take promised action stop Khmer Serei broadcast after he had cooperated by suspending jamming, GVN might gain impression we are not entirely sincere in our assurances to them that we wished broadcasts to stop.

In view foregoing I consider all more urgent every effort be made halt broadcasts through direct approach to Thai Government, together with whatever actions at Saigon would be most effective without any further approach here to Sihanouk seeking cessation jamming.

If Khmer Serei broadcasts continue and if we do not agree participate in conference on Cambodian neutrality at a time when our aid programs are being terminated in manner neither expected nor desired by Sihanouk (this despite fact that he took initiative to bring this about), this combination of developments could easily lead Sihanouk to point of breaking relations with US with all consequences that might flow therefrom including increased commitment to Communist bloc. We do not find convincing [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] view that SVN, which has not found elimination of Viet Cong from SVN an easy task, could take on added job of eliminating “Viet Cong from Cambodia”, which would inevitably lead to added task of eliminating Cambodian military forces.

Thais are also equating dissident Cambodian radio broadcasts aimed at overthrow Cambodian Government with radio broadcast war of words between national radios Bangkok and Phnom Penh, which are hardly the same thing. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] we can not imagine what objective they have in mind which would warrant bringing situation in this area to such a dangerous stage, with serious consequences for them as for us. If their purpose is the overthrow of Sihanouk, we firmly believe Thai methods will, in present circumstances, have opposite effect. It seems to us patently in our own national interest to convince RTG of this.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–S.VIET. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

1 See Document 124.

132. Editorial Note 132. Editorial Note

On December 9, the Phnom Penh Domestic Radio Service, a government agency, broadcast a communiqué in Cambodian. The U.S. Foreign Broadcast Radio Service attributed the statement to the Ministry of Information and translated it as follows:

“Thanks to divine protection for our Kampuchea, all the enemies of Cambodia suffer complete destruction. Ngo Dinh Diem and Ngo Dinh Nhu were killed by bullets. Their friend Sarit Thanarat, who mistreated Cambodia incessantly, has just met with sudden death. Moreover, the great boss of these aggressors shared the same fate. So we have seen that those who want to mistreat Cambodia and who despise our venerated Samdech Aou will not be able to live long and will certainly be destroyed. As for traitors Son Ngoc Thanh and Sam Sary, they will certainly die a sudden death like dogs within 15 days.

“The people from all walks of society and all circles throughout the country feel elated, not out of enmity but simply at the end of persons who mistreated us. This joy reigns among the Khmers in all corners of the country as they are informed of the country’s victory.

“In view of this, it is necessary for all citizens to unite more closely as one behind Samdech Aou, our Chief of State. We Khmers must unite, more than ever before, behind the throne and Samdech Aou. Unity is more valuable now than ever before.

“We beg to ask our dear compatriots who want to celebrate this occasion to come to the Men Square where orchestras will play at night beginning tonight and where the national radio will record the celebration and broadcast it immediately.

“We beg to inform the compatriots that during the past few days, our venerated, our dear, our man in whom we place our confidence has sworn to the children that if Sarit Thanarat, who mistreated us, dies, civil servants throughout the kingdom will be given a one-week leave. But because our country is busy achieving economic reforms, this leave is cancelled.

“However, Samdech Aou authorizes all government services and civil servants throughout the kingdom to have two-hour leave everyday. That is, work hours will be from 0900 hours beginning Monday this week for a period of two weeks so as to permit the children to dance and amuse themselves. Beginning tonight, and every night, there will be musical programs in the Men Square, and the celebration will be recorded and broadcast by the national radio.” (Text in Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I)

On December 9, Prince Sihanouk gave a speech that was subsequently broadcast on December 10. The Foreign Broadcast Service translated an excerpt of Sihanouk’s remarks as follows:

“Now our people, especially our youth, are delighted over the death of Sarit Thanarat, baneful Premier of the Thai Government and our No. 1 enemy. Sarit’s death is a thing that shows the Divine Power, the power of our ancient kings, who protect our Kampuchea [Cambodia]. We can see that the power of our ancient kings is most efficacious: that is why, in only a month and a half—once every two weeks—the people who headed those countries which are enemies of our independent, neutral Cambodia have been destroyed, dead one after another, even while they were displeased with us, were mistreating us, and were constantly making us unhappy.

“Those who headed these three countries—some are truly wicked, others a little wicked or wicked enough—are gone to the other world. We had only three enemies, and the leaders of these three countries all died and went to hell, all three, in a period of a month and a half. They are meeting there in a conference of the Free World’s SEATO. If the Free World does not believe and continues mistreating us, we are convinced that the Divine Power will render justice to the good people and punish the wicked ones.” (Text enclosed in airgram A–339 from Phnom Penh, December 19; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 CAMB. The brackets are in the source text.)

133. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Dean Acheson 133. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Dean AchesonSource

Washington, December 9, 1963, 12:25 p.m.

Harriman told Acheson that the most extraordinary thing had happened to Acheson’s FE friend.1

Acheson said yes he knew; Dean Rusk had called him.

Harriman said sometimes they get out local things on the radio and change it when it goes to the world.

Acheson said that Phil2 ought to go right away and ask that this be disavowed or he should come home.

Harriman said he is to go up and demand a repudiation of any reference of these remarks to President Kennedy. In addition, he should take exception to the celebration in a barbaric manner of the deaths of the Heads of Government that are accepted by the civilized world. Point out that this will affect US/RKG relations.3

Dean Acheson agreed with this.

Harriman said he had been promoting the idea of Acheson’s going out there. This means it will be impossible for him to go out.

Acheson said he would see the Gov tomorrow night at dinner.

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

1 Reference is to Sihanouk.

2 Ambassador Sprouse.

3 In telegram 308 to Phnom Penh, December 9, the Department instructed Sprouse to protest the radio communiqué ordering celebrations of the deaths of Thai and South Vietnamese leaders and, by implication, President Kennedy. Sprouse was to point out in strongest terms that such uncivilized and barbaric “celebrations” would strongly affect U.S.-Cambodian relations. Sprouse was also informed that Ambassador Charles Yost, Deputy Representative to the U.N. Security Council, would be making an identical protest to Ambassador Nong Kimny (who was attending the U.N. General Assembly for Cambodia). (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 US–KENNEDY) In telegram 478 from Phnom Penh, December 11, Sprouse indicated that he saw Prime Minister Kantol that morning (all Cambodian Government offices were closed on December 10 for a holiday). Kantol denied knowledge of the radio broadcast, recalled his trip to Kennedy’s funeral in Washington, and promised an immediate investigation. (Ibid., POL 15–1 CAMB)

134. Memorandum for the Record 134. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, December 10, 1963.

SUBJECT

Daily White House Staff Meeting, 10 December 1963

1. Mr. Bundy presided throughout the meeting.

2. Cambodia. Forrestal was present this morning, and the first question Bundy asked him was about the situation in Cambodia. Forrestal replied that our present policy will be to pull out all American presence as quickly as possible. There is some question as to whether we should complete a road under construction.1 Bundy asked Forrestal if he was a “road finisher,” and Forrestal answered that he was not. He had been one until these latest episodes. At that point he said he decided to support abandonment of the road project. Harriman evidently feels the same way.

Forrestal said he believed our policy should be to let the Cambodians become neutralists, and even invite the Chinese in if they wished. In six to eight months or so they will surely kick them out and invite us back. Bundy seemed to share this opinion.

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam and other unrelated matters.]

WYS

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman’s Staff Group, Dec. 1963, WH Staff Memos, T–213–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Prepared by Smith.

1 Reference is to the Khmer-American Friendship Highway connecting Phnom Penh and the port of Sihanoukville, inaugurated in July 1959 as a symbol of friendship and American engineering skill. Unfortunately by 1961 almost one-third of the highway had disintegrated to the point of impassibility. The cost of repairing the road was estimated in late 1961 to be around $9 million. Since it could only be worked on during the dry season, it would take at least until 1963 to complete. (Letter from Trimble to Harriman, December 13, 1961; Department of State, Central Files, 851H.2612/12–1361)

135. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff 135. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) and Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council StaffSource

Washington, December 11, 1963, 6:45 p.m.

Harriman said he thought Cambodia is more important than Laos as an infiltration. . . .

Forrestal said he believed he said that in his memorandum about Cambodia.1 The sea frontier is the place where the supplies come in.

Forrestal said the first priority has nothing to do with the border.

Harriman said you are diverting attention.

Harriman told Forrestal that if he talked to Bob2 about this he hoped he would talk particularly about the problems of Cambodia. He said you have seen the latest take and it is quite distressing. We still want to see if our Amb could produce something.

Forrestal said that when he left Honolulu he was told there would be no decision made on cross-border operation.3 He said he came here and found they are ready to go.

Harriman said nobody has agreed to it.

Forrestal said Kaysen is going out.

Harriman said Bill4 is going too.

Forrestal said the Pentagon has the responsibility and has the control.

Harriman didn’t think this was true.

Forrestal insisted they did. He said he talked to McCone and says they have no control.

Harriman said Bill is not under this impression.

Forrestal asked where the messages come in if we don’t see them any more. He said that is why we don’t have control any more.

Harriman said Bill saw a few but they divulged nothing.

Forrestal said the only ones Bill could see are the old CIA ones. He said whenever CIA is in control, we are okay. He said it is important to have Leonard5 come down and explain.

Harriman said he was not worried about seeing this thing approved. He said he thought it was okay for him to come down. Also they are afraid there may be some shooting from the other side. If you want him to come down, okay. Unger has to be briefed and be told to have a stiff back.

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

1 Not found.

2 Apparently Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. No record of a McNamara–Forrestal conversation has been found.

3 Reference is to a contemplated cross-border operation into Laos to obtain information on infiltration down the Ho Chi Minh trail.

4 Apparently William P. Bundy.

5 Ambassador to Laos Leonard Unger.

136. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) 136. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, December 14, 1963, 5:15 p.m.

Bell called re Cambodia.

B—You made a suggestion to them this morning that if they wanted us to, we would complete the road.1

H—I said these negotiations have got to be conducted in Cambodia but the one thing we all agree to finish if it is possible, and I am not sure it is, is the road. I wanted to make clear that we were willing to complete the road, for the record. They are getting out a telegram of instructions.2

B—A couple of points about it—1, are we distinguishing in some fashion between the road and other projects?

H—Everybody seemed to think that was the one project where our reputation was at stake. Badly constructed. Eyesore of the US record in the world.

B—Up to now, we are prepared to finish the road, and as far as other projects that are . . .

H—. . . The Cambodian came in.3 We thought he was instructed to go home at once. He says he hasn’t received those instructions yet. He would be glad to send any messages. Certain things he said—he said there were misunderstandings. He went over some of those. He said there was feeling that when this was proposed that there would be an orderly termination. Suddenly the Americans announced everything would stop and seized the property, etc. Ready to stop all projects underway. I said that is not the way it looks to us. He said he knows that. I said for example, the road is something if they want us to finish we would be glad to do it. There are a series of matters that have to be worked out on the ground. So this was just an attempt to get into the record that (if the door were slammed) we would be officially on record that we were not going out or dumping. As to the rest of the projects there is no provision against our (not) finishing anything else.

B—The way I read it, everything else is to be wrapped up but the Cambodians are to be informed that if they want the road—

H—I didn’t understand that. This is the only project I know about. Haven’t the slightest idea about the importance of the others. But we don’t want to leave buildings half-finished.

B—We are prepared to honorably complete the projects that have been started including the road, but we are not trying to draw any sharp distinction between this road and the others.

H—That’s right. I just happen to know about the road. I told him we didn’t see why because there was a difference in our governments that we should interfere with the lives of young people, that the scholars over here should be able to finish their (terms). I think our boys have been a little bit scared about this thing. I would like to tell you some time what he said about the past. I don’t think we handled ourselves well. We put in the wrong man. This type of fellow—he is a pseudo-intellectual, cultured. Likes music. Likes to have people around that enjoy that sort of thing. If we had gotten an imaginative person to send out there. He is a sucker for black propaganda. He believes this stuff. I kick myself around the room because we sent the wrong guy. I don’t think we ought to write this whole damn place off. We ought to do it in an orderly way. I told him I also hoped it wouldn’t interfere with the improved relations between Saigon and PhPenh. I asked him to send a message on that. I just picked this road as one thing that I know about and the sort of thing that we didn’t want to run out and leave if he wanted it finished, and if he would do it under conditions that we could operate.

B—That contractor has already told us he considers his previous contract terminated and wants several millions more to finish. (Close to 4 million.) The important thing we have to have [is] really effective assurances from the Cambodian Govt and inspection, that this guy could do his work.

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Telephone Conversations. No Distribution. Transcribed in Harriman’s office.

1 The Khmer-American Friendship Highway.

2 Apparent reference to telegram 348 to Phnom Penh, December 16, in which Ambassador Sprouse was instructed to inform Cambodian officials that if Cambodia desired the U.S. Government to complete the rehabilitation of the highway, it could address a note to the United States to this effect. The note would be given a favorable response. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB) Sprouse informed the Cambodians as instructed on December 18. (Telegram 535 from Phnom Penh, December 18; ibid.)

3 Ambassador Nong Kimny met with Harriman on December 14. Another account of their discussion is in telegram 339 to Phnom Penh, December 15. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB)

137. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Hannah) 137. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Hannah)Source

Washington, December 16, 1963.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

In a conversation between Acheson, Harriman, Hilsman and Forrestal today, it was agreed that, to provide a basis for considering whether or not Acheson should make a trip to Cambodia, we would draft a treaty on Cambodia’s neutrality, including an enlarged ICC along the lines Sihanouk desires, which we would be content to sign if it could be negotiated without a conference.

RH

* Source: Department of State, EA/Burma Union–Cambodia Files: Lot 66 D 492, 1963 Cambodia, July thru Dec. Confidential. Also sent to Czyzak of L/FE.

138. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 138. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, December 17, 1963, 8 p.m.

526. Situation in Cambodia has now entered new stage following Sihanouk’s violent reaction US protest against Cambodian “celebrations” death Sarit and by implication President Kennedy, as well as his violent reaction to relatively minor UK representations on these “celebrations”. His reactions, mirrored in his Takeo speech December 12 (Embtels 492 and 497),1 and communiqué issued by his private secretariat (Embtel 517),2 indicate three possibilities for US-Cambodian relations, in which Sihanouk, in his present highly overwrought state of mind, is more likely to be in position decide outcome than is USG: 1. Sihanouk breaks relations and asks withdrawal US diplomatic representation. He seems to have reached stage where he is prepared cut all ties with West save that with France and range himself ever more closely with Communist bloc. Sihanouk has said it would be in interest of Americans and British to leave, and break with UK as well as with US could come at any moment. (UK Ambassador tells me that on instructions from Foreign Office he recently told SecState FonAffs Sambath UK regretted “celebrations” as they made difficult UK efforts assist Cambodia by convening neutrality conference. This has merely added fuel to Sihanouk’s flame.) In this situation, dispatch our note recommended Embtel 5093 (even in watered-down version described below) could easily tip delicate balance on side complete break diplomatic relations. While at some point we should make clear record of US position, question now seems to be one of timing.

2. USG sends note in version Deptel 338,4 (which firmly but correctly states our position and which would probably make break in relations inevitable), and announces decision break relations and withdraw personnel. This could be followed later by white paper exposing Sihanouk’s statements regarding “celebrations” death of free world leaders. No grounds for expecting Sihanouk do anything helpful US interests for long time to come, if ever. His recent utterances reveal almost pathological hatred of US which leaves little hope for real improvement of relations as long as he is in control. He likely to turn increasingly to extreme left and pro-Communist elements whom [with?] possible introduction increasing number ChiCom advisers. Withdrawal US representatives will avoid inevitable unpleasantness as Sihanouk faces deteriorating economic situation and likelihood continued difficulties and acrimonious exchanges with Thais and SVN. Domestic developments, particularly economic difficulties ahead, will play major role in making Cambodians realize Sihanouk’s recent actions.

3. We reduce remaining Embassy and USIS staff to minimum possible with view to continuing diplomatic relations as long as possible in hope we can ride out storm until some sense of reality returns to Cambodian scene. While Sihanouk may make this impossible by himself breaking relations, we should do everything possible, provided situation does not put us in position where our national dignity would no longer permit continued diplomatic relations or where we encounter obstacles making continued functioning impossible, to keep foot in door and maintain contact with RKG and Cambodian people with hope long-range benefits. This would be in keeping with basic principle of not breaking contact whether friend or foe, and we should keep in mind Cambodia is not yet an iron curtain country. In order make clear our legal position re aid, we would send (not necessarily immediately) modified version of note which, while retaining all legal points pertaining aid agreements, would omit reference to unilateral setting of departure date for MAAG and USAID personnel and be slightly modified in other respects to remove elements likely irritate Sihanouk. Timing of note would be chosen with view minimizing reaction, and we would not publish unless our overriding interest caused us to—as in case RKG breaks relations in any case.

Country Team concurs my recommendation we follow third course as most conducive long-run interests of US. Presence US Embassy here, even reduced and relatively inactive for time being, would be visible reminder US interest Cambodia and potentiality US action in future. When present acute phase Sihanouk’s Americanophobia subsides, Embassy would seek reactivate contacts among friendly Cambodians, including those in armed forces. (No one [Note?] that in meeting today with Chief MAAG Taber, Lt. Colonel Us Say, Chief Cambodian military negotiator, exhibited extremely friendly attitude and, at close of meeting, expressed hope that friendships born of long association in past would remain in being.) If some change for better is to take place in Cambodia, it will have to come about through influence more moderate, thoughtful Cambodians whose material interests and basic political convictions have been violated by Sihanouk’s recent actions. As long as American presence remains in Cambodia, in however reduced form, these people may retain hope of bringing about changes in their and our interests. While we cannot be sure Sihanouk will not break relations, even if we do nothing provocative, he may still be enough interested in having conference convened for neutralization of Cambodia to refrain from doing anything further to exacerbate relations with US, although this is no longer certain (see septel this subject).5 (We note, incidentally, statements attributed to Secretary in item FEF 27 today’s USIA radio bulletin to effect US and Britain are both out of Cambodia leaving France as last Western nation represented here.)6

In this general connection our whole approach to question continued aid to Cambodia has heretofore been that we would consider continuation projects only upon specific RKG request. Language suggested in Deptel 338 (indicating we would be ready to consider projects which might be mutually acceptable) would not only undermine this position but might be trumpeted publicly by Sihanouk as proof US will do anything, accept any abuse, in order to keep aid program here to serve its own interests rather than those of Cambodia (Embtels 455 and 490).7 To surrender to Sihanouk’s month long public abuse of US and its aid programs by resuming aid on his terms and in absence clearly expressed RKG request would strengthen his position and be extremely damaging to those elements who might otherwise eventually seek to exert some moderating and controlling influence over his so far unchecked actions. Moreover, such action by US will tend to strengthen Sihanouk’s position as he pursues his objective of neutralizing SVN and Thailand. In light foregoing, even if we send note, we would recommend that final sentence new paragraph to be inserted after paragraph 6 in draft note (Deptel 338) be changed by substitution after “continuation” of “such projects as the Cambodian Government may request”.8

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Secret; Immediate. Passed to the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

1 Both dated December 13. (Ibid., POL 15–1 US/KENNEDY and POL CAMB–US)

2 Dated December 16. (Ibid., POL 17 CAMB–UK)

3 In telegram 509, December 14, the Embassy recommended sending a note to the Cambodian Government setting forth the legal U.S. position on the termination of aid and countering the false statements and implied threats in the Cambodian December 14 note on the termination of aid. This telegram contained a proposed draft of the U.S. note. (Ibid., AID (US) CAMB) The Cambodian note charged the United States with unilaterally instituting a series of cessations of U.S. aid programs even before the bilateral negotiations between the two governments on liquidation of the aid programs began on December 14. The text of the Cambodian note is in telegram 502 from Phnom Penh, December 14. (Ibid.)

4 In telegram 338, December 15, the Department concurred in the dispatch of a note with some modifications, which it outlined. (Ibid.)

5 Not further identified.

6 Not further identified.

7 Dated December 4 and 12. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB)

8 In telegram 347 to Phnom Penh, December 17, the Department concurred with the recommendations in course no. 3. The Department suggested a gradual reduction of staff, expressed reservations about a note to Cambodia as suggested in telegram 509 from Phnom Penh (see footnote 3 above), and suggested that its delivery be postponed. The fact that Cambodia apparently desired the completion of repairs to the Khmer-American Friendship Highway indicated to the Department that “for the time being we should concentrate on avoiding any unnecessary irritation and on keeping the door open with our foot in it.” Finally, the Department agreed to the proposed word substitution, but, of course, not to delivery of the note. (Ibid.)

139. Current Intelligence Memorandum 139. Current Intelligence MemorandumSource

Washington, December 19, 1963.

OCI No. 3519/63

SUBJECT

Sihanouk’s Intentions

1. Prince Sihanouk probably is more than a little uncomfortable over the position he finds himself in as a result of his abrupt renunciation of US aid. Aside from the economic consequences of his actions (see attachment), Sihanouk must realize that he is perilously close to destroying Cambodia’s neutrality mechanism. In the past, Cambodia’s neutrality policy has operated in pendulum-like fashion, veering left and right as the occasion or Sihanouk’s whims dictated. However, Sihanouk has never before cut his Western contacts so drastically or so strongly proclaimed Cambodia’s dependence on Communist China and the bloc.

2. There are indications that Sihanouk is a victim of his own emotions in the present situation and that he probably did not want relations with the US to deteriorate as far and as fast as they have. Following formal renunciation on 20 November, Cambodian negotiators made it clear that they wanted US aid to continue virtually intact for a 6-month period, after which Cambodia would be happy to negotiate a new agreement on more favorable terms. These feelers ended when Sihanouk recalled Cambodian Embassy personnel from Washington in response to US protests over a Cambodian broadcast slurring President Kennedy.

3. The potential gravity of Sihanouk’s recent moves are mirrored in the widespread dismay evident among the essentially conservative elements making up Cambodia’s power structure. The military, the bureaucracy, businessmen, and the royal family are deeply disturbed over the prospects of increased Chinese Communist influence in Cambodia and the resultant threat to their vested interests.

4. Despite criticism among conservative circles, there are no immediate prospects of organized open or covert opposition developing. Sihanouk’s power position is strong. Even the military, which stands to be one of the principal victims of the economic dislocations brought on by Sihanouk, is staunchly loyal. Significant opposition from the military and other quarters probably would emerge only after a considerable lapse of time, even under the worst of circumstances that Sihanouk might generate.

5. The Queen Mother and other conservative elements close to Sihanouk are attempting discreetly to bring moderating influences to bear on him. So long as Sihanouk remains in an agitated state of mind, however, these efforts will probably have little effect. No firm predictions of Sihanouk’s day-to-day moves are possible, given his highly volatile condition at present, and the fact that day-to-day US or UK policy actions could cause new Sihanouk twistings. We have some confidence, however, that Sihanouk does not desire an irreparable break with the US. Thus, assuming a restrained US–UK posture, we would expect Sihanouk to back off a bit in the near future from his present extreme demands.

6. We would stress the importance, however, of Sihanouk’s irrational suspicions of the US. He has long believed that the US has sought to overthrow him. These suspicions have been fed at various times by Communist agents and by certain French advisers of Sihanouk. These suspicions lie back of the probable immediate causes of the present crisis: Sihanouk’s belief that the US instigated the overthrow of Diem, and his great unease concerning the cordial relationship existing between US officials and the Cambodian military.

7. Sihanouk’s next moves probably will be influenced by several factors, including his own assessment of his standing at home and abroad; developments in Cambodia’s relations with the US and other Western nations, notably France; the success or failure of South Vietnam’s current conciliatory approaches to Cambodia; and domestic economic and political problems. If by the interreaction of these mutable factors Sihanouk feels himself threatened, there is real danger that he will resort to further demagogic extremes to rally strong popular support behind him. Under such circumstances, American lives and property might be threatened as a consequence of Sihanouk’s use of the US as a whipping boy.

8. The greatest danger would appear to be that some incident, real or imagined, may occur to heighten his sense of isolation and danger. If his mania persists, he might take some action such as a formal request to Moscow or Peiping for a security guarantee backed by emergency military assistance.

9. Such dangers aside, Sihanouk is not in such serious economic straits that he would feel compelled to ask either Communist China or the USSR for a large-scale crash economic assistance program. He has time, if he desires, to work around gradually to an improvement in relations with the US.

10. On balance, the West may yet ride out the latest storm in Cambodia. While Sihanouk’s basic outlook is one of accommodation with Communist China, he is by no means anxious to fall into the bloc’s economic or political toils. Similarly, while he has long been interested in adapting Communist China’s economic state control methods to increase the productivity of Cambodia’s economy, he is not insensitive to the conservative mores of his country which strongly resist drastic change. Sihanouk probably would be best pleased if he could reconstitute, more or less on his terms, economic and political contacts with the West while at the same time feeling free to accept military as well as economic help from the bloc.

Attachment1

Washington, December 19, 1963.

Current Intelligence Memorandum

OCI No. 3520/63

SUBJECT

Cambodia—Economic Effects of US Aid Withdrawal

1. Prince Sihanouk’s renunciation of US aid poses serious, though not insurmountable, problems for Cambodia. US aid, some $365 million since 1956, has been Cambodia’s chief source of external assistance.

2. Besides supporting various economic and welfare projects, US aid has provided a large part of the pay for the 30,000-man Cambodian armed forces, as well as their military equipment. Sihanouk realizes that he must make other arrangements to support the armed forces or risk alienating a heretofore loyal and essentially nonpolitical force.

3. Sihanouk’s decision to terminate US aid and to nationalize segments of the Cambodian economy has had immediate and deleterious effects on the economy. The market value of the riel is down, there is hoarding of imported commodities, and the uneasiness of the business community is reflected in the flight of capital. Financing the forthcoming rice harvest is an example of the type of economic problem Sihanouk must now solve. This function has been traditionally performed by banking and export interests which face imminent nationalization.

4. While economic dislocation is likely to be severe, it will not be ruinous. By Southeast Asian standards, Cambodia is basically a prosperous country producing more food than it consumes. It has ample foreign exchange to see it through a short-term crisis. Austerity steps already are being taken to reduce the budget deficit.

5. Additional aid from other sources probably will be forthcoming, although not in amounts to take up all the slack. The French have indicated a willingness to increase somewhat their modest assistance program, and French Defense Minister Messmer will go to Phnom Penh in early January to work out details. Communist China and the Soviet Union have been exceedingly cautious in their reactions to the fluid situation. Thus far, they have made no offers of additional assistance.

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. I. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared in the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency. At the request of the Acting Director of Central Intelligence, Deputy Director (Intelligence) Ray S. Cline sent this memorandum to McGeorge Bundy for his personal attention. Much of the information in this memorandum and its attachment was incorporated into the Office of Current Intelligence’s Special Report on “The Situation in Cambodia,” SC No. 00623/63B, December 20. (Ibid.)

1 Secret. Prepared in the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency.

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in CambodiaSource

Washington, December 19, 1963, 1:07 p.m.

353. Ambassador Nong Kimny in company with Wongsanith called at his request on Gov. Harriman and Hilsman. On instructions and reading most of his text Ambassador Kimny stated that the RKG desired to inform the US Government of the reasons for which it had halted aid negotiations. The RKG felt that the US unilateral actions had made further negotiations pointless since there was nothing more to negotiate. He listed 16 specific actions taken by the Director of USAID to stop the economic aid program. (Details by pouch.)1 He listed four specific actions taken by Chief MAAG to terminate military aid program. He particularly emphasized the cessation of POL deliveries and cancellation jute bag program saying that when oil does not flow “everything stops” and without jute bags the country would “choke to death on rice.” He stated these actions were not in conformity with Gov. Harriman’s earlier statements about terminating aid program in orderly manner.

Kimny then stated that Prince Sihanouk “accepted” suggested Acheson visit (Harriman had actually suggested Sihanouk might want to invite Acheson) but believes “we should set up conditions to give Acheson trip a chance to succeed.” He listed three “suggestions” which are identical in substance to the conditions listed in communiqué from Prince’s secretariat. If US could meet these conditions, Ambassador Kimny and Wongsanith would stay in Washington to complete negotiations and make arrangements for Acheson trip. In conclusion he emphasized particularly the importance of cessation Khmer Serei broadcasts saying that their continuation might “cause success of Acheson visit to suffer.”

In reply Harriman took up three points as follows: 1) US thought RKG note of Nov. 20 should be taken seriously as expressing wishes Prince Sihanouk and government. Harriman mentioned other public statements including some by Sihanouk which urged US AID personnel to get out faster.

2) Harriman reiterated that if RKG desires US to complete highway we would be glad to see if arrangements could be worked out to do so.

3) On conditions for Acheson visit Harriman quoted Amb. Yost’s specific instructions on manner in which word “barbaric” was used.2 He then reviewed a few of the recent public press and radio statements emanating from Phnom Penh including some by Prince Sihanouk. He noted that RKG had issued a statement of denial and he expressed strong opinion that it would be in the interest of both countries not to reopen the subject since our side would have to reveal what was bothering us and this would be unpleasant. We had accepted RKG statement of denial. We could not review our Ambassadors’ statements without reviewing the whole record and this would aggravate rather than calm situation. Hilsman pointed out how unfortunate it was that possibility Acheson’s visit and these three conditions had been made the subject of a press statement before given to USG, a fact which visibly shook Kimny. In conclusion Harriman took following position: 1) Would postpone any further comment on questions involving aid until his statement analyzed.

2) Recommended that first two conditions for Acheson visit be forgotten.

3) Emphasized that both Presidents Kennedy and Johnson had given personal assurances that US not responsible in any way for Khmer Serei broadcasts and he obviously considered RKG should accept these assurances.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared by Harriman, and approved by Hannah for Hilsman.

1 Not found.

2 See footnote 3, Document 133.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 141. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, December 19, 1963, 7 p.m.

546. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 534.1 Sihanouk alone and in sense unaided has produced out of thin air in recent weeks present major crisis which, climaxed by his latest speech, has brought US-Cambodian relations to low ebb. Major forces working on him in this situation have been following:

1. His conviction Communists will win in Southeast Asia and Cambodian survival as national entity, which remains his overwhelming obsession, depends upon his making some kind of arrangement with ChiComs.

2. His mental state, [1 line of source text not declassified] compounded by rigid diet cure under supervision French doctor in October.

3. Pathological hatred of US as evidenced by constant campaign of abuse in public statements during past few weeks.

In light of foregoing, my analysis problems US faces in Cambodia is as follows: 1. Sihanouk does not desire good relations with US. Crisis involving abrupt termination US economic and military assistance and posing question whether diplomatic relations will continue, would not have existed unless he wanted it. He has deliberately and publicly distorted every gesture we have made during that period to intensify differences between us and to instill anti-American feelings in masses of Cambodian people. His placing of what he knows to be impossible conditions for visit Dean Acheson to Cambodia indicates he does not desire such visit, and he has used Nong Kimny’s report of conversation with Harriman concerning Khmer-American Highway (Deptel 339)2 to create public impression US has belatedly recognized Cambodia’s right to completion certain aid projects, thus implying we violated aid agreements in terminating aid upon receipt November 20 note. Sihanouk is thus distorting and using against us as evidence of weakness or hypocrisy our friendly gestures.

2. Sihanouk is convinced ChiComs winning in Southeast Asia and unless he can receive adequate guarantees against being swallowed up by them, his best course is to join them. He evidently expects new GVN fail in its fight against Viet Cong, and he sees neutralized SVN only alternative to complete domination whole country by Hanoi, with swallowing-up of Cambodia next item on menu. His present course began immediately after Saigon coup d’etat and, while he has backed away from elimination French presence, he is still assiduously courting Peiping favor viewing ChiComs as only real protection against Hanoi in long run. Peiping may be somewhat embarrassed by Sihanouk’s recent actions and reluctant for both financial and political reasons become too deeply involved in Cambodia too soon. In fact Sihanouk may be forcing the pace, while ChiComs may prefer longer term approach which they probably believe would bring all of Southeast Asia into their grasp without risks and without need expend scarce resources in immediate future. This is not to imply, however, Peiping will leave Sihanouk in lurch.

3. Sihanouk either because of strong convictions of wisdom his policy or because of his pathological hatred for US, determined let neither practical considerations nor apprehensions of more moderate Cambodians stand in way of course he has charted. In November 19 Special National Congress he exhibited for first time technique appealing to masses over heads of moderate Cambodians. His subsequent speeches have continued this tactic, and he can be expected repeat his performance with embellishments in semi-annual National Congress scheduled December 29. He is proceeding with his leftist economic policies despite disruption already caused Cambodia’s economic life and even greater disruption which could take place in next months as full consequences those policies become felt. Despite country’s obvious need for rehabilitation Khmer-American Highway and inability keep this highway in optimum condition by its own efforts, he has snubbed our invitation to work out conditions under which we would complete work. By his fervent calls for neutralized SVN and his flirting with Hanoi (DRVN delegation currently in Phnom Penh putting finishing touches on airline agreement) he indicates he is willing risk closing of Mekong when and if new GVN finally loses patience with him.

Foregoing considerations lead me to conclude there is no real hope improvement US-Cambodian relations as long as Sihanouk is unquestioned arbiter this country’s destinies and policies. If Sihanouk does not ask US withdraw all personnel (this could happen at any moment) I believe our best strategy is to pull in our horns, maintain our presence here quietly through existence of reduced Embassy (thoughts on size and nature such Embassy will be subject septel in response Deptel 347),3 and seek to ride out storm in hope more moderate elements in Cambodian scene, increasingly disturbed at Sihanouk’s reckless action in economic and political fields, may assert themselves either to remove him from power or circumscribe his freedom of action. We have substantial number of friends here aware past benefits to Cambodia of association with us and fearful of direction in which Sihanouk is leading this country.

I do not see how any further US overtures to Sihanouk could lead to any change his attitude or current policies. Our trump cards of Dean Acheson and Sen. Mansfield, acknowledged by Sihanouk to be Cambodia’s most understanding American friends, produced reaction reported Embtel 534. Time and possibility French through visit Messmer can continue preserve Western influence and position are our best bets for period immediately ahead. However, it is interesting note that Cambodians on all sides are quietly expressing to departing American officials hope and expectation Americans will be back in matter of months. This reaction on part of Cambodians courageous enough to express it shows we have something to build on here for future.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Passed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency and repeated to CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 534, December 18, the Embassy reported on a speech Sihanouk made at Prey Nop casting aspersions on South Vietnam’s attempts to improve relations with Cambodia as an American-directed tactic and spurning U.S. efforts to settle differences. (Ibid.)

2 See footnote 3, Document 136.

3 See footnote 8, Document 138. In telegram 347, December 17, the Department also asked for the Embassy’s view of the size and pattern of future Embassy staffing in Cambodia

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 142. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of StateSource

Phnom Penh, December 22, 1963, 4:30 p.m.

561. Eyes only for Hilsman. Am giving following explanation here for postponement my return to Washington on consultation until early January:

Following exchange between Dept and Embassy regarding problems withdrawal USAID and MAAG, Dept asked me to postpone my return until early January in order that I might be here to deal with problems which might arise in connection withdrawal and remain until majority personnel of two Missions depart. Am sending note to FonOff, as follow up to previous note announcing my departure Dec 23, saying I will be proceeding to Washington on consultation in early January following withdrawal most of USAID and MAAG personnel.

Would be helpful know what Dept has in mind in connection with any possible negotiations with RKG. I should like to repeat and reemphasize views set forth my tel 546.1 There is no real hope improvement US-Cambodian relations so long as Sihanouk is unquestioned arbiter this country’s destinies and policies, and I do not see how US overtures to Sihanouk, which he might interpret as surrender to his high-pressure tactics, could lead to basic change his attitude or policies. I am convinced best line for us to continue to follow is that set forth in Embtel 455,2 with which Dept concurred in its Deptel 305,3 that we should not agree to continue any elements US aid program unless RKG makes clear its desire that we do so and submit request in writing. Sihanouk is clearly using our friendly gestures to avoid complete rupture as means strengthening before masses image of his infallibility and belittling US overtures as yielding to Sihanouk’s clever and superior tactics. Influential and well-connected Cambodians have suddenly begun to display new confidence and renewed friendliness toward Americans which may well presage turn in tide. These are Cambodians most directly affected by Sihanouk’s rejection US aid and his new economic measures, and they have for some [time?] avoided contact with us. This is only straw in wind but these Cambodians in excellent position to be aware of changes sometime before they have been translated into concrete action.

Economic and financial facts of life may be coming home to roost sooner than we anticipated. Flight of leading banker reported in Saigon tel 1203 to Dept4 and recent Phnom Penh Presse editorial criticism Sihanouk’s new economic policies (whom Sihanouk immediately denounced publicly in strongest terms as bordering on treason) offer other indications that all is not sweetness and light for Sihanouk.

National Congress meeting on December 29 should provide forum for Sihanouk to show in what direction events in Cambodia are moving and will move in immediate future. I think it would be extremely unwise for us to take steps at this stage which would represent appeasement of Sihanouk or departure from our agreed upon course of action (Embtel 455 and Deptel 305). To surrender now would only whet Sihanouk’s appetite and likely lead to even more outrageous abuses of US in future, thus postponing evil day as it were, whatever that day and Sihanouk might bring to us. Even more importantly, it would undermine position and courage Cambodian moderate elements who are our only hope for long pull.

Sprouse

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate. Passed to the White House.

1 Document 141.

2 See footnote 7, Document 138.

3 Dated December 6. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) CAMB)

4 Dated December 22. (Ibid., POL 30–1 CAMB)

IndonesiaIndonesia

143. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, January 25, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/1–2561. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC.

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djarkarta, January 25, 1961, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/1–2561 Secret; Limit Distribution. Also sent to CINCPAC.

145. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 31, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–3161. Confidential. Drafted by McBride and cleared in S on February 12.

146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Hare)

Washington, February 13, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1361. Secret. Drafted by Bell and Lindquist and cleared by Steeves.

147. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 14, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/2–1461. Confidential. Drafted by Linehan and cleared by Parsons, Bell, Roger W. Tubby, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol, and Hare.

148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)

Washington, February 18, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1861. Secret. Drafted by Rusk.

149. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 23, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/2–2361. Confidential; Priority.

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, March 3, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/3–361. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

151. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 7, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to SecDef (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indonesia, No. 1, 1960 thru. Secret. The source text has Gilpatric’s name stamped on it.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, March 7, 1961, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/3–761. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC.

153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, March 17, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case. Confidential.

154. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, March 20, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Rand Studies, Part A. Confidential.

155. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Bissell) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 27, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow, McGhee, Nitze, and Amory.

156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 27, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/15/61–3/29/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow, on whose copy Komer wrote the following note: “Walt—despite Pye, Pauker, and Hecksher I’ll stick with Amory and Jones. None of these others have any answer at all.” (Ibid., Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61)

157. Record of Conversation

Washington, March 31, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Rand Studies (B). Secret. Drafted by Johnson on April 4. Pauker, Rostow, Landon, and Johnson had an earlier conversation on March 15. Johnson prepared a 25-page summary of the major points on March 29. (Ibid.)

158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 3, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–361. Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text.

159. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 5, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 4/1/61–4/15/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy and Robert Johnson.

160. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 6, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–661. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and cleared by McGhee, Wallner, and Jenkins. Also sent to Under Secretary Bowles.

161. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 7, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol I. 4/1/61–4/15/61. Confidential.

162. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 10, 1961, 11:05 a.m.–noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1061. Secret. Drafted by Kohler and approved in Bon April 19 and the White House on April 22. The time of the meeting is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

163. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 10, 1961, 3:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1061. Secret. Drafted by McBride and approved in S on April 24. The time of the meeting is from Rusk’s Appointment Book, which indicates his next appointment was for 5:40 p.m. (Johnson Library)

164. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 11, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1161. Secret. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on April 17. Luns also met with Ball, Nitze, and William Bundy on April 11. They discussed the Soviet Union’s role in Indonesia and then Luns returned the conversation to West New Guinea, reiterating many of the points he made in previous conversations. (Memorandum of conversation, April 11; ibid.)

165. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 17, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4/16/61–4/30/61. Secret.

166. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 18, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4/16/61–4/30/61. Secret.

167. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 19, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4 /16/61–4/30/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Bundy. Komer wrote the following note on the source text: “Walt—Bob Johnson and I are on quite the same frequency.”

168. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President Kennedy

Washington, April 20, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/4–2061. Secret. Drafted by Lindquist and cleared by Bell and Steeves. The original of this memorandum is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, 4/24/61–4/25/61.

169. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, April 21, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 4/61. Secret.

170. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia, Indonesia—Security, Sukarno Visit, 4/24—4/25/61. Secret.

171. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, April 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 4/61. Secret.

172. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 24, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/4–2461. Secret. Drafted by Jones and approved in S on June 6. The meeting was held at the White House. According to the President’s Appointment Book, Sukarno arrived at the White House at 10:25 a.m. and the meeting lasted from 10:28 a.m. to noon. (Kennedy Library)

173. Editorial Note

174. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, May 12, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–1261. Secret. Copies were sent to McGhee, McConaughy, and Battle.

175. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 23, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2361. Secret. Drafted by Johnson and Sullivan.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, May 24, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2461. Secret; Limit Distribution.

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, June 2, 1961, 9:36 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/5–1561. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Lindquist and Bell on May 29; cleared by Wallner, Tyler, and McConaughy; and approved by Bowles. Also sent priority to Paris for Rusk and repeated to The Hague, Kuala Lumpur, Canberra, Moscow, London, CINCPAC, and USUN. In a May 19 memorandum to Rostow, Robert Johnson described a conversation he had with Lindquist who indicated he was clearing a telegram (which was sent as this telegram to Djakarta) “designed to give some sort of general reassurances to Sukarno prior to his arrival in Moscow.” Lindquist said he feared there might be some delay in the approval of a new U.S. position and therefore was clearing the telegram separately and expected to ask for White House clearance. Johnson encouraged Lindquist in his efforts. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 5/61)

178. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, June 12, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia—Security, 1961–1963. Secret.

179. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 16, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–1661. Confidential. Drafted by Blue and approved in U on July 15.

180. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, July 10, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 5–8/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Bromley Smith, Komer, and Samuel Belk of the NSC Staff.

181. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 24, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2461. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and cleared by Tyler and Steeves. Cleveland proposed this course of action to McConaughy and Tyler in a memorandum of July 21. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–2161)

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, August 3, 1961, 9:53 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–361. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist on July 31; cleared by McConaughy, Tyler, Buffum, U. Alexis Johnson, Bell, and Jenkins; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, London, New Delhi, and Rangoon for Bowles who was visiting the Far East.

183. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 22, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–2261. Secret. Drafted by Ingraham and approved in S on September 11.

184. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy)

Washington, August 25, 1961, 12:25 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office.

185. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, September 2, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61. Secret.

186. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, September 8, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61. Secret.

187. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, September 9, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Countries, Indonesia, Security, Sukarno–Keita Visit, 9/13/61. No classification marking. Assistant Secretary Tyler urged Rusk to send this memorandum, which was drafted by Beaudry, to President Kennedy, fearing that “the President might be put in an exposed position if he should urge this step on Sukarno because we are convinced that the Dutch Government is not at this time prepared to negotiate directly with Sukarno.” (Memorandum from Tyler to Rusk, September 8, with attached memorandum from Rusk to Kennedy; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–861)

188. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 10, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Indonesia, Security, Sukarno–Keita Visit, 9/13/61. Secret.

189. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 11, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Sukarno-Keita Visit, 9/12/61. Secret.

190. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, September 14, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 9/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Komer.

191. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 16, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–1661. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

192. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 16, 1961, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–1661. Secret; Limited Distribution.

193. Editorial Note

194. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, September 29, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 9/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Komer.

195. Editorial Note

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, October 11, 1961, 9:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/10–1161. Confidential. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Sisco, Blue, and Steeves; and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Djakarta and The Hague.

197. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, October 13, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 10/16/61–10/31/61. Secret. This memorandum was not initialed by Rostow nor was there any indication that the President saw it. On October 13, Robert Johnson submitted a draft of this memorandum to Rostow under cover of a memorandum that reads as follows: “Attached, as per your suggestion on Wednesday [October 11], is a draft of a new memorandum to the President on West New Guinea. I think it is very important that this go forward as quickly as possible. “You will note that I have introduced the idea that we should speak frankly to the Dutch and put some real pressure on them. I know that FE would be in favor of this kind of an approach—which I have long advocated—but is up against opposition from WE and IO. The Secretary’s reluctance to become more actively involved is also an important factor. I think that the President will have a much more fruitful discussion with the Secretary if he is given a point of view to present than if he simply raises the question in a rather bland fashion.” (Ibid., 10/1/61–10/15/61) On October 16, Johnson sent a copy of this memorandum to the President and McGeorge Bundy, indicating in a covering memorandum that “this question could be a live one during the next couple of weeks.” (Ibid., 10/16/61–10/31/61)

198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 13, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 091 Indonesia. Top Secret.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, October 18, 1961, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/10–1861. Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, The Hague, London, and Canberra.

200. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 6, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/1/61–11/15/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow.

201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 15, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–1561. Confidential. Drafted by Stephen Palmer and Buffum of UNP and cleared by Tyler and Blue, but FE did not concur. A note on the source text indicates that Harlan Cleveland “presented these views to Sect’y orally.”

202. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, November 15, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/1/61–11/15/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Komer.

203. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, November 16, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/16/61–11/20/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Komer.

204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, November 29, 1961, 7:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–2961. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Lindquist and Sisco; cleared by Emmons, Blue, and Sullivan; and approved by McConaughy. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

205. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, December 1, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/1/61–12/5/61. Secret. A note on the source text indicates this was part of the President’s weekend reading book for December 1.

206. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, November 30, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/21/61–11/30/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Robert Johnson.

207. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 8, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/6/61–12/10/61. Secret.

208. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Palm Beach, Florida

Washington, December 8, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, Oct.–Dec. 1961: Secret; Operational Immediate. Sent to Evelyn Lincoln, the President’s secretary, for the President.

209. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, December 9, 1961, 4:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, Cleveland, Emmons, U. Alexis Johnson, Rostow, Ball, and Battle; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, December 9, 1961, 4:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Steeves and Cleveland; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, Ball, Emmons, U. Alexis Johnson, Rostow, and Battle; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, December 11, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1161. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

212. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 12, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/11/61–12/15/61. Secret. Also sent to Kaysen, who replaced Rostow as the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs as of December 1. Rostow became Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of its Policy Planning Council.

213. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris

Washington, December 13, 1961, 9:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1361. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Lindquist, Stone, and Beaudry; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, and Wallner; and approved by Ball. Repeated to Djakarta, The Hague, Canberra, London, and USUN. Rusk was attending the Ministerial Session of the North Atlantic Council at Paris December 13–15.

214. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/16/61–12/20/61. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum, which is dated December 17, indicates that Lindquist, Stone, and Palmer were the drafters; Cleveland and Emmons cleared; and Harriman and Tyler cleared in draft. According to a December 17 covering memorandum from Harriman to Bundy, this paper was prepared for the President in case he wished to discuss the issue at the Bermuda talks with Prime Minister Macmillan December 21–22. West New Guinea was not a principal topic of discussion at Bermuda. According to Document 215, this memorandum was sent to President Kennedy who was returning from Bogota, Colombia, to Palm Beach, Florida. Documentation on the Bermuda Conference is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2020–2021.

215. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 18, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/16/61–12/20/61. Secret. Johnson sent copies to Kaysen and Komer. Bundy sent the attached paper and apparently Document 214 to the President in Bogota, Colombia, for “possible plane reading” on the trip back to Palm Beach. Bundy wrote a covering note, also sent to the President in Bogota, that reads: “Mr. President: Here are two papers on New Guinea & West Irian which give the issues clearly. If you agree with Johnson of our staff, a word with Harriman is indicated to say that you want a real push on this one. McGB.” A note on the attached paper indicates that the President saw it and apparently Document 215 on December 19 in Palm Beach.

216. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 22, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2261. Secret. Drafted by Stone and initialed by Harriman.

217. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 27, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 11/61–12/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Schlesinger.

218. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, December 27, 1961, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2761, Secret; Niact. Repeated niact to The Hague and to London, Canberra, and CINCPAC.

219. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 4, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 1/1/62–1/7/62. Secret. Also sent to Kaysen and a copy was sent to Komer. Komer wrote the following note to Kaysen on the source text: “Carl, FYI in case you hadn’t heard.” McGeorge Bundy wrote: “Harriman tells me he has left the Dutch in no doubt on this point.” Kaysen wrote: “Hold for talk with President.”

220. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy)

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/21–3/62. Top Secret. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “Carl, Noted, discussed with Pres & Harriman this A.M. Averell is satisfied heat is adequate for now—so is Pres.”

221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, January 15, 1962, 8:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–1562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Stone, Sisco, and McGhee; and approved by Rice. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, London, USUN, CINCPAC/POLAD, Geneva FECON for Harriman, and Manila.

222. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Wallner) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 17, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–1762. Secret. Drafted by Wallner. Copies were sent to McGhee, Rice, and Tyler.

223. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy)

Washington, January 28, 1962

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security. Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Kaysen. Top Secret.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, February 1, 1962, 7:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–162. Secret. Drafted by Bell, cleared by Stone and Buffum, and approved by Rice. Also sent to The Hague and repeated to Canberra and London. Although Komer is not listed as a drafter, he suggested to Kaysen that the actions described in this telegram be undertaken. (Memorandum from Komer to Kaysen, February 1; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/62–3/62)

225. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)

Washington, February 2, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 2/62. Secret. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy.

226. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Singapore

Washington, February 10, 1962, 8:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1062. Secret; Niact, Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell and Dungan, in draft by Stone, Harriman, Czyzak, and Bundy, and in substance by Sisco; and approved by Rice. Repeated priority to Djakarta and to The Hague, Canberra, London, and USUN.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 12, 1962, 10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1262. Secret; Niact. Received at 10:45 a.m.

228. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Kennedy

Washington, February 12, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking.

229. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Kennedy

Washington, February 12, 1962, 10:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, February 12, 1962, 10:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Lindquist and Ball, cleared by Bell and Tyler, and approved by Ball.

231. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Attached to a copy of this telegram at the Kennedy Library was a note indicating that the President read it “with interest.” (Kennedy Library National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/62–3/62)

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; No Distribution Outside Department.

234. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, February 15, 1962, 11:35 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office.

235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, February 15, 1962, 2:44 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rusk and Ball; cleared by Tyler, Cleveland, Harriman, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Ball who initialed for Rusk. Repeated to The Hague and USUN.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, February 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated niact to Rome.

237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, February 21, 1962, 1:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2-2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Harriman and approved by Rice. Repeated to The Hague, Rome, and Berlin. A typed note on the bottom of the source text indicates that Harriman obtained approval of this telegram in draft from Rusk and the President.

238. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and Secretary of State Rusk

February 22, 1962, 2:05 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office. Rusk was at Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina; Ball was in Washington. Rusk and Ball had an earlier brief conversation, part of which dealt with Indonesia. The transcription reads as follows: “Ball said this related to a message we had in from Sukarno answering the President’s letter. Very briefly he comes out in favor of some kind of secret informal negotiations along the pattern of the Algerian and French in the presence of a third party. It is not explicit that he would like to get us in the middle of some sort of negotiation. On the question of Pope, he says Pope won’t be executed, but that he will be released soon and the timing has to be left to him.” (Ibid., Atomic Testing)

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany

Washington, February 23, 1962, 7:27 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2362. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Tyler, Stone, Komer, and Ball; cleared by Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, and Tyler; and approved by Rusk. Regarding the drafting and clearing process of this telegram, see Document 238. Repeated priority to The Hague and to Djakarta and USUN. On February 23, McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of the State draft of this telegram to the President in Palm Beach, Florida. Bundy observed that “it is based on premise that Sukarno’s more forthcoming position on willingness negotiate justifies our putting real heat on Dutch. This draft goes further than anything we’ve said yet to Dutch in telling them we believe only satisfactory solution will be one resulting in effective transfer WNG Administration to Indonesia.” Bundy also noted that it expressed U.S. willingness to act as moderator for the secret talks. Harriman, Ball, and the NSC Staff strongly favored this approach, Bundy stated, while Rusk was skeptical. Bundy also noted that he and Komer felt that the State draft needed “more ammo” to convince the Dutch to accept it and provided additional arguments. The telegram as sent combined the State draft with Komer’s and Bundy’s suggestions. (Telegram CAP 5078–62 to, Palm Beach, February 23; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 2/23/62–2/24/62)

240. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 27, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2762. Secret. Drafted by Beau-dry and cleared by Sisco and Harriman.

241. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, February 27, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2762. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to Djakarta and to The Hague.

242. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, February 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 2/62. Secret. In a covering note to Bundy, Komer suggested that, in setting up the meeting at the White House at 6 p.m. on March 1, it was “best to let Rusk talk to AG and others at lunch first, because Rusk won’t be ready to make up his mind until after he has heard from Bobby.” Robert Kennedy had lunch at the Department of State with Rusk and others on February 28. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) Komer also stated that he thought “it important President talk to AG and concert strategy before the latter sees Rusk.” Komer asked if Bundy would give the President this memorandum that evening. There is no indication whether Bundy did so.

243. Editorial Note

244. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 2, 1962, 4:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–262. Secret. Drafted by Beau-dry and approved by the White House on March 10. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House and lasted until 5:50 p.m., is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

245. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/62. Secret.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, March 6, 1962, 8:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–562. Confidential. Drafted by Stone; cleared by Tyler, U. Alexis Johnson, Buffum, and Rice in draft; and approved by Bell. Repeated to The Hague and USUN.

247. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 55–62. Secret. Prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force; the Joint Staff; and NSA. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with it on March 7 except the Atomic Energy Representative and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands

Washington, March 12, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Stone; cleared by Bell, Rice, Tyler, and Sisco; and approved by McGhee. Also sent niact to Djakarta as telegram 1012 and repeated priority to USUN and to Baguio for Harriman, who was attending a conference of U.S. Far Eastern Ambassadors.

249. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, March 14, 1962, 8:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Lindquist, Tyler, and in draft by Rice; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to The Hague, USUN, Geneva for Rusk, and priority to Tokyo.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, March 21, 1962, 8:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Rice, in draft by Tyler and Wallner, shown in draft to Bunker, and McGhee was informed of the substance; and approved by Bell. Repeated to The Hague, USUN, Bangkok, and Geneva for Rusk.

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, March 24, 1962, 12:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Sisco, Rice, Tyler, and Bunker; and approved by McGhee. Repeated priority to The Hague, to USUN, niact to Geneva for Rusk, and niact to Vientiane.

252. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/62. Secret.

253. Editorial Note

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands

Washington, March 29, 1962, 3:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Bunker, Cleveland, Tyler, Rice, and Bell; and approved by McGhee. Also sent niact to Djakarta as telegram 1089 and priority to USUN as telegram 2505.

255. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, March 30, 1962, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–3062. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

256. Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of State

The Hague, April 3, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–362. Secret; Niact.

257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 5, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Forrestal.

258. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 17, 1962, 2:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1762. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on May 11. The meeting lasted until 3:34 p.m.; van Roijen remained alone with the Secretary for a few minutes after the meeting. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, April 19, 1962, 8:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Cleveland, and Bunker, and in draft by Tyler; and approved by Harriman. Repeated priority to The Hague and to USUN.

260. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 24, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret.

261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 27, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret.

262. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Athens

Washington, May 2, 1962, 10:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–262. Secret; Priority. Rusk was in Athens for the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting May 4–6. Although the source text lists McGeorge Bundy as the drafter, the telegram was drafted by Komer, On May 2, Komer sent a copy to President under cover of a memorandum stating that Robert Kennedy, Harriman, Bunker, and Tyler concurred with the draft. Komer noted that the “Dutch had stalled on the Bunker formula for a month, and Subandrio’s trip to Moscow is an ominous sign that Sukarno may be giving up hope.” Komer told the President that the best way to “lean on” the Dutch was to threaten to withdraw Bunker and to publish the details of his efforts, which Luns had carefully kept from the Dutch public and Parliament. Such a move would cause a “ruckus” and might lead to Luns’ fall, so he would be anxious to forestall it. Without Presidential instructions, Rusk would not put such pressure on Luns. Komer’s draft was identical to this telegram. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62)

263. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Athens, May 6, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–662. Secret; Niact.

264. Editorial Note

265. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer 5/62. Secret.

266. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, May 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that this is McGeorge Bundy’s copy, but no indication whether the President saw it.

267. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, May 17, 1962, 2:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–1662. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Tyler, Beaudry, and Rusk; cleared by Rice and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Repeated priority to The Hague and to USUN.

268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)

Washington, May 22, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. There is an “OK” written on the source text, apparently by Kaysen.

269. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence’s Assistant (Knoche) to Director of Central Intelligence McCone

Washington, May 22, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret.

270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, May 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Portugal, Azores Base. Secret.

271. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Forrestal.

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, June 8, 1962, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–862. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, June 8, 1962, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–862. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

274. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, July 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, General, 7/1 /62–7/10/62. Secret. A note on a transmittal sheet to this memorandum indicates that it was part of the President’s weekend reading, July 13. According to the Department of State copy of the memorandum, it was drafted by Lindquist and Beaudry and cleared by Wallner and by Rice and Burdett in draft. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–1062)

275. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to Attorney General Kennedy

Washington, July 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 7/62. Secret.

276. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, July 20, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, General, 7/11/62–7/20/62. Secret. A note on the source text indicates the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading, July 20.

277. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 24, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. Drafted and initialed by Robert Kennedy who sent a copy to Bell.

278. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, July 26, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. No classification marking.

279. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 26, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2762. Secret. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on August 2. The meeting ended at noon. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

280. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, July 26, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates Beaudry drafted it and Harriman, Tyler, and Wallner cleared it. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2662)

281. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 26, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2662. Secret. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on August 2.

282. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security. Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 30, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 7/62. Secret.

283. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 1, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 8/1/62–8/6/62. Secret. A copy was sent to Robert Kennedy. A note on the source text indicates the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading, August 8.

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, August 2, 1962, 1:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Bell and Rusk, cleared by Harriman and Stone, and approved by Rusk.

285. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, August 3, 1962, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–362. Secret; Niact. Repeated niact to The Hague, priority to Canberra, London, USUN, CINCPAC.

286. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, August 15, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 8/62. Secret.

287. National Security Action Memorandum No. 179

Washington, August 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC, NSAM 195. Secret. Copies were sent to Robert Kennedy, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Maxwell Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, Robert Johnson, Komer, and Forrestal.

288. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 5, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 091 Indonesia. Secret.

289. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/9–1462. Secret.

290. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, September 25, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.5-MSP/9–2462. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Ambassador Jones, who was in Washington for consultations, saw the memorandum. A note at the end by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs Avery F. Peterson reads: “In short, for reasons you know of, Mike comes down for emergency support only at this stage. AVP”

291. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Kennedy

Washington, October 10, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC, NSAM 195. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Peterson, cleared by Frank K. Sloan for DOD, Janow for AID, FitzGerald for CIA, Dan Moore for USIA, Kenneth R. Hansen and Robert Amory for BOB, and Dillon and W.W. Diehl for Treasury. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/10–1062)

292. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 195. Secret

293. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 11, 1962, 9:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/10–1162. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The time of the meeting, which lasted until 10:10 a.m., is taken from Kennedy’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

294. National Security Action Memorandum No. 195

Washington, October 22, 1962.

Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 195. Secret.

295. Letter From President Kennedy to President Sukarno

Washington, November 2, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11 /62–12/62. No classification marking. Drafted by Forrestal and Bell at the instruction of the President after his meeting with Jones; see Document 293. Komer had hoped that President Kennedy would decide that the salutation to this letter should be “Dear Bung Karno,” the familiar term used by Sukarno’s friends and associates in Indonesia, but the decision was left to the President. (Memorandum from Forrestal to Kaysen, October 22; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62)

296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, November 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret.

297. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, December 17, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret.

298. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret. Also sent to the Acting Administrator of AID.

299. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, January 4, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.551/1–163. Secret. Drafted by James B. Freeman of SPA.

300. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 16, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 1/63–2/63. Secret.

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, January 16, 1963, 10:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 101.2/1–1663. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell, cleared in draft by Harriman and in substance by Komer, and approved by Bell.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, March 1, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 1–1 INDON. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

303. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, March 6, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 3/63–4/63. Secret.

304. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 24, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in draft by Rice, Bell, Francis E. Meloy, Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, and by Robert J. McCloskey, Deputy Director of the Office of News, Bureau of Public Affairs.

305. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, May 10, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading for May 11.

306. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. Secret; Urgent. A note on the source text indicates that ithe memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading of May 18.

307. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, May 20, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading of May 18.

308. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Buridy)

Washington, May 21, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, PET 15–2 INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Jarvis and Czyzak; cleared in draft by Bell, Ingraham, Barnett, and Andrew Fensor, Chief of the Fuels and Energy Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, and by Sullivan.

309. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, June 10, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV. Secret.

310. Editorial Note

311. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Robert W. Komer of the Staff

Washington, July 19, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files; Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV, 6/63–8/63. Confidential.

312. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, July 23, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV, 6/63–8/63. Confidential. In a covering note to McGeorge Bundy, Komer asked if his memorandum and the attached memorandum from Rusk could be included in the President’s night reading. Komer suggested that a meeting with the President should be arranged if Kennedy had “any qualms.” Bundy wrote on the note: “P[resident] saw & approved.”

313. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, August 29, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV. Confidential.

314. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, September 19, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files; POL 25–3 INDON. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated immediate to Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, Singapore, USUN, Canberra, and CINCPAC.

315. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 24, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Kinney on September 25 and approved in S on September 30. The meeting was held at USUN.

316. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, September 24, 1963, 3:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in substance by AID, Treasury, and Agriculture, and in draft by OSD/ISA; and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Manila, Kuala Lumpur, Canberra, London, Singapore, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, October 24, 1963, 4:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Harriman, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration William J. Crockett, and in draft by Hilsman; and approved by Ball.

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, October 28, 1963, 3:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Secret; Immediate; Eyes Only. Drafted by Ingraham, cleared in draft by Forrestal and Cuthell and by Sullivan, and approved by Rice.

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State

Djakarta, November 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 INDON. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

320. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 19, 1963, 5–5:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 10/63–11/63. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The times of the meeting are taken from Document 321 and the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) The source text is labeled “Part I of Two Parts”; Part II is printed as Document 321:

321. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 19, 1963, 5–5:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 10/63–11/63. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The ending time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part II of II Parts”; Part I is printed as Document 320.

322. Editorial Note

323. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 29, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–US. Drafted by Jones and approved by the White House on December 4 and in M on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House.

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, December 7, 1963, 2:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 INDON. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Freeman, cleared by Bell, and approved by Rice.

325. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, December 16, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Correspondence with Ambassadors. Confidential.

326. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 18, 1963, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-US. Confidential. Drafted by Jones and cleared in the White House on December 31. The meeting was held at the White House.

143. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 143. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, January 25, 1961, 4 p.m.

2154. For Secretary from Ambassador. CINCPAC also for POLAD. Time has come in my opinion when US interests demand reassessment of situation in Indonesia and review of our policy and courses of action.

US has been seriously challenged in Indonesia by Communist bloc for first time since nation freed from colonial domination of Dutch.

Result is that economic, military, psychological programs which formerly good enough, no longer can assure achievement of US minimum objective of preventing Indonesia from falling under Communist control.

US is faced with decision as I see it whether this minimum objective of sufficient importance to make necessary effort to repel Communist counter-attack now in full swing. If answer affirmative US will, as in achievement any major objective, have to pay price. Price will be higher, longer we wait.

Situation still sufficiently fluid that if positive program to meet new situation is pressed immediately, vigorously, Communists can be beaten here. Inaction unlikely to preserve status quo; on contrary it virtually certain produce deterioration our position, further Communist gains, ultimate necessity for drastic measures to avert disaster—measures we might by then be unable or unwilling to take.

I wish to propose now in broad outline seven-point program of immediate action. In subsequent communications I intend to spell out in greater detail certain parts of it.

Before suggesting program I would discuss briefly reasons why we must take action—why it is that, despite the anti-Communist position of the army, Indonesians now moving slowly but perceptibly from neutralist position to one of greater dependence on bloc.

Slightly less than year ago USSR apparently reached conclusion it could not afford have largest Asian Communist Party outside China mainland go down drain. At about that time President Eisenhower declined visit Indonesia. Khrushchev did come, and he dangled practically unlimited offers of economic, military aid before eyes of relatively unsophisticated Indonesians. Even more importantly he came forward with sky’s-the-limit offer of political support for satisfaction of Indonesian national claim to WNG. Perhaps most effective of all, he paid attention to Sukarno.

At almost this precise moment Dutch elected assert their colonial claim in this part of world by dispatching aircraft carrier Karel Doorman on flag-showing cruise. However innocent Dutch intent may have been, however well-grounded in legality their claims to this conglomeration of mountain and swamp land half world away, from Holland, consequences of this action have been mischievous and long-lasting. At worst, this defiant gesture may have been prelude to free world disaster in Southeast Asia, opening the way, as it has, for an unwelcome choosing up of sides over intrinsically insignificant issue.

It hardly necessary to spell this out in detail. Should war break out between Netherlands and Indonesia over WNG, consequences are such that our entire position in Asia would be threatened. The Sino-Soviet bloc would at once come to support of Indonesia, Australia would at once come to support of Holland. The US would be forced to choose between unsatisfactory position of neutrality and support of Netherlands on an issue which all of Asia and Africa would regard as struggle of new nation against colonialism.

In my view this bleak outlook can be prevented from ever coming to pass but not without US seizing initiative, difficult as this is for us in situation in which long-time, tried and true ally arrayed against uncertain newcomer. Formula for solution of WNG question must be found, US as acknowledged leader of free world has responsibility of finding it. We must further face up to hard fact that if peaceful solution to be developed it must be solution acceptable to Indonesians. Time has passed that Dutch could dictate terms and every attempt on their part to do so only throws Indonesians closer and closer into waiting Soviet arms.

Solution of West Irian problem, difficult as that may be, is, however, alone no longer sufficient to bring about readjustment of Indonesian posture. Second essential key is Sukarno the man. Once Sukarno would have turned with whole heart to US if we would have changed our position on WNG; he told at least three successive Ambassadors this. Today more is required.

We must convince Sukarno we are interested in working with him to achieve peaceful solution to problems of Asia in general and WNG in particular. As first step toward new rapprochement with Indo President, we must satisfy him that US is not hostile to him personally. Reserving elaboration of separate points for subsequent communications, following is summary of actions which I think we must take to achieve our objectives.

1. Resolution of New Guinea question. We must actively seek formula for solution West Irian question, exploring all possibilities, recognizing that there no possibility of permanent, peaceful settlement which does not include unmistakable promise that this territory will one day be united with Indonesia.

2. Establishment of personal relationship between President Kennedy and President Sukarno. This involves also recognition of fact there no group in Indonesia except rebels willing directly to oppose Sukarno, and therefore no immediate means of displacing him.

3. Greater flexibility in (a) technical assistance programs including commodity support; and (b) educational exchange. Only slightly more funds would be required but Ambassador should be free to move expeditiously when opportunity arises.

4. Much greater speed in supporting development projects and programs, more stress on political effect; willingness to let Indo use development funds as they think best, including promotion of their concept of socialist state if necessary; and broader use of resources for development of impact projects on basis of calculated risk even though such use funds may involve some departure from traditional economic criteria for justification.

5. Removal of political restrictions, “token aid” character military assistance to Indo. For example, provision heavier weapons rather than permitting bloc to supply them (although we may be too late here).

6. Preparation for possible major psychological war campaign coordinating covert and overt resources when proper climate can be developed.

7. Review of US position colonial questions throughout world, to assure that we are as we talk and as we like to think of ourselves. Although listed last in this list, it might well be first in importance.

It my considered judgment that such program would not meet our short range objective here. I believe, however, that its success depends upon complete coordinated pursuit of all seven points. Partial implementation would not likely bring partial success but only delayed failure.

If it is to be argued as heretofore that such program involves too high price, then we must readjust our thinking to concept of advanced Communist base in this three thousand [garble], strategically located treasure house of resources, or at least an Indonesia closely approximating Communist satellite. We may even have to face involvement in new proxy war or war itself should Anzus become involved over WNG.

It not my purpose to evaluate these possibilities in total scheme of things. I consider it my inescapable duty, however, to point the ways I see of avoiding them.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/1–2561. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC.

144. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 144. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djarkarta, January 25, 1961, 8 p.m.

2164. CINCPAC also for POLAD. Embassy telegram 2154.1 Second point in program I proposed in reference telegram involves closer personal relationship with President Sukarno. I know that he is personally obnoxious to many Americans, that his leftist sympathies make him anathema to some while his moral peccadilloes revolt others. Yet he is in well nigh absolute control of destiny of Indonesia for time being and the man who will challenge him for this role is not yet clearly in sight, even though General Nasution may some day do so.

To ignore, snub, punish or attempt to wish away Sukarno are all equally futile pastimes. Like Nasser and Nehru he is there, and we must learn to live with him as fact of life. Soviets have been able to do so by recognition that what Sukarno craves is acceptance as great Asian leader and also as a man. They have exploited fact that Sukarno sets store by personal relationships in international relations far beyond any concept well understood in West.

Partly as result of persistent refusal President Eisenhower accept repeated invitations, partly because of general coldness our leaders, open hostility US press, including reckless reports of US–Nasution conspiracy to oust Sukarno, President believes we not only do not like him but that we are in fact out to get him.

In last year, Sukarno has made increased progress toward controlling political forces his country. He has harnessed political parties by creation appointed Parliament and Peoples Congress. He has eliminated only two major opposition parties by simple expedient of declaring them hostile to state. This action has also enabled him purge government of members those parties. More recently, he has launched move to substitute Nasakom, symbol for the unity of Moslem, nationalist, and Communist groups, for Pantjasila,2 which in its stress on belief in God has been used effectively by the army for ally [rally?] anti-Communist sentiment.

Domestically, therefore, President has almost attained position of undisputed personal leadership he has aspired to since early days of revolution. One hurdle, only, must yet be surmounted—the army—and reluctance of army chief to face genuine test of strength with Sukarno bodes ill for army position over period of time.

Under present circumstance Sukarno could not visualize either security in status or rise to greater eminence under Western auspices. Apart from his evident conviction that West is against him, he certainly could not foresee any prospect of international leadership aligned to the West. Even under the exigencies of East-West competition, any role beyond that of more or less tractable voter with Western bloc in UN hardly foreseeable. Finally, democratic world not place for man on horseback.

Soviets, however, have much to offer him. Apart from their revolutionary fervor which, however spurious, has real attraction for Sukarno, their concept of leadership appeals to him. Leader most admired by Sukarno is Tito. In current world situation, Sukarno may tend see much more to be gained from tacit alignment with “co-existing” Soviet bloc than with West. Sukarno’s move toward Soviet bloc also consistent with his view of own role as man of destiny. His aspiration for leadership of Asia-African countries antedates first Bandung Conference.3

This aspiration thwarted by obvious preeminence of Nehru and Chou En-lai. Russians appear to have been encouraging Sukarno pretensions in new situation. As Department aware, Sukarno attempted strong bid for leadership neutrals at recent UNGA. His address there has already been made part of the apocrypha of his leadership at home; text being issued in book form.

I do not recommend, of course, that we attempt to pander to vanity of Sukarno in fashion of USSR. However, there much we can do to inject warmth of personal relationship into intercourse between US Government, Sukarno. This involves participation of US President. Sukarno is, after all, a warm, magnetic, responsive human being. A personal relationship between the two Presidents, once established, without question will lead to greater US impact on Sukarno’s thinking and attitudes and could exert considerable influence on course of events in Indonesia.

As practical matter [garble] and good opportunity to get ball rolling since Sukarno planning another of his world junkets in April–June. I am fully conversant with difficult problems involved in arranging official visit of head of state to US however, I do not think this necessary in this case. I believe as effective results can be obtained by invitation from President Kennedy for President Sukarno to come to Washington for an informal visit and exchange of views in connection with his forthcoming trip.

Invitation, I believe, could be most effective if included in letter from President Kennedy in which latter’s acknowledgement of Sukarno’s congratulations4 is followed up in same spirit of common approach to common problems, which scored hit with Sukarno. It would be most useful at same time to state clearly new administration’s opposition to imperialism and colonialism in any form, our dedication to preservation of independence of nations, President Kennedy’s determination to find peaceful solution to such irritants as the West New Guinea situation which are likely to erupt in such way as to threaten peace of area, his desire for Sukarno help.

If this action could be taken soon, President Kennedy, might well include in such letter expression of hope that Sukarno would not take an irrevocable step in the Congo such as withdrawal of Indonesia troops before two Presidents have had an opportunity to discuss this and other considerations in connection with Africa as well as Asia.

There more than a possibility that such action on President Kennedy’s part could pave way for an early adjustment in US-Indonesian relations favorable to free world. Indonesians of all shades of opinion are looking with fervent hope to President Kennedy to take steps which will enable this country to move closer to us. There is sense of alarm in country which represents, I believe, general fear that current snuggling up to Sino-Soviet bloc will lead Indonesia away from realization of [garble] freedom and democracy for which Indonesians spilled their blood in four years of revolution, culminating just over decade ago. This apprehension, which surfaces only rarely in controlled press, is freely expressed in private conversation by non-Communist Cabinet members, leading figures in armed forces, political party leaders, as well as, of course, by members of banned opposition parties PSI and Masjumi.

In some way we must take positive action to restore relations between the US Executive and Sukarno as one element in coordinated program to keep Indonesia out of Communists’ hands.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/1–2561 Secret; Limit Distribution. Also sent to CINCPAC.

1 Document 143.

2 The five principles of Pantjasila (Pancasila) are belief in God, humanitarianism, national unity, democracy, and social justice.

3 The non-aligned Afro-Asian Conference held at Bandung, Indonesia, April 18–24, 1955.

4 On January 21, Sukarno sent Kennedy a telegram congratulating him on his inauguration. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, 1/61–3/61)

145. Memorandum of Conversation 145. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, January 31, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador J. H. van Roijen, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. E. L. C. Schiff, Minister, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. Robert H. McBride, WE

Ambassador van Roijen reviewed briefly the Dutch position on West New Guinea. He said that the key point of the Dutch policy was the preparation of the Papuans for self-determination. He noted that the council which had been created in Hollandia was proving successful and that the Indonesians wished to frustrate political developments of this type in West New Guinea. Ambassador van Roijen referred to the Nasution Mission to Moscow to procure arms for “anti-colonial” purposes, presumably for strengthening Indonesian claims against West New Guinea.1 Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch were willing to submit their policy to scrutiny by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and were willing to have U.N. observers sent to West New Guinea. Furthermore, the Dutch were ready at any time to submit the sovereignty issue to the International Court of Justice. He said that the Dutch were open to all ideas and indeed had suggested that the Secretary-General send an observer to inspect the situation and see for himself that there was no Dutch military build-up in New Guinea. Furthermore, the Dutch were anxious to have representatives of the international press visit the area for the same purposes. Indonesian allegations regarding Dutch aggressive intentions were false, he said.

The Secretary inquired with regard to Indonesian infiltration into West New Guinea. Ambassador van Roijen said that these had so far consisted of small groups of no more than 20 men who had usually been rounded up relatively quickly. He thought the purpose of the infiltrations to date was to provide propaganda for the Indonesians. He said that some of these were Indonesians while others were Papuans. Some had been identified as coming from regular Indonesian military units. The Secretary inquired if the Dutch had evidence of an Indonesian military build-up. Ambassador van Roijen replied in the affirmative and said that the Dutch particularly feared attacks against certain islands close to New Guinea. He said that the differentiation between New Guinea and Indonesian territory was clear on maps which had been accepted at the round table discussions. Therefore, he thought there was no problem with regard to sovereignty

In response to a further query from the Secretary, Ambassador van Roijen said that the problem had been discussed in the U.N. three times and that no resolution on the issue had ever received a two-thirds vote. Although it was in the U.N. deepfreeze at the present time, West New Guinea remained on the agenda technically and of course could be brought up by the Indonesians at any time. The Secretary inquired as to when the last Dutch-Indonesian bilateral talks had been held. Ambassador van Roijen said that there had been talks in 1955 and that the original discussions, of course, had been held in 1950–1951.

Ambassador van Roijen said the Dutch believe that a real effort should be made to deter any Indonesian aggressive actions. He said that the Dutch agreed with us that Indonesia should be kept out of the Soviet orbit. The Secretary noted that Indonesia was not particularly subject to advice and that it was relatively easy for the Soviets to give satisfaction to many of their desires. Finally, on this subject the Secretary inquired as to the existence of any Papuan political thought. Ambassador van Roijen said that insofar as any informed opinion existed among the Papuans, it was anti-Indonesian since, in their view, annexation by Indonesia would be simply merely to trade one colonialism for another.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–3161. Confidential. Drafted by McBride and cleared in S on February 12.

1 Defense Minister General Nasution headed a high-level Indonesian delegation to Moscow January 2–6. Included in the delegation were Foreign Minister Subandrio and Air Force Chief of Staff Air Marshal Suryadarma. The Indonesians signed an agreement on January 6 to purchase weapons, and announced that their purchases were in response to the military buildup by the Dutch in West New Guinea. At a later press conference on January 16, Nasution announced that Indonesia was purchasing bombers, fighters, torpedo boats, and submarines from the Soviet Union. For documentation, see ibid., 033.9861. On March 22, Nasution asked Jones to inform Rusk that the trip to Moscow “involved no change of GOI policy either external or internal.” (Telegram 2716 from Djakarta, March 22; ibid., 033.9861/3–2261)

146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Hare) 146. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Parsons) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Hare)Source

Washington, February 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

Reiteration of Warning to Indonesia Against Use of Force

FE cannot concur in the EUR proposal1 that our opposition to the use of force in settling international disputes again be reiterated to the Indonesians with specific reference to the West New Guinea problem for the following reasons: 1. Such an approach to the Indonesians would have no effect. We have, largely at the instigation of the Dutch, conveyed a warning to the Indonesians 13 times in the last 30 months. The Indonesians have absolutely no doubt about our policy. In this regard, an Indonesian Foreign Ministry spokesman on January 16, 1961, when discussing the subject of augmentation of Dutch forces in West New Guinea, said, “it would be most unwise on the part of some Western circles to ask a guarantee merely from the Indonesian side that the West Irian dispute will be settled through peaceful means.”

2. The Indonesians have cautiously suggested that they anticipate an improvement in relations with us under the new Administration in the United States. To start off by reiterating the position they know so well would severely damage this favorable climate. Reiteration now might cause Sukarno to question the sincerity of President Kennedy’s recent message to him which stated, “I am extremely anxious that the friendly relations between our countries continue to prosper.”

3. The intelligence community and FE are in agreement that there is little likelihood of an Indonesian attack on West New Guinea during the next six months.2

4. In FE’s view the way to prevent such an attack is not to continually admonish the Indonesians on the instigation of the Dutch, but rather to seek a change in the situation which would make an attack less likely. We are now in the process of discussing a plan which, if successful, would put a UN presence in West New Guinea. This, in our opinion, would be a more effective deterrent than any further comments we might make to the Indonesians.

5. In recent months there has been considerable discussion of the West New Guinea problem and Sukarno most probably perceives that the international community now realizes that some solution to the issue must be forthcoming. The increased strength of the Afro-Asian group in the UN is a favorable element for Sukarno. In these circumstances, he is unlikely to make a military move designed to change the status quo when it is probable that a diplomatic move in the UN would have a good chance of success. A military move against West New Guinea would be an act of desperation, and there is no present reason for Sukarno to assess the situation as desperate.

6. It seems to me that this boils down to a question of whether we take an action which will further alienate the Indonesians and drive them closer to the Communists by again acceding to a Dutch request or whether we refuse to further jeopardize our position in Indonesia and cause the Dutch some annoyance.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1361. Secret. Drafted by Bell and Lindquist and cleared by Steeves.

1 The proposal was made in a memorandum from Kohler to Parsons, February 6. (Ibid., 656.9813/2–661)

2 As stated in a memorandum from Charles N. Spinks, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for Asia, to Bell, January 27. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–2761)

147. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 147. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, February 14, 1961.

SUBJECT

Visit of President Sukarno to the United States

We have been informed by Ambassador Jones in Djakarta that President Sukarno of Indonesia will make another world tour this spring, during which he is expected to visit the United States and, on the invitation of Premier Khrushchev, the Soviet Union. The Ambassador strongly recommends that President Sukarno be invited to meet with you in Washington during his visit in the United States.1

The Indonesian Foreign Minister has told our Ambassador that Sukarno believes the United States is opposed to him personally and that it is, in fact, “plotting” against him. These feelings, supported in Sukarno’s view by the failure of President Eisenhower to accept repeated invitations to visit Indonesia, by our refusal to support Indonesian claims to West New Guinea and by the open hostility of the United States press, have played an important part in influencing him to closer and more cordial relations with the USSR. The visit of Premier Khrushchev to Indonesia in February 1960, the continuing Moscow support of Sukarno’s desire for recognition as a leader of the Afro-Asian Bloc and Soviet support of Indonesian claims to West New Guinea, underlined by a recent military equipment purchase agreement between the two countries of very large proportions, have also fostered his tendency to seek support for his program from the Indonesian Communist Party.

On the other hand, he has given, in his congratulatory messages to you following the election and upon the occasion of your inauguration and also in conversations with the Ambassador, strong evidence of a desire for closer cooperation with the United States. He has clearly indicated to the Ambassador his hopes that the United States will take a new view in its relations to him and to Indonesia. I believe it is very much in our interest to foster these feelings whenever we are in a position to do so in view of the fact that Sukarno is in nearly absolute control of Indonesia’s destiny for the time being.

We have been informed that Sukarno plans to make a two-day visit to the United States, tentatively scheduled for April 24–25, and that he hopes to be able to meet with you. I believe we should seize this opportunity to support his desire for a warm personal relationship with you and to encourage him to closer cooperation with us. Accordingly, I recommend that you authorize the Ambassador to initiate discussions looking toward a short informal visit to Washington by President Sukarno.2

Dean Rusk3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/2–1461. Confidential. Drafted by Linehan and cleared by Parsons, Bell, Roger W. Tubby, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol, and Hare.

1 In telegram 2352 from Djakarta, February 13. (Ibid., 611.98/2–1361)

2 Telegram 1297 to Djakarta, February 21, instructed Jones to deliver an invitation for Sukarno to visit Washington to renew his friendship with President Kennedy. (Ibid., 798.11/2–2161)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles) 148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Under Secretary of State (Bowles)Source

Washington, February 18, 1961.

It seems to me that the attached study1 is incomplete, in that it does not deal with some important questions relevant to a United Nations administered trusteeship.

(a) How much would such a trusteeship cost? This is relevant for us because we would be expected to pay a very large part of the bill. Do we know how much Dutch administration costs them? If so, we could multiply it by a factor of three or four because of the additional services and developmental efforts which would be insisted upon under UN administration.

(b) Who would staff the administration of the armed forces? Approximately how many would this require?

On practical grounds, I am dubious about a UN administration of almost a million people which would be under the control of the Trusteeship Council or the General Assembly.2 Or do we have in mind that the Secretary General would be the principal executive agent? Would not a governor of such a trust territory be in a most difficult position with respect to his own bosses and governing authority?

Could we think of any compendium of three or four countries who might accept such a trusteeship and take all the responsibilities that go with it?3

I am not now suggesting an answer, but I do think that at least the first two of these questions should be given somewhat more attention.4

Dean Rusk5

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1861. Secret. Drafted by Rusk.

1 Not attached, the study was a draft paper that George McGhee of S/P submitted on February 15 to McGeorge Bundy entitled “Possible United Nations Resolution on West New Guinea.” The paper traced the West New Guinea/West Irian dispute from 1949 and concluded that a U.N. trusteeship might be the best solution since it would give the Dutch a way to retire gracefully. To succeed, however, Sukarno would have to be convinced a trusteeship was the only practical way of removing Dutch control. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 2/61–3/61)

2 In a February 17 memorandum, Robert Komer informed Rostow that the trusteeship idea might have succeeded 5 years ago, but not at the present time with Indonesia’s new military power and the new alignment at the United Nations. Komer recommended a policy on West New Guinea offering the Indonesians a promise of early effective control with as much face-saving for the Dutch as possible. (Ibid.) Director of Central Intelligence John McCone made similar points in a February 20 memorandum to McGhee. (Ibid.) Kenneth Landon, in a memorandum to Rostow on February 15 commenting on McGhee’s proposal, stated that the United States “should not permit this colonial issue to continue to infect adversely our aims and objectives in South and Southeast Asia.” (Ibid.)

3 On February 3, Rusk had asked Parsons about the utility of a U.N. resolution calling for settlement of the West New Guinea problem by peaceful means. In a February 21 memorandum to him, Parsons stated that the resolution would probably provoke acrimonious debate on the colonial issue at the United Nations and would not contribute to a settlement. (Ibid.) Also on February 21, Rusk met from 3 to 3:43 p.m. with McGhee, Rice, Kohler, William L. Blue, Deputy Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, Steeves, Bell, and Woodruff Wallner, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Organization Affairs. The topic of discussion was Indonesia, but no other record of the discussion has been found. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

4 On February 21, McGhee submitted a memorandum to Rusk through Bowles that attempted to answer the Secretary’s questions. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2161)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

149. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 149. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 23, 1961, 3 p.m.

2426. Presidential Handling. Deptel 1297,1 Embtel 2418, 2423.2 President Sukarno expressed great pleasure upon receipt of President Kennedy’s message. He read it carefully twice, nodded his head, said “good, good. I am very pleased about this.” Sukarno then referred to informal nature of visit, said this was fine, created warm, friendly atmosphere between 2 leaders at same time affording opportunity for discussion serious problems.

“International relations are human relations,” Sukarno said, repeating favorite expression of his. “Let me tell you in strictest confidence what happened last time I was in Washington.” He then repeated story of how President Eisenhower had kept him waiting in anteroom for 10 minutes, causing him great embarrassment before members of his party. (Embtel 2352)3

Sukarno said he had “great expectations” of Kennedy’s administration with respect to understanding of Asia. “Let us deal with each other as friends,” Sukarno said. “For example, even if the visit is informal, it would make so much difference in feelings of my people if President Kennedy could come out to airport, welcome me as old friend, make me feel welcome. This is what happens in other countries.” There was more of same, emphasizing importance of warm, friendly, heart-to-heart relationship which means so much to Asians who are yearning to be genuinely treated as equals.

We then discussed timing of release of announcement, Sukarno saying “the sooner the better. Let us release it just as soon as possible. Today, if possible.” At same time indicated he wished meet President Kennedy’s convenience this respect. He then suggested noon today but when I pointed out problem of communication involved, he responded with “7 o’clock tomorrow morning, then, so that we may make 7 o’clock news broadcast here.” I told him I would communicate with Washington at once and advise him later today.

As for date of visit, Sukarno said he had not as yet made up his mind whether to proceed to Washington via Bangkok, Manila and California or whether to make European stops prior to Washington. He asked my advice. I replied I had no views on this but that we should appreciate knowing soon as convenient what his plans are.

President received me 7:30 am, his aide having telephoned late last night to change appointment from 9:45 at President’s request in order to give us more time. President greeted me warmly when I arrived at Merdeka Palace. I expressed appreciation for the kind message of sympathy which he had sent me through the Foreign Office in connection with damage to the Residence. He said he also hoped that Madame Sukarno whom Mrs. Jones saw yesterday had also conveyed how badly they felt. I responded Mrs. Jones had deeply appreciated the warm expression from Madame Sukarno.

President then said that these demonstrations which were worldwide resulted from bad image America projected in world. US must make “fundamental change in its attitude and actions on subject of colonialism.” Sukarno referred to Senator Morse’s statement on this subject which was featured on page 1 of newspapers here, emphasized Morse was absolutely right. Sukarno said he felt he knew American people and understood their feelings which had not been adequately represented by previous administration.

I told President my chief concern regarding incident was possible effect it would have on US-Indonesian relations as result of American reaction. Material damage was unimportant compared to this. President quickly assented, said nothing must interfere with our good relations.

President then referred to President Kennedy’s book Strategy of Peace which he said he had read with very great interest. President Kennedy’s speeches are good, reveal clear understanding of important problems in world. Speeches one thing; administration another, Sukarno stressed. If President Kennedy implemented ideas contained in his speeches, all Asia would respond and entire atmosphere would be changed.

“The years the locusts have eaten”, Sukarno quoted. “One of things they have eaten is understanding between American and Asian-African countries who have felt Americans always on side of colonialism, opposing aspirations new nations.”

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/2–2361. Confidential; Priority.

1 See footnote 2, Document 147.

2 Telegrams 2418 and 2423, February 22 and 23, dealt with arrangements for Jones’ interview with Sukarno. (Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/2–2261 and 798.11/2–2361)

3 See footnote 1, Document 147.

150. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 150. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, March 3, 1961, 3 p.m.

2508. CINCPAC also for POLAD. Embtel 2154.1 Embassy does not consider necessary at this time to re-submit analysis of pros and cons of New Guinea question in order to spell out recommendation of sevenpoint program contained reftel. Dept has made exhaustive studies, is fully informed of fact that all Indo foreign policy, much of Indo internal political life, revolves around this cardinal issue.

Embassy would like, however, to point out present appears to be most favorable moment for taking initiative to find solution; initiative which unlikely to come from any other source having equal amount of influence with both parties.

There has clearly been created a different atmosphere over this question than has existed at any time in the past. We now have the picture of Luns, other Dutch leaders, on one hand, Subandrio and company on the other, conducting, however indirectly, a sort of public exchange on this issue in lieu of direct discussion. Further, efforts of Rahman have attracted far more interest on part of both Dutch and Indonesians than might reasonably have been expected a year or two ago. For almost first time adversaries have begun to speak in terms of finite positions, which are always susceptible to bargaining. For example, the Indos once contended that UN trusteeship would be anathema under any circumstances.

Now, although they have not gone so far as to be willing to call a trusteeship a trusteeship, they talk in terms of “one or two years” of some kind of interregnum as being acceptable.

While Embassy would not undertake to analyze position of Netherlands, we have observed public reports, private comments, suggesting Netherlands thinking in terms of 10-year or similar period tutelage with self-determination as goal. Embassy submits these positions, however far apart, are of nature susceptible to compromise. Meanwhile, Australians appear to stand on position taken about year ago that they would not interfere with any arrangement reached by peaceful means between Dutch, Indos.

There is further increasing evidence that Indo war talk has become somewhat muted in recent weeks while Dutch speak publicly, at least, with much more confidence that Indos are not planning seize West New Guinea by force.

Embassy inclined to doubt, however, once valid objective of bringing about face-to-face discussion between Dutch, Indos any longer feasible. Indeed, such confrontation more likely to exacerbate situation than to ameliorate it. Honest broker necessary. While such role possibly inappropriate for US, US could at least be of assistance in locating one, such as UN.

Dept in best position to select course of action. Forthcoming visit of Sukarno would provide ideal opportunity to broach new plan for overall US initiative. Embassy urges therefore, that determination of course of action, together with any preliminary exploration with Netherlands, Australia, British or others, such as Malayans, be expedited with that in view.

Unless New Guinea question can be promptly removed as source of Soviet strength and US weakness, as incipient cause of war and as platform for variety of unhealthful isms within Indonesia, our best efforts in any other direction will fail to achieve our objectives here.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/3–361. Confidential. Repeated to CINCPAC.

1 Document 143.

151. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency 151. Brief Prepared in the Defense Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, March 7, 1961.

SNIE 55–61: OUTLOOK IN INDONESIA WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO WEST NEW GUINEA1

This Special National Intelligence Estimate was approved by the United States Intelligence Board on 7 March 1961. Significant judgments in the estimate are:

The present balance of political forces in Indonesia is not likely to change dramatically during the next year or so. President Sukarno will continue to be successful in balancing the Army and the Communist Party off against each other while retaining for himself the controlling power position. However, Sukarno’s current slide to the left is continuing. The Indonesian Communist Party is now strongly represented in every important body of the central government except the cabinet, and non-Communist political parties have been all but eliminated as major political factors. Anti-Communist efforts of Nasution and the army have not halted or reversed the steadily growing strength and influence of the Communist Party.

Although he will probably continue to seek a balance in Indonesian relations with the major Communist and non-Communist nations, Sukarno’s recent tendency to move closer to the Bloc is likely to continue. The Soviet effort to capture Sukarno and Indonesia through personal diplomacy and military and economic assistance has reached substantial proportions and appears to be making significant progress.

Indonesia is looking to the Communist Bloc for important contributions to its economic and military development, and the Bloc appears willing to meet most Indonesian requests. Total Bloc loans offered to Indonesia now amount to about $1,103 million—$593 million for military aid and $510 million for economic assistance. Despite this and Sukarno’s ambitious development plans, the Indonesian economy will probably continue its trend of slow decline. Indonesia’s trade with the Communist Bloc will almost certainly increase over its present level of 12 percent.

The Army has for the first time apparently accepted a sizable amount of Soviet aid, thereby giving the Soviet Union a potentially important advantage. Military spokesmen have made clear their preference for US equipment and training, but have been disappointed with the amount received and critical of the delays and red tape involved. The anti-Communist stand of the army may be somewhat eroded as Soviet military aid and training programs are implemented.

The Indonesians will probably continue to wage a vigorous campaign to assert sovereignty over West New Guinea but will probably seek to do so primarily by political means. They will probably also at times resort to military threats, patrol activities, and small unit infiltrations designed to dramatize Indonesian claims. At the same time, Indonesian frustration over not reaching their objective, combined with the acquisition of new Soviet military equipment, will increase progressively the danger of larger scale military action by Indonesia.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Assistant to SecDef (Lansdale) Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Indonesia, No. 1, 1960 thru. Secret. The source text has Gilpatric’s name stamped on it.

1 Not printed. (Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 55–61)

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, March 7, 1961, 2 p.m.

2536. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embassy telegram 2154.1 Our military assistance to Indo has lost much of promising 1958–59 momentum in strengthening anti-Communist cause. There are several reasons for this, only one of which is competition provided by open-handed largesse of Soviet military services. While this presently beyond our control, other reasons subject to corrective action by us.

Most important corrective action necessary is to revise our whole approach to Indo armed forces, abandoning doctrine of “token” aid in favor of wholehearted cooperation between equals. Our limited aid program was conceived as application of carrot technique. If Indo armed forces effectively anti-Communist, we would reward this by limited amount of assistance, then stand back observe results. A little more anti-Communism, a little more aid, etc., holding out promise of full cooperation in distant future.

Indos, of course, quickly became aware from our performance that something of kind was in wind, galling their nationalistic sensibilities to utmost. Meanwhile, we insisted on aid mechanics devised primarily for application to such countries as Thailand, Republic of China, South Korea, Philippines. It was US that set force goals within which aid requests would be fixed. These force goals, of course, had to make “military sense” from point of view of military men. At same time, we were strictly enjoined from talking to Indos in terms of assistance farther ahead than current fiscal year, while seeking on other hand to draw from them firm estimates as to their own intentions.

All this has been bewildering enough to Indos. When unexplained delay in deliveries, failure to answer simple questions about US willingness to supply such mundane requirements as Marine Corps rifles are added to picture, it is easy to understand why Indos desire alternative source of military supply. (Rifles removed as current case in point by Deptel 1368.)2 As though this lack of flexibility were not enough, additional handicap of politically inspired limitations on types of weapons which can be sold to Indo, limitations clearly intended meet wishes of enemy Dutch, has settled question even in minds of most pro-American officers.

SovBloc is, of course, meanwhile using its military aid offers in shrewd attempt to undermine Army/Navy faith in its own leadership which up to now is sole force able prevent Communist takeover Indo. Bloc strategy is to show Army/Navy that their present military leaders, in spite of anti-Communist posture, must when chips down turn to bloc to meet real needs armed forces.3

In this situation it is futile for us to try any longer to straightjacket Indo Army/Navy by our force goals and political restrictions.

Instead, our military aid program should be rapidly revised to: 1) strengthen confidence in US on part of anti-Communist Indo military leadership; 2) prevent Soviets from being sole source of conspicuous equipment (such as operational aircraft, amphibious tanks, heavy AA weapons, combat ships) which creates impression armed forces must rely on them; and 3) supply some of modern, complex equipment Indos want so as to reduce numbers of future Indo military leaders and technicians trained in bloc or by bloc mission in Indo. Incentive for them to train in US or by US training teams here would thus be provided.

Foregoing program is based on recognition of fact fundamental purpose in providing aid is political: namely strengthening anti-Communist military leadership. That means we must base future decision re type and size equipment on Indo’s own concept of roles and missions, which not confined to internal security alone. We can no longer, in any event, forestall Indos from developing the strength to oust Dutch from WNG or from building kind of forces they consider they require. Like other ambitious but insecure new countries, they are convinced strong armed forces essential to consolidation nationhood and establishment prestige.

While we cannot and should not attempt match bloc aid in amount, we should appreciate and respond sympathetically to reasonable determination Indo military leaders to have size and quantity forces appropriate to this sixth largest nation, located on vulnerable flank of highly strategic area of increasing significance and whose natural enemy, as even FonMin admits privately, is same as that of US and its Asian allies: namely Communist China.

We should recognize Indo, unlike most other nations receiving MAP aid, has no commitment to mutual defense objectives, does not consider that its forces are part of US grand strategy, and therefore conditions here do not conform to usual format for MAAG reports and congressional justifications. Adjustment of our policies and procedures to this situation is essential if we are to succeed. On positive side, to implement adjustment in program, I strongly recommend: 1) early conversion of token program established to meet needs existing in 1958 into full-scale programs; and 2) authorization MILTAG to discuss five-year program, on non-commitment basis, with Indo military leaders in order permit timely revisions which may help reduce equipment to be procured from Soviets.

Program increase should permit supply of equipment strongly desired by Nasution, Jani and staff, such as armored cars and light tanks, which if not obtainable otherwise, should be supplied by US offshore purchase. Increase also should support Martadinata’s ultimate 60,000-strong navy. Similar example of revised program content would be provision of some of jet fighter aircraft described by Nurtanio (AIRA C–109 DTG 260339Z Oct),4 as well as heavy construction equipment army leadership strongly desires and now reportedly planning obtain from Soviet sources. We should also immediately authorize direct purchase other US military equipment on favorable terms, as Indos willing pay in hard currency for some of equipment they need.

It is, of course, not necessary that additional equipment begin arriving immediately. What is needed is evidence of new approach as manifested in ability provide commitments to begin supplying desired items within reasonable time. This, of course, raises question ability Indo armed forces to utilize. While they have far to go, absorptive capacity has improved. Further, there are strong indications that demonstration sincere US intention provide increased support on more than year-to-year basis would slow down Indo desire buy excess equipment against anticipated day of famine. Chief problems are insufficient trained technicians, supervisory personnel in navy, limited maintenance capability air force, army. Problems of absorptive capacity can be aided to considerable extent by additional mobile training plus some increase in MILTAG’s staff. Soviets, of course, unconcerned about this problem, do not raise questions as to absorptive capacity.

Finally, priority of Indo for deliveries should now be raised. Present long lead times suggest Indo well down on list for production and shipping authorities. Irrespective of reasons therefor, great gap between expedited arrival by air of equipment planned in FY 1958 and that for subsequent fiscal years has created doubt among military leaders re US intentions. At present stage Indos unable plan far ahead, which makes quick response to their requests important. Continuation of delay between decision and performance will further tend induce Indo reliance on Soviet sources supply.

Military aid program so adjusted is essential if US is to improve its leverage within Indo armed forces in face Soviet aid campaign. Most Indo military leaders would prefer US aid but ideological considerations alone will not induce them to reject Soviet alternatives.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/3–761. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC.

1 Document 143.

2 Dated March 5. (Department of State, Central Files, 798.56/2–161)

3 In a March 2 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Komer commented: “Anyone who doesn’t believe that the Indonesians are planning something eventually in West New Guinea need only look at the new Soviet aid agreements.” He listed the equipment the Soviets were supplying and concluded:

“Since the only conceivable amphibious operation Indos might have in mind would be New Guinea, it’s quite clear what they have in mind, and Sovs egging them on to do it.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 2/61–3/61)

4 Dated October 26, 1960. (Department of State, Central Files, 798.56/10–2660)

153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 153. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, March 17, 1961.

SUBJECT

Appeal on Behalf of Allen Pope

It is expected that you will shortly receive, from Mrs. Allen Pope, a letter in which she will appeal to you to intercede, on behalf of her husband, with President Sukarno of Indonesia during his forthcoming visit to Washington.

Mr. Pope is an American pilot who has been in prison in Indonesia for nearly three years and whose sentence of death is now under review by the Indonesian Supreme Court. A decision is expected from this Court within the next six or seven weeks which, if adverse, will leave Mr. Pope with but one further recourse under Indonesian law, that of an appeal to President Sukarno for executive clemency. A brief history of Mr. Pope’s case is appended for your background information.

It is recommended that a reply be sent to any appeal to you from Mrs. Pope saying that you regard her appeal sympathetically and that you will seek an opportunity to raise Allen Pope’s case with President Sukarno when he calls upon you.

Dean Rusk

Enclosure1

ALLEN L. POPE

1. In November 1957 at a high level in our government approval was given to a special political action program in Indonesia calling for the maintenance as a force in being of the anti-communist, pro-West dissident movement established by anti-Sukarno military commanders in Sumatra and the Celebes. This program later authorized the provision of arms and other military aid to the dissidents including air support. Several C.A.T. pilots volunteered for this work, ostensibly took leave from their C.A.T. jobs and, as “Soldiers of Fortune” employed by the dissidents, undertook combat missions. On 18 May 1958 one of these pilots, Mr. Allen Lawrence Pope, was shot down by anti-aircraft fire and captured while making a bombing attack upon shipping in Ambon, Celebes.

2. Pope was tried before an Indonesian Military Tribunal in December 1959 on various counts of aiding the enemies of Indonesia and bearing arms against Indonesia. He was convicted and sentenced to death on 29 April 1960. A military appellate court upheld this decision in December 1960. An appeal is pending before the Indonesian Supreme Court. A decision may be announced at any time. Recent information from the Indonesian Prosecutor indicates that it may come prior to President Sukarno’s departure in late April 1961. If, as expected, the Supreme Court confirms the death sentence, Indonesian law requires a thirty-day delay before the execution of the sentence, during which Sukarno must personally concur in the execution of the sentence and Pope will be granted the opportunity to appeal for presidential clemency.

3. Throughout his many interrogations and the trial itself, Pope has maintained his story that he volunteered to fly for the dissidents of his own free will in the belief that in so doing he would be helping to fight communism. He has not implicated the United States Government in his activities. The Indonesian authorities, however, are by now well aware that the Dissident Movement was given support and encouragement by the governments of the United States [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

4. Although preservation of Pope’s cover story has required considerable circumspection on the part of U.S. officials in dealing with Indonesian authorities on this subject, the U.S. Embassy in Djakarta has been able to maintain contact with Pope and with the Indonesian officials immediately concerned with his case. Following the imposition of the death sentence, both Secretary of State Herter and Ambassador Jones took appropriate opportunities to express to Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio their concern over the severity of the sentence and the damage which its execution might have on U.S.-Indonesian relations. In December 1960 Pope’s wife visited Indonesia and was granted a personal interview with President Sukarno in order to plead for Sukarno’s intercession on her husband’s behalf. Sukarno promised to give the Pope Case his “very deepest consideration.” At this meeting, Ambassador Jones presented to Sukarno a letter from President Eisenhower expressing a personal interest in the Pope case. In January 1961 U.S. Air Force General White expressed to Indonesian Air Force Chief of Staff Suryadarma the hope that the Indonesian Government might see fit to extend leniency to Pope as a gesture of good will toward the United States. Mrs. Pope has recently returned from Indonesia and has written to President Kennedy requesting his intercession on her husband’s behalf. She plans to return to Indonesia to be present when the Supreme Court decision is handed down.

5. Despite certain debatable aspects of the Indonesian legal proceedings, it is undoubtedly true that Pope was guilty of the major charges on which he was convicted. It is quite apparent, however, that the final disposition of the case will be determined on political rather than purely legal grounds. The expected timing of the Supreme Court’s announcement of its decision suggests a connection with the forthcoming meeting between President Kennedy and President Sukarno.

6. In my opinion2 Pope’s conduct both before and after his capture entitles him to our gratitude and any appropriate action to mitigate his sentence.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case. Confidential.

1 Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the President read it.

2 The first person in the memorandum is not identified.

154. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 154. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, March 20, 1961.

SUBJECT

Guy Pauker’s Three Rand Papers on Indonesia1

There is attached an original and one copy of a condensation2 of the three papers by Guy Pauker prepared as requested for possible reading by the President. I have attempted to present the essence of Guy’s argument in each paper.

I believe that Guy’s ideas are worth passing on to the President3 and should be helpful to him in preparing for his visit with Sukarno as well as for dealing with the larger questions of our policy toward Indonesia. I think it is worthwhile to bear in mind in this connection, however, that the papers all contain some highly speculative material which is sometimes supported, if at all, by quite impressionistic evidence. I do not mean to condemn the arguments on this basis. On the contrary.

However, one major argument in the February 3 paper seems to me to suffer rather seriously from weak logical as well as factual support. This is the theory that Sukarno can see a future for himself as a world leader only as a spokesman for the Soviet Bloc. The chain of reasoning runs something like this (references are to Guy’s paper of February 3, 1961, summarized in pp. 6–7 of the attached):

a. Sukarno is anti-Western and his political interests and philosophy are in conflict with the West. (No evidence is presented for the statement with respect to his anti-Westernism other, perhaps, than Guy’s later statement of his conviction that, when Sukarno and his colleagues say that imperialism is the main enemy, they mean primarily the United States, only secondarily the Dutch (see pp. 6–7). It is not clear why Guy considers Sukarno more anti-Western than Nasser or Nkrumah, whom he sees as genuine neutralists (p. 3). Has Sukarno’s previous ambivalence toward the West really changed to a completely anti-Western view? If by Sukarno’s “political interests” Guy means West Irian, there is, at present at least, a conflict though a shift in the U. S. position could reduce the conflict. If “political interests” include internal political interests, it is by no means clear that they are wholly in conflict with ours.)

b. Sukarno would have strong competition from the Nehrus, Nassers and Nkrumahs as a major spokesman of the genuinely uncommitted Asian-African nations, but would, through the Soviet propaganda machine, gain much acclaim if he were to become the Asian-African champion of the Bloc (p. 3). (But the Soviet propaganda machine now gives the fullest play to any actions of Nehru, Nasser and Nkrumah which can be interpreted as pro-Soviet. The Soviets are likely to continue to look upon these three as more important leaders from their point of view than Sukarno. If the Russians are not likely to give Sukarno a bigger propaganda play than Nehru et al., Sukarno does not escape the latter’s competition in this way. Now Sukarno might, quite irrationally, believe that it will be otherwise, but Guy’s argument is presented as a speculative analysis of Sukarno’s rational calculations.)

c. Sukarno believes that Communism is the wave of the future. (This is argued on highly inferential grounds (see p. 4). Thus, Sukarno’s visit to the United States in 1956 “may have left a bitter memory” because it did not get him support on West Irian. His subsequent visit to the USSR and Communist China “must have . . . planted the roots of his growing belief that Communism is the wave of the future. . . . Nasser’s success in the Suez crisis, then a year later the ‘sputnik’ must have strengthened this attitude. If the Soviets, as is fair to assume, followed this development carefully, by February 1960 Sukarno may have been ripe to be picked by Khrushchev personally.”)

I hope this does not seem a bit of logic chopping. The point at issue obviously has important policy implications. I am not arguing that Guy may not be right, only that he has not proved his case. Moreover, despite the above argument, Guy is by no means clear on the extent to which he attributes some of Sukarno’s actions to past U. S. policies and the extent to which Sukarno could be influenced by changes in our policy (see pp. 5–7 of his paper; p. 7 of the attached summary). One of Guy’s problems in this regard is that he does not seem to me to have decided whether a change in the U.S. position on West Irian would be a net advantage or a net disadvantage to the U.S., though he inclines toward the latter view.

A second point that gives me some trouble is Guy’s emphasis upon the significance of Nasution’s statements in Moscow as an indication that the General’s anti-Communism has been undermined. The U.S. government, I understand, has information (which Guy did not have when he wrote his paper) that Nasution attempted subsequently to reassure us. Nasution’s statements themselves, moreover, seem to me generally to be of the kind one would expect in such a situation. Guy is clearly going through a considerable (largely justified) disillusionment with the Indonesian military (see pp. 54–58 of his paper on the military) which may have influenced his judgment here. Other aspects of his analysis of the effects of the arms deal seem to me valid or at least arguable.

Let me make clear that, with the exceptions noted, I find the analysis generally convincing and very interesting. My criticisms apply primarily to Guy’s most recent paper; it gives some evidence of having been put together with less care than the others.

Bob Johnson

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Rand Studies, Part A. Confidential.

1 These studies, done by Pauker for the Rand Corporation, were RM–2619–RC, “Recent Communist Tactics in Indonesia,” August 15, 1960; RM–2637–RC, “The Role of the Military in Indonesia,” September 1, 1960; and D–8448, “Indonesia’s Drift Toward the Soviet Bloc,” February 3, 1961. The papers are 21, 65, and 42 pages long, respectively. (Ibid.)

2 Not attached. The condensation of the three papers, which is 10 pages long, is ibid.

3 There is no indication that the President read the condensation.

155. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Bissell) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 155. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Bissell) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 27, 1961.

I am sending you herewith a rather long-promised paper on Indonesia. Inevitably this is a mixture of an intelligence estimate and some analysis of the implications of this estimate for U.S. policy (this is not, of course, a formal national intelligence estimate). I would hope for an opportunity for some discussion of the issues raised in this paper on an appropriate occasion (either one of the Tuesday lunches or any other group that is reviewing policy toward Indonesia).

RMB jr1

Attachment2

Washington, March 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Indonesian Perspectives

1. Indonesia’s growing vulnerability to communism stems from the distinctive bias of Sukarno’s global orientation, as well as from his domestic policies. The former propels that country toward the Soviet orbit. The latter sap the political foundation of any organized attempt to deny the Communist Party a mass base, strive to neutralize the Indonesian Army as a force opposing communism, and permit economic mal-administration to stifle all constructive impulses toward improving the lot of the Indonesian people. Dissident movements on Java and the outlying islands, which have a basically anti-Communist orientation, have been permitted to wither from lack of sustenance. They are now virtually on their last legs and no longer represent a viable force in being. In Attachment B to this paper, entitled “Countervailing Forces?”,3 we attempt to shed light upon the factors which render the Indonesian Army progressively more ineffectual in its containment of communism, and present an estimate of dissident strength upon which we base our conclusion that as a political power factor it no longer counts.

2. Economic factors are likely to play a decisive role in making Indonesia ripe for a Communist takeover. While it can be argued that the vast majority of the rural population of Indonesia are impervious to the hardships of life on a bare subsistence level, the urban proletariat, especially in Java, may be found less supine. An Eight-Year Plan has been launched, predicated on the availability of foreign loans on an unrealistic scale of magnitude. A growing budgetary load will have to be borne in order to fund Indonesia’s preparations for a showdown over West Irian. The expansion of Indonesia’s military establishment is bound to make heavy inroads into Indonesia’s financial resources. Consequently, a continuing and accelerated decline in the economic life of Indonesia is very probable. While economic atrophy may set the stage for a Communist uprising, we consider it more likely that (barring completely unforeseen developments) Sukarno’s “Guided Democracy” will be permitted by the PKI to run its natural course. This would enable the Communist Party to take over the leadership of Indonesia at a time when radical changes in the methods of administering Indonesian domestic affairs become the inescapable alternative to perpetual chaos. Even achievement of a modus vivendi between the United States and President Sukarno could not stave off such a development.

3. While many factors of the Indonesian situation remain objects of contention, it would be hard to deny Sukarno’s responsibility for the economic decline of Indonesia. That his dictatorship may possibly endure as long as he lives strikes us as the crux of the Indonesian problem. In Attachment A of this paper, entitled “President Sukarno—Key to the Indonesian Situation,”4 we are attempting to throw into more striking relief the many insoluble problems besetting Indonesia, which can directly be traced back to Sukarno’s personality and to the political philosophy that animates him. As we see it, Sukarno’s continued leadership of Indonesia—irrespective of his momentary friendships with the Bloc or the West—renders Indonesia increasingly more vulnerable to PKI strategy, which is to make its decisive bid for legal power under circumstances of economic and political chaos with all other political solutions evidently exhausted.

4. The forthcoming talks between Presidents Kennedy and Sukarno will take place in the shadow of a threat of war between Indonesia and the Netherlands over West Irian. The United States, having thus far observed “impartiality” regarding this issue, may be forced to abandon this stance, should the crisis deepen. With abandonment of “impartiality” connoting involvement, the United States Government will have no choice but to take a position regarding the validity of Indonesia’s claim to sovereignty over West Irian.

5. This paper does not intend to address itself to the legal merits of the respective claims advanced by Indonesia and the Netherlands. Both nations have made it abundantly clear that they do not consider the ownership issue as “sub judice” but as a bare contest of power, with Indonesia claiming that its national independence will necessarily remain incomplete and in permanent jeopardy as long as the Netherlands maintains its hold over West Irian. We realize that this may be considered a simplification of an issue which has become a highly sensitive internal political question in both countries, complicated by considerations of national pride and “face” and by the entire history of Dutch-Indonesian relations.

6. Without suggesting that other factors can be ignored in determining United States policy regarding West Irian, we believe that one important aspect has not as yet been given sufficient consideration—namely, how United States interests will be affected if Indonesia carries the day and ownership of West Irian is awarded to her. We believe that accession to Indonesia’s claim as long as Sukarno is in power would not serve the best interests of United States security in that part of the world. We consider it likely that Indonesia’s success in this particular instance will set in train the launching of further irredentist ventures already foreshadowed in lectures given by Professor Yamin, an avowed extremist who, however, is a member of the Indonesian cabinet close to President Sukarno. Success would be bound to cement relations between Indonesia and the USSR, which, in addition to throwing the full weight of its political support behind the West Irian campaign, is liberally providing Indonesia with military aid specifically designed to enable her to oust the Dutch from West Irian by force of arms. President Sukarno’s prestige and power in Indonesia and in Asia as a whole would grow immeasurably, since nothing succeeds like success. Even assuming that it were the weight of United States power and prestige which gained Indonesia a bloodless and prestigious victory, we would not gain that country’s respect, let alone affection. Indonesia’s leadership would see to it that the true record of events would be slanted to substantiate the boast that it was the threat of USSR intervention, the leadership of President Sukarno and the unflinching support given him by the Communist Party which combined in making this victory possible. Predictions that the Indonesian armed forces, once freed from their preoccupations with the Dutch threat, would be able to concentrate upon dislodging communism from positions of influence tend to ignore the demonstrated effectiveness of President Sukarno’s tactics of never allowing the army a sufficient breathing spell to consolidate and methodically deploy its political strength in combatting communism. There is nothing to encourage the belief that President Sukarno intends to abandon those tactics once West Irian has been annexed. In sum, by backing Indonesia’s claim to sovereignty over West Irian, we may inadvertently help to consolidate a regime which is innately antagonistic toward the United States.

7. The proposal of a United Nations trusteeship, which the Department of State appears to favor, would go a long way toward de-fusing the West Irian time bomb which President Sukarno himself has primed. It would present an at least temporary solution of the problem, permitting the United States to escape the opprobrium of having sided with the Netherlands on a “colonialist” issue. However, unless confronted with unmistakable manifestations of United States resolve not to permit a settlement of the West Irian issue by force of arms, and of our vigorous opposition to turning this area over to the Indonesians without any observance of self-determination procedures, the Sukarno regime would be unlikely to acquiesce in the imposition of such a trusteeship.

8. It has been argued (Djakarta Embassy Telegram No. 1861, dated December 28, 1960)5 that the new policy of the Soviet Union vis-à-vis Indonesia leaves us with only one practicable alternative, namely, “to continue a moderate program of economic and military assistance sufficient to bolster the political position of our friends within Indonesia and to enable those who are willing to stand on principle to do so without being submerged by the overwhelming temptation of and pressures engendered by Soviet offers.” The foregoing alternative would seem to epitomize policies that have been tried by the United States Government since Indonesia gained her independence and that have failed in the attainment of their set objectives to keep Indonesia out of Communist hands. We are disposed to argue that our national policy should be to treat Indonesia as a case in which appeasement, whether by word or by deed, will buy us nothing. Hence to propose stepped up aid as a blueprint, for future action simply begs the question whether Communist ascendancy in Indonesia can be curbed as long as Sukarno remains in power. We believe it cannot.

9. It would be gratifying to be able to propose an alternative course of action by the United States which would stand a good chance of turning the course of events in Indonesia in a constructive direction. Unfortunately, this is a situation in which the influence that the United States can exert, at least in the short run, is extremely limited, if (as must be assumed) crude and violent intervention is excluded. Any “carrot” in the form of economic or military aid or diplomatic support that is freely given will (for reasons set forth above) be used simply to consolidate an essentially unacceptable regime. Any “stick” the United States would be willing to use would be too feeble to destroy the regime and would simply accelerate the process of disorganization which (it is argued above) is the probable prelude to a constitutional Communist take-over. Under these difficult circumstances we believe that the least unsatisfactory policy for the United States is to apply pressures, but politely and without public recrimination, to offer favors, but only on tough conditions, and in these ways to create such inducements as we can for the Indonesian elite, both civilian and military, and for Sukarno himself, to behave in a more constructive fashion.

10. At the very minimum we should not now entertain any major increases in the scale of economic or military aid to Indonesia and we should lose no opportunity to make clear that the reason for our negative action is that the Indonesians are in no position to make effective use of such resources in pursuit of goals we can support. Perhaps this pressure can best be applied affirmatively by giving the impression that we would consider substantial economic aid if difficult but essentially technical conditions were met and that we would consider increased military aid if we had confidence that Indonesia would not resort to aggression against the Dutch and that their military services had not already become dangerously dependent on Communist Bloc support. Our attitude on these major matters, and on specific political issues as they arise, should be made known, using all available contacts, to the military establishment and the leading politicians as well as to Sukarno himself. Such a hardening in our posture, without overtones of hostility or anger, would serve to alert the conservative elements among Indonesia’s leadership to the ineluctable necessity of choosing between absorption by the Communist Bloc and association as an equal within the comity of free Western and Asian nations. To take the opposite position—to appease Sukarno on the West Irian and other questions, and to compete with the Bloc in economic and military aid in the vain hope of gaining time—would, we believe, finally destroy the resolve of conservative elements to oppose Sukarno’s policies and to act as a brake on the leftward and downward course of Indonesia.

11. The coming talks between the President and his Indonesian guest offer an important opportunity to convince Sukarno of the firmness of the United States position on an occasion when the treatment accorded him should be flattering and should itself convince him of the importance this government attaches to the future of his country. It is important that “red carpet” treatment and the circumstance of a Presidential meeting should not give him the impression that the United States is prepared to support him in the basically hostile and unconstructive course he currently pursues.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow, McGhee, Nitze, and Amory.

1 Bissell’s initials appear in an unidentified hand, indicating Bissell signed the original.

2 Secret.

3 In Attachment B, not printed, the author discounted General Nasution as a potential counterweight to Sukarno. The estimate concluded that the “Sukarno/Nasution axis appears quite durable.” A bloodless victory over the Dutch in West Irian would make Sukarno even stronger among the more conservative Indonesian military. The author concluded that the armed dissident movements “will probably have to be counted out.” In sum, there were no countervailing elements to challenge Sukarno.

4 Attached but not printed.

5 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVII, pp. 586–589.

156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 156. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 27, 1961.

McGB/WWR

I disagree with so many of the half judgments in Bissell’s Indonesia paper1 [1 line of source text not declassified] that I don’t know where to begin. The thesis is that Sukarno, the devil incarnate, will take Indonesia so far down the road as to make it a pushover for PKI in predictable future. However, the paper itself admits there are no countervailing forces left. Hence all it comes up with is sterile oppositionism, i.e. we tell Sukarno sternly he can go to hell without our help.

Have never understood [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] proposition that Sukarno’s “global orientation” makes him necessarily pro-Communist and is incompatible with our own goals. Over long run precise opposite seems true. Indonesian nationalism will sooner or later run afoul of ChiComs (of whom they already scared), if only we play it right.

Sukarno’s responsibility for the mess Indonesia now in is no reason for not dealing with him in absence of any alternative. So what?

What we need is a holding operation which will preserve our ties with army and other elements until such time as Sukarno comes a cropper with other side or disappears from scene. As Jones says, a shift to pro-Indonesian policy on West Irian plus more “political” aid essential ingredients in this bid for time. DD/P paper opposes both but has no better answer. I’ll stick with Ambassador Jones.

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/15/61–3/29/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow, on whose copy Komer wrote the following note: “Walt—despite Pye, Pauker, and Hecksher I’ll stick with Amory and Jones. None of these others have any answer at all.” (Ibid., Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 1/61–3/61)

1 Document 155.

157. Record of Conversation 157. Record of ConversationSource

Washington, March 31, 1961.

MAJOR POINTS MADE IN THE CONVERSATION BETWEEN GUY PAUKER AND MESSRS. ROSTOW AND JOHNSON ON MARCH 31, 1961

I. Sukarno visit: General Strategy

Guy indicated that he had talked to Professor George Kahin at Cornell about his latest paper.1 Kahin had expressed three reservations about the paper:

a. He was not convinced that if Indonesia gains West Irian it would have the effect of building up Sukarno. Kahin suggested that with West Irian out of the way Sukarno might be forced to perform in other areas—in areas where he may have more difficulty in performing such as economic development.

b. It was Kahin’s view that Sukarno had not forced the military into the new united front (the “National Front”). Rather, after Sukarno had decided upon this tactic the army had forced its own way into the Front.

c. Kahin agreed that if the PKI could be banned, it would eliminate the possibility that the party would be left as the legal heir to Sukarno. However, he felt that the party might remain the legitimate heir even if it were not a legal party.

With these three reservations Kahin accepted the analysis in Pauker’s paper. Kahin also pointed out that if we were going to extract a quid pro quo from Sukarno in return for a change in our position on West Irian, the matter would have to be handled with the greatest finesse because Sukarno was very sensitive to this kind of thing.

An interview Kahin had had with Aidit (Chairman of the PKI) during Kahin’s last trip to Indonesia in January indicated that the Communists were trying very hard to build an image of moderation. (Aidit sought this interview apparently for the purpose of making this clear to Kahin.)

Guy felt that perhaps the reason he was more pessimistic than Kahin about the situation in Indonesia was that he (Pauker) was attempting to determine the general trend; to determine where the political dynamics of the situation was leading Indonesia. Thus, though the army may have forced its own way into the National Front, it may nonetheless be adversely affected by its association with the Communists in the Front.

Mr. Rostow outlined the following possible strategy for dealing with Sukarno and asked Guy Pauker’s reaction to it:

a. The visit itself commits us to a red carpet treatment for Sukarno.

b. We might make some concessions to Sukarno on West Irian in the direction of eventual Indonesian control.

c. We might seek to convince Sukarno that we are serious in Southeast Asia; that we are not going to let South Vietnam go communist. We might seek to make him aware of the presence of the Seventh Fleet and of the fact that the movement of the Fleet during the Laotian crisis was intended seriously. In general, we might seek to convince him that the balance of power is not tilted in favor of the Communists and that this is a vigorous, powerful country. The personal impression created by the President himself should be very helpful in this regard.

d. Despite the fact that everyone seemed to be writing off the development plan as not being a very serious document, it should be possible to find two or three important projects in the plan that are serious and that we could offer to support. Such action should help strengthen the hand of Djuanda and the “rationalists” within the government.

(Guy Pauker’s comments on this strategy are contained under specific subject matter headings below.)2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Rand Studies (B). Secret. Drafted by Johnson on April 4. Pauker, Rostow, Landon, and Johnson had an earlier conversation on March 15. Johnson prepared a 25-page summary of the major points on March 29. (Ibid.)

1 The paper, “Indonesia Today,” drafted by Pauker, was sent by the Rand Corporation to the White House on March 27. (Ibid.) In a March 30 memorandum to Rostow, Johnson summarized and analyzed Pauker’s paper. Johnson stated that the central issue posed by the paper was: “is Sukarno so committed to a pro-Soviet position externally and a pro-PKI position internally that he can be little influenced by any changes in U.S. policy?” Pauker leaned toward that conclusion, but suggested that Sukarno might be susceptible to personal diplomacy during his White House visit. Pauker also suggested that a U.S. deal on West New Guinea/West Irian could also have a real impact on Sukarno. Pauker warned that success in West Irian might convince the army to accept the PKI as a full partner. Johnson himself suggested a deal whereby the United States supported the claim to West Irian and offered aid and Sukarno eliminated the PKI as a political force with his united front. (Ibid.)

2 Attached but not printed. Pauker commented that Sukarno would not accept a U.N. trusteeship and probably not a temporary U.N. trusteeship with Malaya as the trustee. Pauker thought Sukarno might accept a 5-year Malayan trusteeship followed by a plebiscite provided that Indonesians could have access to Papuans to convince them their future lay with Indonesia. As for U.S. aid, Pauker believed it could not substitute for support on West Irian. Finally, Pauker recommended the visit with President Kennedy should be a personal and social one, since Sukarno responded well to such visits.

158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 158. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 3, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposal for Dealing with the Dutch-Indonesian Dispute over West New Guinea (West Irian)

I transmit herewith (Tab A) a paper outlining the background and history of the dispute between the Netherlands and Indonesia over West New Guinea (West Irian), and suggesting a United States course of action for dealing with it This would be for the United States to seek the agreement of the states concerned to the establishment of a United Nations trusteeship for the area. We would first attempt to promote a trusteeship to be exercised by Malaya, which has taken an active interest in finding some way of settling the dispute. It would have to be assisted, financially and otherwise, by a consortium of powers. If we cannot work out a trusteeship by Malaya, which appears the most suitable candidate, we would intend to fall back upon a proposal that the United Nations organization might itself become the trusteeship authority.

I approve this line of approach. It has been discussed with Senator Fulbright, and also has his general approval.1

Dean Rusk2

Tab A

THE PROBLEM OF WEST NEW GUINEA (WEST IRIAN)

West New Guinea is the one part of the Netherlands East Indies, redesignated Indonesia in 1948, which the Netherlands refused to transfer to the Republic of Indonesia at their 1949 round-table conference. They agreed then to decide its future status by negotiations within a year. These negotiations failed, with West New Guinea remaining under Dutch sovereignty, and Dutch-Indonesian relations have been deteriorating ever since. Indonesia resorted to direct pressure, successively expropriating Dutch properties, expelling many Dutch residents, and breaking diplomatic relations. It also took the matter to the UN, last in 1957 when the growing Afro-Asian bloc lined up behind a resolution which in effect urged further negotiations on the Dutch. It won a majority but failed of the necessary two-thirds vote.

West New Guinea comprises 150,000 square miles of perhaps the most primitive territory in the world, part of it unexplored mountainjungle-swampland. Most of the estimated 700,000 inhabitants are seminomadic, stone-age, Papuan tribesmen, speaking a couple hundred mutually-unintelligible tongues. Half have had no contact with the Netherlands administration. About 16,000 work in the employ of the government or economic enterprises (there are also about 17,000 Dutch, 18,000 Chinese and some immigrants, mainly Eurasian, from Indonesia). The indigenous inhabitants are closely related to the people of adjacent Australian-administered territories but to no inhabitants of the Republic of Indonesia excepting some on nearby islands. West New Guinea is an economic and fiscal deficit area for which the Netherlands recently initiated a program of economic and educational development intended to culminate in self-determination within ten years.

The continuing dispute over West New Guinea far transcends in importance the object of the dispute. It has permitted Sukarno, as leader of a popular national crusade, to make any challenge to his leadership appear unpatriotic; helped enable the Communists to undermine the conservative influence of Army leaders; and diverted attention from urgent internal problems. Externally, it has embroiled third powers in a series of related disputes; resulted in a drift by Indonesia towards the Soviet bloc; and threatened hostilities. We long tried to stay neutral, though Secretary Dulles did promise the Dutch some kind of support in case of Indonesian attack.

The US hands-off policy towards the dispute over West New Guinea was abandoned consequent to Secretary Herter’s approval of a Policy Planning Staff paper of October 12, 1960, in which the dispute and alternative approaches to its solution were considered in detail.3 The recommended course was to seek a trusteeship to be exercised by the UN organization itself. Implementation, however, did not proceed beyond preliminary discussion with the Australians before the difficulties of the UN and its Secretary General in and over the Congo raised the question of whether effort should really be made to get the UN to attempt this new task.

Meanwhile, Indonesia had responded to the sending of a Dutch aircraft carrier and reinforcements to West New Guinea by carrying out armed infiltrations; contracting for about $500 million of Soviet military aid; and issuing belligerent statements. We discount the likelihood of major military operations in the next six months, but expect the military balance to shift in favor of Indonesia by late 1961. Accordingly, the problem has become more urgent.

We believe: (1) Most nations of the world community are increasingly unwilling to back politically the exercise of tutelage by a white colonial power over any large overseas area inhabited by non-white people. (2) Attempts to maintain it must therefore increasingly depend on deterrent military force. (3) The Netherlands is not a power which can maintain unchallengeable deterrent force half a world away from its shores. (4) Indonesia doubtless hopes that the threat of superior force coupled with political and diplomatic action will suffice, but fighting between an Indonesia backed by the Soviets and the Netherlands is a growing possibility. (5) Such hostilities would be a catastrophe for the Free World; could disrupt NATO unity; would set colored peoples against whites in and out of the UN; and might cause Indonesia—whose external orientation and internal political trends already are a cause for grave concern—to land wholly in the Communist camp.

We accordingly believe that recent developments only reinforce the conclusion that the Netherlands should withdraw from West New Guinea. We believe that the last proposal the Netherlands would accept would be that it turn West New Guinea over to the Republic of Indonesia. We seek rather a means whereby it may be able to meet the parliamentary and other problems involved, and retire gracefully. We can see no alternative except a UN trusteeship and hope that both the Netherlands and Indonesia can be persuaded to agree. (We do not expect the neighboring Australians to be happy about it, but hope they will come along.) It seems to us that the Dutch might agree, since their professed aim is self-determination for the native peoples, and as that principle is inherent in a trusteeship. Indonesian agreement is likely to be more difficult: they have so far indicated only that they might accept a brief trusteeship intended to lead to their acquisition of the territory. They should, however, regard Dutch departure as a favorable development, and need not feel that self-determination would rule out determination for a union with the Republic of Indonesia.

Malaya, as the country nearest to Indonesia geographically, linguistically and racially, should be the prospective trustee most acceptable to Indonesia, and it is not antagonistic to the Netherlands. It could not be expected to undertake the task except in consequence to the agreement of the two disputants, as it would not want to inherit Indonesian animosity from the Dutch. Nor could it be expected to bear the financial and other burdens without outside help: a consortium of states interested in a solution would have to help finance costs, and outside (perhaps UN) personnel assistance would doubtless be required.

If such a trusteeship cannot be worked out, we could fall back on the original proposal for a direct UN trusteeship. The added burden on the UN Secretary General might be minimized if an administrator of world stature were found whose prestige would rally support, and if he were made directly responsible to the Trusteeship Council. West New Guinea does not present a situation quite like the Congo where rival regimes pit armed forces against one another, and only police and constabulary forces should be required to maintain internal order in those areas which are now administered. If Indonesia is willing to accept and live with a UN trusteeship, external defense should present little problem; if it challenges the trusteeship authorities with the threat of armed force, such a threat should at least be easier to handle than one aimed at Dutch colonialists. The UN would, of course, have to foot the bill and we our share of perhaps $15 million a year, as we would under a consortium of financing powers. If it be argued that a UN trusteeship would alter the terms of the West New Guinea problem without settling it, we can only observe that those terms need to be altered and that we can see no really good solutions.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–361. Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text.

1 No record of the discussion with Fulbright has been found.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XVII, pp. 564–565. The study is published in full in the microfiche supplement to that volume.

159. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 159. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 5, 1961.

Walt—

I confess to great puzzlement over State’s West New Guinea memo to the President.1 It now puts the issue clearly, but comes up with no commensurate solution. If the prime reason for a policy shift is to keep Indonesia from sliding away, we must come up with a solution which is broadly satisfactory to the Indonesians. If we do not, we merely let ourselves in for a peck of trouble without gaining the advantage which led us to move in the first place.

Unfortunately, State’s proposal is about the minimum movement we can make. It will incur all the disadvantages of outraging the Dutch, Australians, et al without satisfying the Indos. Why move at all in this case?

Of course, if we are proposing trusteeship not only as a graceful out for the Netherlands but as a cover operation for eventually giving WNG to the Indonesians, it might make sense. But if this is the case, why not tell the President? And why not spell but how the proposal (e.g. a plebiscite in three years) could be used to convince Sukarno that we are really moving in his direction.

The trouble with State is that it never thinks these problems through to the end. I’m sure we all agree that Indonesia will eventually get WNG, that we cannot afford to buck Sukarno on this issue while the Soviets back him, and that the Dutch will have to give. But we always enter these painful transitions with a little move that stirs up a ruckus and leads us from crisis to crisis before the issue is resolved in the way we knew it would be in the first place, but with all parties mad at us.

Incidentally, I still have yet to see State coming up with any policy alternatives in their papers, so President would at least know range of choices open to him. WNG would have been ideally suited to this approach.

Was it prearranged that after earlier PG discussion and [the?] request for revision of S/P paper new version2 should go straight to JFK over Rusk’s signature? It seems to me this gives us only ex post facto reprise on whether such papers fill the bill.

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 4/1/61–4/15/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy and Robert Johnson.

1 Document 158.

2 Komer apparently is referring to Tab A to Document 158, which was a revision of the S/P paper of October 12, 1960; see footnote 3 thereto.

160. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State Rusk 160. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Kohler) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, April 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposal for the Resolution of the Dutch-Indonesian Dispute over West New Guinea

It is agreed that the long-standing dispute between the Netherlands and Indonesia over the ownership of West New Guinea is approaching a critical phase. Both sides have maintained an intransigent attitude, although the Dutch have given some indication that they would be prepared to “internationalize” the problem on the condition that the natives be guaranteed the right of self-determination. Indonesia considers the territory hers and insists on its immediate transfer to Indonesian jurisdiction. However, Indonesian officials have indicated a willingness to agree to a “transitional trusteeship” which would assure the transfer of the territory to Indonesia in one or two years. The increasing build-up of Indonesian military potential and the prodding of the Communists makes more likely the possibility of armed hostilities on a significant scale. Clearly the US should attempt to achieve an acceptable solution to the problem before hostilities break out. We have already informed the Dutch that we are thinking of proposing a solution for the current dilemma.

As instructed, Mr. McGhee has discussed the idea of a trusteeship as a possible solution with Senator Fulbright who expressed his approval of this approach.

The Under Secretary has assured the Netherlands Ambassador (Tab D)1 that we would not introduce our proposals for a solution without first consulting with the Dutch. The Netherlands Foreign Minister, Mr. Luns, will visit you, the President, and other officers on April 10. We strongly urge that a decision be taken in time to explain and explore the policy aspects of this problem with Mr. Luns at that time.

This matter has been studied in great detail over a period of months. The consensus of the bureaus charged with responsibilities in this area favor a trusteeship under UN aegis. The terms of reference of this mandate should clearly state that its purpose is to move the indigenous population promptly toward democratic political institutions and ultimate self-determination of the territory’s political status. Accordingly, I would propose that we undertake to obtain acceptance by the interested parties of the following steps:

A. The establishment of a UN trusteeship for WNG making the government of Malaya trustee with full powers and authority to administer the territory.

B. The arrangement of a consortium of states to support the Malayan mandate with personnel and funds. This consortium might include those interested and friendly states which have the personnel and means to assist. Obviously it will be necessary to obtain the agreement of the Dutch, Indonesians and Malayans in the first instance, as well as the members of the proposed consortium.

In the event that we are unable to achieve sufficient agreement on the above proposal to give reasonable assurance of success, we would then propose to the interested parties, after discussion with SYG, a direct UN trusteeship, fully realizing the problems of obtaining UN approval.

Recommendations:2

1. Authorize us to proceed toward the establishment of a trusteeship as outlined in A. above including the fall-back position of a UN trusteeship.

2. Undertake to explain our position and explore the problem with Foreign Minister Luns on April 10. There is attached a proposed talking paper for your conversation with Mr. Luns. (Tab A)

3. That you sign the attached telegrams at Tabs B and C to Embassies Kuala Lumpur and the Hague.3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–661. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and cleared by McGhee, Wallner, and Jenkins. Also sent to Under Secretary Bowles.

1 Not attached. Tab D was apparently a memorandum of conversation, March 27, between Bowles and Netherlands Ambassador J.H. van Roijen. Bowles informed van Roijen that, contrary to previous indications, the United States would not send a representative to the inaugural ceremony of the first representative Council in West New Guinea. Van Roijen considered this appeasement of Indonesia. Bowles assured him that the United States would make no proposals on West New Guinea without first consulting the Netherlands. (Memorandum of conversation, March 27; ibid., 656.9813/3–2761)

2 Rusk initialed his approval of these recommendations on April 7.

3 The talking paper was attached but is not printed. The two telegrams, not attached, were sent as 513 to Kuala Lumpur and 1600 to The Hague, both April 7. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–761)

161. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 161. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 7, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Luns Visit and the West New Guinea Issue

Attached are two stories from this afternoon’s AP and FBIS tickers.1 They report that the Dutch are “put out” about a long standing British invitation to Sukarno to visit Britain but that the British Government “has made certain promises as to the subjects to be discussed with the Indonesian President.”

Despite the statements in the story, which presumably originated in Dutch sources, the invitation has been extended by the British in the last several days as a result of strong Dutch pressure upon them. The Dutch want the British to invite Sukarno to London for the specific purpose of having the British warn him against using force in the settlement of International disputes. I understand that as a result of the obsession of the Dutch with this matter and their constant requests to us along similar lines, we have made similar démarches to Sukarno fourteen times since August 1958!

It is the view of the State people most concerned that this is the third in the series of Dutch acts intended to “queer” the Sukarno visit to the United States. The first was the affair of the New Guinea Council, the second, the recent Dutch effort to get us to seek Indonesian agreement to permit the United States to represent the Netherlands in Djakarta now that the Indonesians have refused to permit the British to do this.

The paper that the President will receive from State this afternoon or early tomorrow morning on the Luns visit will recommend that the President assure Luns that the President will reiterate, in his discussions with Sukarno, our opposition to the use of force to settle the West New Guinea issue. It is highly likely in the view of the officer to whom I spoke in State that the Dutch press will then carry a story on the morning following the President’s conference with Luns to the effect that we have given the Dutch certain “assurances” relating to the Sukarno visit. Such action would be in line with the attached story relating to the Sukarno visit to Britain.

It is obvious that the Luns visit presents real dangers to the success of the later Sukarno visit. A “leak” to the Dutch press indicating in a vague way that the President had given certain assurances to Luns could most seriously damage the prospects for success in the Sukarno visit. In the light of this new development, I suggest that we seriously consider whether we wish to give Luns any such assurance or other assurances that might be similarly twisted to suit Dutch purposes.

The information on which this memorandum is based was an “informal” conversation with one of the responsible officials concerned in State. It should obviously be used with circumspection to protect the source. On this, as on most “colonial” issues there are differences in State which may preclude more formal expressions of concern.

Robert H. Johnson2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol I. 4/1/61–4/15/61. Confidential.

1 Not attached.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

162. Memorandum of Conversation 162. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 10, 1961, 11:05 a.m.–noon.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

George W. Ball, Under Secretary for Economic Affairs

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

John S. Rice, Ambassador-designate to the Netherlands.

The Netherlands Foreign Minister Luns

Dr. J. H. van Roijen, Ambassador of the Netherlands

After initial greetings, picture taking and exchange of Navy service reminiscences, the President opened the talks by raising the question of West New Guinea. He referred to his recent conversation with Australian Prime Minister Menzies on the subject1 and to the upcoming visit to Washington of Indonesian President Sukarno and said he would welcome an expression of Mr. Luns’ judgment as to where this matter stands and what developments are foreseeable.

Mr. Luns replied that Netherlands relations with Indonesia had deteriorated in direct ratio to the growth of power of Sukarno over the past ten years. The Dutch from the beginning had warned their Western allies that Sukarno was a dangerous opportunist. Suddenly two years after the Round Table settlement Sukarno had proclaimed that West New Guinea belonged to Indonesia and that he was no longer willing to discuss the question with the Dutch. Sukarno had persistently refused, as proposed by the Dutch, that his claim be submitted to the International Court of Justice. Meanwhile the Indonesians had proceeded to confiscate Dutch property and oust Dutch nationals. Even at the time of the conference of 1949, in which Ambassador van Roijen participated, the Dutch had refused to turn over West New Guinea to the Indonesians for two reasons. First, West New Guinea was an entirely different country with entirely different people than the Indonesians. Secondly, the Papuans were not yet prepared and able to express their wishes.

The President asked whether there had not been an agreement to talk about the status of West New Guinea within a year of the Round Table agreements. Mr. Luns replied that they had talked with the Indonesians and had offered to incorporate West New Guinea in the then foreseen Dutch commonwealth. However the whole deal had been repudiated by the Indonesians and had become a dead letter. The Netherlands had invested over one billion guilders in educating and preparing the Papuans for self-determination. He then referred to the sense of disappointment and shock with which the Government and people of the Netherlands had received the United States withdrawal of its previous acceptance of the invitation to participate in the inauguration of the local self-government councils in West New Guinea.

The President said that he had carefully considered this matter and had felt that there were two main reasons making U.S. participation inadvisable. We were on the brink of a possible intervention in Laos and did not want to have an incident to the south when we were so heavily engaged in other parts of the area. Secondly, he feared that participation at this time might create difficulties in the way of our accomplishing anything positive during the forthcoming visit of Sukarno. Mr. Luns replied that he understood the reasons but with all respect to the President he felt that the withdrawal of our acceptance was not a wise action. He felt, first, that this action was contrary to what the United States stands for in the world; and secondly, that the decision made the United States appear opportunistic in its handling of such matters. He had discussed the question even with African ambassadors who had agreed with these reactions. The President said he did not want to seem critical of ambassadors particularly in the presence of such a distinguished ambassador as Mr. van Roijen but that he thought ambassadors were frequently likely to say what they thought their interlocutor would find agreeable. He dared say that the State Department could cite many cases of ambassadors who had expressed contrary views to us on this question. Mr. Luns resumed, saying that he had had a talk with Indian Prime Minister Nehru in London three weeks ago and discussed the question with him. He said that Nehru had agreed that he could see no alterative to the policy that the Dutch were presently following in Indonesia. He said that he had spoken to Secretary General Hammarskjold as long ago as 1958 and a number of times since about the Dutch willingness to have the UN scrutinize Dutch policies and conditions in West New Guinea, but that the Secretary General had not felt that he could take on this burden. Mr. Luns had also made clear that they were prepared to have a suitable United Nations trusteeship for West New Guinea. However even in 1958 Hammarskjold had said that the Dutch would not get a two-thirds vote for a bona fide trusteeship. He thought it possible that this was still the case and that a trusteeship arrangement would not be approved unless it were in fact not bona fide. The Dutch could not turn West New Guinea over to the Indonesians and break all their promises to the Papuans. Moreover even if they did so, this crisis might disappear but new crises would follow as the Indonesians moved against the Australian portion of New Guinea or against the Portuguese in the island of Timor. He said that the Dutch situation vis-à-vis the Indonesians was like that of the United States vis-à-vis Castro. The President quickly questioned the Foreign Minister’s equation of the two cases and considerable inconclusive discussion then ensued on this point. Ambassador van Roijen terminated this discussion by saying there was at least one difference between the two cases, namely that the United States still has its interests in Cuba protected by the Swiss whereas the Indonesians had deprived the Dutch of any representation of their interests there. He then went on to say that in his discussion with Mr. Bowles the latter had cited as a further reason for the U.S. decision the fact that the United States has been making plans which it hoped might provide for a means of settlement of the West New Guinea issue.

The President replied that of course we do not have any idea that we can settle this question but that we had been giving thought to possible ways to solve it. It was particularly in relation to this that he had wanted to get the views of the Foreign Minister.

Mr. Luns then referred to the conversations that he had had with former Secretary of State Acheson and his successors and to the effectiveness of the “political deterrent” which they had exercised against possible Indonesian aggression by warning the Indonesians that the use of force to achieve their objectives with respect to West New Guinea would not be allowed. This of course was in accordance with standing policy voiced by the United States. In 1958 he had approached Mr. Dulles with the evidence of aggressive Indonesian intentions, and the vigorous diplomatic action which the latter had taken with Sukarno had been sufficient to frustrate Indonesian plans. Mr. Luns felt that “in a couple of years” the Dutch might be able to leave West New Guinea without leaving a “Congo” situation behind them. The basic structure of local self-government was being created which would make it possible for the Papuans to express a free choice as to their own destiny, whether that be independence or union with the Australian part of the island or whatever they wanted. The Dutch had reinforced their defense posture as they were duty bound to do. However, they would be most reluctant to wage a war alone in the Pacific. They had already suffered two defeats in the area and a third would be too much. Mr. Luns said he was very concerned as regards the effect which the United States position might have on Dutch-American relations in NATO and elsewhere. He had been delighted to learn of the actions the President was taking to strengthen NATO. However, if the United States should for opportunistic reasons abandon its principles, this would create difficulties and differences. He wanted to assure the President that the Dutch were willing to explore with the United States any and all formulae which might promote a solution. Ambassador van Roijen added that if the Dutch were left alone in the Far East, Dutch public opinion would feel that they had been “left in the lurch” by their allies.

The President said he had difficulty in understanding why the Dutch were so concerned about this faraway island which was really a great burden for them and asked how long the Dutch contemplated remaining there. Mr. Luns replied that they hoped to be able to bring the Papuans along toward self-government and self-determination in 5 to 10 years. The President then inquired about the strength of the Dutch forces in West New Guinea. Mr. Luns said they had: 3 destroyers; 8 patrol boats; 10 landing craft; 1 squadron of jet planes; 1 squadron of conventional planes; some helicopters; 1 battalion of infantry; 1 battalion of marines; and a 400-man anti-aircraft artillery unit. In addition there were about 200 troops in the West New Guinea constabulary.

The President then inquired about Indonesian strength. Mr. Luns replied that the Dutch thought the Indonesians could mount an invading force of some 2 to 3,000. However, any incursion involving more than 100 to 150 men the Dutch would know about. At present the Indonesians would have to start from Fak (phonetic?) but soon would have facilities in Amboina. However the Dutch do a daily sweep in the West New Guinea waters and the Papuans have an effective though primitive signal system so there would be no invasion without advance warning. The President then asked what the Australians would do and Mr. Luns replied that this would depend entirely on what the United States did.

The President then referred to the burden of $20 million per annum falling on the Dutch (which Mr. Luns interjected to correct to $35 million) and said he still could not understand why they wanted to continue. Mr. Luns replied that apart from “idealism” there was some importance of the territory to the KLM airline operation and to Dutch shipping since the Dutch had been completely ousted from Indonesia. Ambassador van Roijen supplemented this by saying that the Dutch had toward West New Guinea “a sense of task, of mission”. This was universally and very sincerely felt by the Parliament and the people. The President said that he accepted the Ambassador’s explanation as a fact since there was certainly no other explanation. Mr. Luns discounted the importance of the financial burden on the Dutch. He said that he thought the Netherlands carried perhaps the highest rate in the world of contributions of aid to the underdeveloped countries. They felt they had “a duty to do something” and that through the Common Market alone they were contributing about $70 million for this purpose.

The President said he thought we should understand clearly what we were talking about. It appeared that the question was one of engaging us in possible hostilities on the political and maybe even on the military level over a very costly, primitive area of no strategic significance. He said this was a very heavy burden to assume for such an area which was clearly non-essential to the defense of the Netherlands. He recognized that the Dutch were outstanding as allies in NATO, that we have a very favorable trade balance with them, and that we receive constant support from them. He assured the Foreign Minister that we want to keep it that way.

Ambassador van Roijen repeated that he could assure the President that the Dutch people had a unanimous feeling of mission to assure the Papuans of their right to self-determination. Mr. Luns added that there was a further consideration. If the Dutch should yield, difficulties in the area would simply increase for the Australians and for the Portuguese in Timor. At present, because the Indonesians were concentrating on West New Guinea, these other questions were dormant. He cited the parallel of the surrender of Sudetenland to Hitler when people had thought they could relax. The world had seen the United States take a clear stand on colonial issues with respect to Portugal; now it saw the opposite stand with respect to West New Guinea. The source of the trouble in West New Guinea was Sukarno personally. If Sukarno should disappear then all problems could be solved. He reiterated that Sukarno had so far been restrained only by the United States political deterrent. The question at issue was not that of $35 million annual expenditure. There were 18,000 Dutchmen in West New Guinea; they had built more than 1,000 schools. Progress was being made. In reply to a question from the President, Mr. Luns said there were between 700,000 and one million Papuans in West New Guinea and approximately 1.5 million in the Australian side of the island. He went on to point out that in the United Nations there were 70 member countries with a smaller population than the Netherlands and 88 countries with a smaller national income. Ambassador van Roijen said it would be most helpful if the President would deliver a warning to Sukarno when he visits here since the new Administration had not yet done so.

The President said that the Secretary of State would talk with Mr. Luns in detail as to some of the thinking we had been doing regarding this problem. He personally had wanted to get the Foreign Minister’s own views for his background. He repeated that we were very heavily engaged in Southeast Asia, in Laos and in Viet-Nam and without great support from our allies. We were not unmindful of Dutch views on this matter. However, we wanted to be sure that what we do is in accordance with the common interest. When the United States shoots across Sukarno’s bow, increased Soviet influence and efforts would be an inevitable result.

Foreign Minister Luns replied that in his view the United States had a responsibility in this matter on three scores. First of all, the United States was and is President of the United Nations Commission on Indonesia. It was the United States in this capacity which had refused discussion in the Commission of Dutch complaints and criticisms and had allowed the work of the Commission to die. Secondly, the United States had made heavy weapons deliveries to the Indonesians contrary to his advice. It had been argued that the delivery of United States weapons would keep the Indonesians from turning to the Soviets, to which he had replied that United States deliveries would simply encourage the Soviets to underbid and outbid us. He was now proven right by the Indonesians’ big deal with the Soviets for arms. Thirdly, the United States must not give the Indonesians the impression that there was a changed or different U.S. attitude toward the use of force. This would only lead Sukarno to reckless action which the Soviets and Chinese Communists would back. He could assure the President that many Indonesians did not want such backing. He had spoken very frankly but he considered it his duty to express his views.

The President commented with a smile that the Foreign Minister had expressed his views with great vigor. In reply to a question from the Ambassador as to whether he saw any relationship between West New Guinea and Berlin, the President pointed out that we were standing against the Russians and against the Chinese Communists in Viet Minh, Laos and Viet-Nam; then there was the question of the offshore islands and of South Korea against North Korea, not to mention the difficulties in the Congo. The Dutch could understand that we want to be sure of our ground in those situations.

Mr. Luns asserted that in the case of West New Guinea the use of the political deterrent would in fact spare us the trouble of having to face up to real hostilities. He reiterated that the Acheson and Dulles warnings to Sukarno had been effective. In 1958, he said, Secretary Dulles and Under Secretary Herter had promised logistical support to the Dutch in case of Indonesian attack while pointing out that the commitment of troops would depend on Congressional action. The President commented that the problem was how the case could be put on the most favorable basis from the point of view of all concerned. Mr. Luns again repeated the importance in their view of a political warning to Sukarno on the occasion of his forthcoming visit to the United States.

The President then said that his commitment to open the baseball season—an engagement which seemed to have a certain importance in the United States—was about upon him. However, before the Foreign Minister left he wished to mention a couple of other matters. The first of these was the question of the Dutch request for landing rights for KLM on the West Coast. His Administration had reviewed this matter and was desirous of trying to do what it could. Under Secretary of State Ball would talk with the Foreign Minister about this at the Department later in the day. The second was the question of the Sixes and Sevens in Europe. The President wanted to stress our continuing support of the Common Market which also would be discussed between the Foreign Minister and the State Department. Mr. Luns expressed his appreciation and indicated that he would be glad to pursue the detailed discussion with the State Department. With reference to the Common Market, he pointed out that the Rome treaties contemplated both economic and political integration in the Six. The economic process was developing very satisfactorily but President de Gaulle was attempting to put political cooperation on the basis of simply a loose and old-fashioned coalition. He had opposed this firmly but feared he had not had much effect on de Gaulle, who had only commented that he greatly admired the tenacity of his (Mr. Luns’) views. The Netherlands Government had not made a final decision what its policy would be at the May 19 meeting of Heads of Government of the Six. They might feel it was necessary to be negative as regards the establishment of political integration machinery based on Paris. The Germans tended to be ambivalent. The Dutch believed in Franco-German integration but not in a way and to an extent to make de Gaulle spokesman for Europe.

The President referred to his talks with British Prime Minister Macmillan and expressed the view that as the UK became more and more involved with the continent the Common Market would be strengthened. Mr. Luns agreed that UK participation in the continent would take away many of the Dutch fears and objections whether the UK should join simply in political discussions or as full members of EEC. However, the Dutch did not anticipate such development. Ambassador van Roijen added that the Dutch thought that de Gaulle would veto full membership for the UK.

The President then referred to a talk he had heard by Professor Geyl at Harvard sometime ago and remarked that the Professor was not an integrationist. Mr. Luns replied that he was not a follower of Professor Geyl. He was for the Rome Treaty.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1061. Secret. Drafted by Kohler and approved in Bon April 19 and the White House on April 22. The time of the meeting is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 Prime Minister Menzies met with Kennedy on February 24 for luncheon and then privately from 2:52 to 3:05 p.m. (Ibid.) At the lunch meeting, Menzies outlined Australia’s position on West New Guinea, stressing its close ties with Australia and its importance to Australia’s national security. Menzies believed Australians would react adversely to West New Guinea falling into the hands of “Communist dominated Indonesia,” whose claim was political rather than legal. Menzies stated Indonesia’s position represented “substitution of brown colonialism for white colonialism.” He recommended continued Netherlands administration under trusteeship but realized it would be politically difficult. He feared that U.N. trusteeship would be a mechanism for turning the territory over to Indonesia. (Memorandum of conversation, February 24; Department of State, Central Files, 033.4311/3–261)

163. Memorandum of Conversation 163. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 10, 1961, 3:59 p.m.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. Kohler, EUR

Ambassador Rice

Mr. McBride, WE

The Netherlands Foreign Minister Luns

Ambassador van Roijen

Mr. Meijer, Dutch Foreign Office

Minister Schiff, Netherlands Embassy

Foreign Minster Luns opened the conversation, saying that he had explained the Dutch viewpoint to the President. He said there had been a steady deterioration of relations between the Netherlands and Indonesia as Sukarno had more and more grabbed power in that country. Now there was no Parliament in Indonesia, and really no government. The free press had also disappeared and Indonesia today is very comparable to Cuba. He said that the Dutch had been right all along in their view of Sukarno and believed him to be a hopeless case. He noted that Sukarno had operated entirely improperly in the field of international relations and had broken relations with the Dutch without telling them in advance. They had also given no advance warning when they had forced the British to give up handling Dutch interests in Indonesia. He said the great characteristic of the Indonesians was the lack of civic courage and a tendency not to react against disorder. Ambassador van Roijen said that Sukarno had quite a magnetic power which had enabled him to consolidate control.

Luns said that the Indonesians had claimed West New Guinea as part of their territory only two years after the Round Table Conference. He thought that Indonesian policy was to see the Dutch humiliated as much as possible. He noted that Indonesians had also abolished the Dutch-Indonesian Union. He said that Sukarno had a habit of tearing agreements to pieces. He did not think that the Prime Minister of Malaya could win Sukarno’s cooperation on West New Guinea even if he indicated that the Dutch had changed their position and were willing to see the territory go to Indonesia. Luns said he thought that the Indonesians would not accept even this position because they wished to concentrate on humiliating the Dutch.

Luns continued, saying that the Dutch position favoring self-determination for the Papuans had also been their position with regard to all parts of Indonesia. He noted that the Japanese had suppressed the other states of Indonesia, especially the Amboinese. He said the Dutch had not included West New Guinea in the 1949 transfer of sovereignty to Indonesia because the Papuans were racially different and not yet capable of exercising self-determination. He repeated that the Dutch would not violate their pledge to the Papuans. In this context, he referred to the financial contribution which the Dutch had made and said that the Dutch spent more on aid to under-developed countries on a per capita basis than any other country. He said the Dutch were also opposed to setting a timetable for self-determination in West New Guinea now since they were only at the present time building the infrastructure of the country. He said he was dismayed that the United States was giving the impression to the Asians that we had abandoned in this case our policy favoring self-determination for opportunistic reasons. He said the United States was in fact opposing self-determination in West New Guinea.

Luns went on to say that the Dutch have no problems with the Afro-Asian countries except with Indonesia. He said he thought that India was quite friendly to the Dutch. The Secretary asked if the Indians had been invited to the West New Guinea Council. Luns said that only South Pacific Commission countries had been invited. Adverting to the Indian attitude he said that Nehru was extremely cautious and, while opposing the use of force in the West New Guinea dispute privately, at the same time requested that he not be dragged into the dispute. In response to a further question from the Secretary, Luns indicated that he thought Nehru had already told Sukarno that he was opposed to the use of force but was not willing to state this publicly. He noted that the Indian Prime Minister had been extremely cautious in his discussions of this subject with the press and had not been willing to say what he had talked to Luns about in London recently, following the Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ meeting. The Secretary noted that following this same meeting the Malayan Prime Minister had been queried by the press and had indicated that both the Dutch and Indonesians had been stubborn on the West New Guinea issue. He noted that the Tunku had also said that the Dutch policy was unlike that of the Portuguese and had referred to the Dutch program for West New Guinea.

Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch were open to suggestion on what should be done, provided of course that self-determination was guaranteed and not merely a facade to turn over the area either directly or indirectly to Indonesia. The Secretary inquired with regard to a possible trusteeship. Luns said that he had proposed this to the Secretary General in 1958 but Hammarskjold had said it would not get a 2/3 vote, and also that he did not wish the UN to be burdened with another conflict.

Luns thought the trusteeship idea offered possibilities if Holland were backed by her allies. Indonesia had mistreated the Dutch because they had stood alone. He said sending arms to Indonesia was like sending arms to Castro and noted that the Dutch had been cooperative in refusing to send arms to the Cuban dictator. He thought that, if the U.S. sent arms, this would lead to even greater shipments of Communist arms. He said that countries should respect their principles and that it would be unfortunate if the United States position regarding New Guinea were crystallized and communicated to others, since in this event the United States would be offering views on a part of the territory of the Queen of Holland. He added that approval of 2/3 of the Dutch Parliament would be required to change the Constitution of the Netherlands which would be needed to alter the status quo of West New Guinea. He said he could not be in the position of being accused in Parliament of giving the territory away to Indonesia.

The Secretary said he was sorry this problem existed. He said with regard to the Indonesian claim he agreed with the Dutch that, if this were a legal matter it should be referred to the International Court of Justice. Since Indonesia was not willing to do this, apparently it did not believe it had a clear legal claim; therefore, this was a political claim. Self-determination is basic to U.S. policy generally and we realize this is the Dutch position on West New Guinea. The problem was, therefore, how to find an answer on the basis of self-determination. We thought that a trusteeship offered possibilities.

Luns said that, if there were no Indonesian threats and no infiltrations into West New Guinea, perhaps a trusteeship would work. He said that the Papuan Council would pronounce itself in a year or so and perhaps set up a ten-year program for self-determination. The administration of West New Guinea would be 95 percent Papuan by 1970. The Papuans were well on the way now that elections had been held for the Council. He thought the Papuans might exercise self-determination in any one of a number of ways: union with East New Guinea, independence, participation in a Melanesian Federation, or possibly some more permanent form of supervision from the UN or the South Pacific Commission. However, Indonesian claims to the territory falsified the entire situation. He thought that UN presence and some international supervision would be useful. Therefore, some form of trusteeship might be possible.

Luns went on to say that at the present time there were 18,000 Dutch in West New Guinea, including 9,000 in the administration, and that there was a $34 million development program. If the Dutch were removed from the bulk of their administrative positions, he thought this would be a clear notice for them to quit entirely and to make no contributions to the island if they had no responsibility. He referred to a conversation with the Malayan Prime Minister in which he had discussed the possibility of a Burma-Ceylon-Malaya trusteeship, but he thought the Malayans had dropped this because they realized they could not undertake the expenses now being borne by the Dutch. Luns thought it would be very difficult to persuade the Dutch Government to continue to contribute if outsiders were running the administration, and said this formula had never worked.

The Secretary said he thought it might be possible to obtain a 2/3 General Assembly vote for a trusteeship. Ambassador van Roijen said that of course Indonesia could organize opposition thereto. The Secretary believed that, relatively, Indonesia could be isolated. He thought that the important thing was for self-determination to have a completely free chance and then perhaps some timetable could be established by the UN. He thought that this might receive a 2/3 vote. He said the idea of a direct UN trusteeship had also been considered. Luns said he had discussed this with Hammarskjold. The Secretary said he believed it would now be difficult to recommend a direct UN trusteeship, since the Congo precedent had not been a happy one. The Secretary thought West New Guinea could be financed by a consortium of friendly powers and did not believe that the UN itself could assume the financial responsibilities. There were too many countries who would not support financing.

The Secretary referred again to the possibility of a trusteeship with a trusted country as the trustee. This should be one that even the Indonesians would recognize as impartial and the trust responsibility should be to guarantee eventual self-determination.

Luns thought this would be very difficult to achieve since the Indonesians would continue to stir up trouble for whoever the trustee was. The Secretary inquired if perhaps the Dutch could accept a trusteeship consisting of Malaya and New Zealand. Luns asked if the Dutch administrators would be retained or if it would be thought that they should quit and be replaced by others. The Secretary said that one of the problems was to obtain the support of Afro-Asians whose support in the United Nations would be necessary. It was essential that the end result should be uninfluenced self-determination. Luns stressed that the Dutch had no desire for a continuation of any links with New Guinea.

The Secretary pointed out that as Luns said there were a number of choices involved in self-determination and that the problem was to leave all of these open. Luns thought that there could be a UN-controlled plebiscite but that the crux of the problem was the Indonesian threat of force. The Secretary agreed that this was one of the difficulties.

Luns then reiterated that the Indonesians would adopt the threatening attitude only if the Dutch were alone. Luns said he had called in the Soviet Ambassador in The Hague and told him he was concerned with Soviet attitudes towards Indonesia. He thought it was important to reinforce somewhat Dutch forces in West New Guinea, although they were of course no match for the Indonesians.

Luns said that over the past years the United States had noted a political deterrent in the Indonesian situation. If this deterrent were not repeated to the Soviets by the President, there would be an increased danger of use of force by the Indonesians in view of the fact that the new administration has not pronounced itself on this point. The Secretary said that the basis of our policy, likewise, was self-determination for the Papuans and pointed out that it was more difficult to get support for a position of maintaining the Dutch. The Foreign Minister said that the US warning had worked in the past and, if we are not willing to repeat it now, he takes a most gloomy view of the possible consequences.

Luns then referred to the reason why Indonesia has not taken any military action in the past against West New Guinea. He said this was due to the political deterrent of the United Kingdom, Australia and particularly the United States. He agreed that a direct UN interest in the area would replace this political deterrent by what would perhaps be even a better arrangement.

With regard to the issuance of a warning against the use of force to Indonesia, the Secretary said that the issue had changed since this warning had originally been issued and that there had been a major Indonesian build-up, including a large-scale Soviet military assistance program. He said it was one thing to warn the Indonesians when they were weak, but now that they can mount an offensive, a warning must rest on a readiness to act. Ambassador van Roijen said that in the past the Dutch had looked on our attitude toward an attack on West New Guinea as like our attitude towards similar action against the Chinese offshore islands, i.e., unless the potential aggressor was warned, he would walk in. The Secretary noted that the Dutch had strengthened their positions in West New Guinea and wondered if the Indonesians would undertake an invasion in view of the logistic problems involved for them. The Secretary then asked what kind of a warning the Dutch thought we should undertake, should it be a responsible one? Luns replied in the affirmative. The Secretary said in that event we would have to be ready to take action. Luns thought that the minimum Dutch requirement would be for us to tell the Indonesians now that they should not use force and then undertake planning as to what we would do in the actual event of an invasion. The Secretary said he thought it was better to think about the realities of the situation in advance. Luns continued, declaring that only US intervention in the form of a warning had prevented Indonesian aggression in March of 1959. He repeated that if the new administration did not repeat this guarantee, this would be the last straw as far as the Dutch were concerned. He said that it was incomprehensible that Indonesia should receive credits and arms from the West after their anti-Dutch acts and that, at least they should be warned against using force in the West New Guinea case.

Luns said that the situation in Indonesia now was chaotic and anti-Western. He said that the Dutch had repeatedly warned other countries about Sukarno but the US had refused to listen. The Dutch had departed from Indonesia leaving it in the best condition of virtually any colonial area but still the US had sympathized with Indonesian viewpoints. The financial situation when the Dutch had left Indonesia, for example, had been that there had existed 70% gold coverage. Ambassador van Roijen said that the problem in Indonesia was that they had a demagogic leader, whereas a somewhat similar country such as India had a statesman like Nehru. The Secretary inquired if the Dutch did not think there were other valid Indonesian leaders. Luns said that people such as Hatta had been eliminated.

Continuing his observations on the Indonesian scene, Luns said that we had repeatedly been told that Nasution was about to act against the Indonesian Communist Party but that the Dutch do not believe this. He said they had also left Indonesia in an advanced state, militarily, financially and educationally. The Secretary said that he was familiar with the events of 1945–1949 and did not believe it would be profitable to cover this situation in detail now, given the limited time available.

The Secretary then asked if the Dutch would accept a trusteeship over West New Guinea if the Dutch were the trust authority. Luns said that, if this were workable, the answer would be yes. However, if there were other countries named as trustees, and not the Dutch, the Dutch would be forced to strip the administration and would encounter severe parliamentary opposition in Holland. The Secretary said that the important thing was that self-determination should have a clear field. Luns repeated that other Afro-Asian countries were not attacking the Dutch and that the real problem was the Indonesian threat. He said he was going to suggest to Hammarskjold that the UN send a visiting mission to West New Guinea.

Continuing this line, the Secretary asked if a Malayan plus New Zealand visiting mission might be useful. The Dutch Foreign Minister replied in the affirmative. The Secretary wondered if a UN trusteeship and continuation of the present Dutch administration might get support. Luns said that the Dutch could accept supervisory authority of a group of countries including Malaya and Ceylon, for example. Ambassador van Roijen said that one of the problems was that if there were Asian administrators it would be difficult to keep the Indonesians out. The Secretary thought that if it were a real UN trusteeship it would be possible to prevent Indonesian attacks.

The Secretary, summarizing, said that West New Guinea was a burden to the Dutch and the Dutch wished to terminate the present arrangement by self-determination but they did not themselves wish to remain. Luns said that there was a practical problem insofar as there were no guarantees against the use of force. He added that we must also consult the Australians [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Furthermore, the area was of major strategic concern to Australia. He thought that the United States must decide if it wishes the area transferred to Indonesia or if it wishes genuine self-determination.

The Secretary said that bona fide self-determination was a principle of ours and we did not think self-determination should be merely a device but the people really permitted a free selection. Perhaps West New Guinea and East New Guinea could work together. He said that we have not sounded out members of the UN regarding a trusteeship including Dutch participation. Luns said that the Tunku hoped that the Indonesians would go along with the UN trusteeship but he did not think that they would. He thought that the trusteeship should last five to ten years in order to prevent another Congo situation. If the Dutch were faced with lack of support from their allies which led to premature independence this would be against everyone’s interest. If half of the island should go to Indonesia ultimately, there would be an inter-island problem as well. The Indonesians then would immediately seek Timor, Borneo and other territories.

The Secretary said that since the Round Table Conference West New Guinea had in effect been in contention between the Dutch and the Indonesians. Luns said that this was the same as to say that Florida would be in contention between the United States and Cuba if Castro were to claim it. He reiterated that if the Indonesians had a legal claim to the territory they should go to the International Court of Justice. The Secretary said that the situation for looking toward self-determination would be more persuasive if neither of the powers involved were an administrator under a trusteeship. Luns said this implied that the position of the Dutch in Indonesia was on the same basis. Luns wondered if under the circumstances the United States thought that all Dutch should leave West New Guinea. The Secretary asked if all Dutch would in effect leave if Holland were not one of the administering powers. Luns said that perhaps some Dutch would stay if the other trust countries were friendly ones. The Secretary asked which countries might be acceptable. Luns countered by simply saying the whole picture would be clear if the United States would publicly support self-determination for West New Guinea. The Secretary said that we would have to know what we were supporting.

Luns at this point said that he would talk to Hammarskjold about this whole problem. The Secretary thought that the idea of the consortium to finance the area should be considered since, otherwise, there would be no 2/3 vote in favor of a trusteeship in the UN because of the financial burden. Luns said he thought the US attitude on this entire issue was paramount. The Secretary believed the UN could get support to keep Indonesia out of the area.

Luns said that this was the first time that he had heard that the Dutch should leave West New Guinea in the interests of peace. He said this point had never been raised before. He then went on to criticize the international conduct of Indonesia again and said he was astonished that Indonesia had been able to get away with its international actions during the past years. He concluded on this point by complaining about the Sukarno visit to the United States.

The Secretary said we should take a responsible attitude toward Sukarno, and must envisage specific steps if we are to issue a blanket warning to the Indonesians. Such a warning might lead to the need for the use of force by the US. When the United States issues a warning we must mean something and we must not just bluff. Furthermore, it was difficult for us to exercise any helpful influence with the Indonesians if the Dutch were complaining about our receiving Sukarno here. Luns thought that there were various ways of wording a warning and referred to the type of problem which arose when we had not been entirely clear, as in the case of Korea. He said Nehru had privately told him that Indonesia would not and should not use force in West New Guinea. However, if we did not issue a warning to the Indonesians, this would be a change of US attitude. The Secretary thought the Dutch would be disagreeably surprised if we were to give a warning and then, following an Indonesian invasion, were merely to go into the Security Council. He thought this argued in favor of more thoughtful planning. Luns asserted that we must not give the Soviets or Sukarno the impression that the US would look aside if there were an invasion. He said there must be continuity of policy. He repeated that the Dutch could accept the US warning without anything specific being said about action by the US 7th Fleet in the event of an attack. Ambassador van Roijen said that the situation would be very dangerous without the US warning. The Secretary said that a great power cannot issue a warning without planning carefully how it will act if this warning is disregarded. Ambassador van Roijen said that perhaps the US statement could be called by another name. Luns continued on this point, saying that experience teaches us that we will in fact know in advance if the Indonesians are making preparations for an attack and the situation can be covered at that time. The Dutch themselves could cope with small-scale invasion efforts and thought they would know sufficiently in advance to warn their allies in the event of large-scale planning. Therefore, the Dutch could accept the US warning not based on any specific plan.

The Secretary said that we were looking for a framework for a solution to the problem and thought that the UN trusteeship perhaps offered the best possibility. If this were arranged, then we could get support for a US warning to Indonesia. Ambassador van Roijen said he thought the United States was using pressure on the Dutch by not giving the warning in order to get the Dutch to accept a trusteeship, i.e., without a trusteeship we would not issue a warning. The Secretary said this was not the case. Luns said that he doubted it would be possible to get a bona fide trusteeship or even a visiting trusteeship because of Hammarskjold’s reluctance.

Luns then said that the US position on these issues seemed absurd to him unless we supported the Dutch on self-determination. He said that we were opposing the Portuguese in Africa where they did not grant self-determination and were opposing the Dutch for following precisely an opposite policy in West New Guinea. He said we must try to live up to our principles. He said there was also an Australian problem involved and that the Dutch had obtained Australian agreement to self-determination also.

The Secretary wondered if a trusteeship consisting of the Dutch, Australians, New Zealanders and Malayans would be acceptable. Luns replied in the affirmative and said that this would particularly be the case if it were supported by the United States, and he thought that other countries such as Thailand and Ceylon could also be added. The Secretary said it would be difficult to get a 2/3 vote in the UN if the Dutch were to be the administering authority. Luns did not think it was necessary to call the Dutch by this name. The Secretary said he thought a group such as he had outlined, with the addition of Ceylon, perhaps might be accepted in the UN. The Secretary said that we believe self-determination is more important to the area than Dutch presence. We assume that a trusteeship would be a strong one and a bona fide one. The Secretary then concluded, saying that the Dutch should consider this entire conversation as exploratory, and arrangements were made to continue the following day.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1061. Secret. Drafted by McBride and approved in S on April 24. The time of the meeting is from Rusk’s Appointment Book, which indicates his next appointment was for 5:40 p.m. (Johnson Library)

164. Memorandum of Conversation 164. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 11, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Foy D. Kohler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Netherlands Joseph Luns, Foreign Minister

Dr. J. H. van Roijen, Ambassador

The Secretary met with the Foreign Minister for half an hour before dinner at the Dutch Embassy, from 7:40 to 8:10 p.m. Mr. Luns talked at some length about the state of Dutch preparedness to meet a possible Indonesian attack on West New Guinea, along the lines of his remarks to the President. He stressed that he felt there was no immediate danger partly because he was sure that nothing would be undertaken in the absence of Sukarno and partly because there was no evidence of preparatory steps. He pointed out that last fall the Dutch had detected and frustrated even a very small incursion by less than 100 men. He said he felt confident that Dutch intelligence would know at least a few weeks in advance of any major movement which would require as a minimum 1500 Indonesian troops.

The Secretary commented that this somewhat eased his own view of the situation since some of our own intelligence people had feared that a crisis might be more imminent or more of a surprise. He wanted to be quite clear that the questions he had raised with Mr. Luns did not mean that US policy as to the use of force had in any way changed. Obviously the Administration would not give Indonesian President Sukarno any impression that it had. However he stressed that the new Administration took these matters very seriously in terms of the total global struggle with which it was faced, in Berlin, the Congo, Laos, the Taiwan Straits, and elsewhere. He wanted to be quite sure that warnings were issued with full awareness of the possible implications for action. The United States did not intend to bluff or to be caught bluffing. He would say frankly that if matters really came to an issue over West New Guinea, not only the position of the United States but that of the whole free world would be much better if we could not be charged with engaging in hostilities simply to protect a Dutch colonial position. It would clearly be much better, if matters came to a head, that we should be acting on behalf of the UN and the principle of self-determination.

The Foreign Minister reaffirmed Dutch readiness to explore every possibility of an internationalized solution and there ensued considerable discussion as to the nature of a trusteeship proposal which might be offered and accepted by the United Nations. Mr. Luns suggested during the course of this discussion three possibilities: (1) the Dutch alone to be the trustees; (2) the Dutch to remain as effective administrators with some other country or countries as the nominal trustees along the lines of the Italian administration of Somaliland; and finally, (3) possibility of an East-West combination in which the Dutch would be one of five participants, perhaps with Malaya, Ceylon, Australia and New Zealand. It was agreed that the trusteeship possibilities could be explored further with the Dutch Ambassador here and with the representatives of the UK and Australia. During the course of this talk Mr. Luns clarified that his figure of 18,000 Dutchmen in Indonesia did not include the Dutch armed force strength of about 5000. However he did cut back the over-all total to “probably 21,000 or 22,000.” He said that approximately 9000 of these were actively engaged in local administrative duties of one kind or another.

Mr. Luns said that he would talk about the whole question with UN Secretary General Hammarskjold in New York within the next day or two and undertook to let us know the results through Ambassador van Roijen. In reply to Mr. Luns’ question the Secretary indicated that this was still a “Washington question” which was not yet ready for discussion among our representatives at the UN. In connection with his forthcoming talk with Hammarskjold, Mr. Luns said he still wanted to pursue the question of getting a visiting UN mission to go to Indonesia. He felt that if this could be done quickly it would safeguard the situation for the time being and give us more time to consider a more permanent solution.

Referring to Mr. Luns’ claim that many Afro-Asian governments were sympathetic toward Dutch policies in West New Guinea, the Secretary suggested that the Foreign Minister might usefully sound out some of those representatives at the UN, notably Ambassador Slim of Tunisia. If some of the Afro-Asian members were willing to support a trusteeship formula in the UN, this would obviously be very helpful. Mr. Luns agreed to do this.

Both the Foreign Minister and Ambassador van Roijen expressed their appreciation for this talk and their understanding for the concern which the Secretary had felt about West New Guinea.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1161. Secret. Drafted by Kohler and approved in S on April 17. Luns also met with Ball, Nitze, and William Bundy on April 11. They discussed the Soviet Union’s role in Indonesia and then Luns returned the conversation to West New Guinea, reiterating many of the points he made in previous conversations. (Memorandum of conversation, April 11; ibid.)

165. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 165. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 17, 1961.

SUBJECT

Luns and West New Guinea

The attached outgoing message to The Hague1 summarizing a further Luns-Rusk conversation on April 11,2 which I have just obtained, throws important new light on the Luns visit. It indicates:

a. That Secretary Rusk softened the effect of his earlier comments by saying that he did not mean that our policy on the use of force had changed and that we would not give Sukarno any impression that it had; but that any action by us would have to be through the U.N. and in support of self-determination. Thus, the Secretary reverted basically to the equivocal position proposed in the original State talking paper.

b. We apparently committed ourselves to explorations with representatives of the U.K. and Australia, as well as the Dutch, of possible trusteeship formulas.

c. Secretary Rusk suggested that Luns sound out some of the Afro-Asian representatives at the U.N. on a trusteeship formula.

The actions in b. and c. above could, it seems to me, place us in a most awkward position with Sukarno. If we attempt to develop a specific trusteeship proposal in discussions with the Dutch, the U.K. and the Australians before we have any discussion of specifics with the Indonesians, it is likely to make the Indonesians suspicious of anything that is subsequently advanced. The suggestion that Luns sound out Afro-Asian U.N. representatives on some kind of undefined trusteeship formula means that the Dutch will be approaching other countries before we are clear on the U.S. position and before we have presented a trusteeship proposal to Sukarno. If the Dutch do not reveal that we made such a suggestion to them, perhaps little harm will be done, though it is difficult to see what good will be accomplished.

These new developments do raise additional questions as to the appropriate strategy for the Sukarno visit. In particular, our commitment to explorations with the U.K. and Australia as well as the Dutch may make it more difficult than ever to consider floating a specific trusteeship proposal with Sukarno.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4/16/61–4/30/61. Secret.

1 Telegram 1375 to The Hague, April 14, not printed.

2 See Document 164.

166. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 166. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 18, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

This follows up on our conversation this morning.1 There is attached basic information bearing upon problems of any transition from Dutch rule in West New Guinea.2 This memo discusses your concept of the proper approach to Sukarno.

The recent Subandrio speech on West New Guinea suggests that the Indos are quite confident that the forces of national and international politics are moving their way and that they can hope to obtain control of WNG in the near future. It is quite evident from the speech, as from other indications, that whereas the Indos might have been willing to make significant compromises in 1950, they are not prepared to do so now. They are prepared to accept some sort of transitional arrangement which would help the Dutch save face and which would minimize direct contact between the Dutch and the Indos during the transition. They apparently believe that such contact could lead to further difficulties.

I assume that our principal objective is to improve the outlook for a non-Communist Indonesia and only secondarily to satisfy Dutch emotional needs. If that is the case, our approach must be quite clearly directed toward an Indonesian takeover of WNG at a reasonably early date. While we need a formula that will save face for the Dutch by making a bow in the direction of self-determination, we should not in the process delude ourselves or confuse the Indonesians as to our real objective.

The simplest and most straightforward position would be to announce our support for Indonesian control of WNG during Sukarno’s visit. This approach has a good deal of attraction to me. Though it would flaunt the principle of self-determination, it could be based upon acceptance of the Indonesian principle that WNG was an original part of the Dutch East Indies and should go to the successor state. Another problem of course is that we still hope that somehow a mutually agreed upon solution can be found. We don’t want to have to reach it by a route which starts by breaking what is left of the crockery and then going back later and trying to pick up the pieces. Finally, we are presently caught up in a web of commitments of our own devising which requires us to talk with the Dutch, the Australians and the British about any new approach. Such considerations probably make this approach infeasible now.

The real intent of State’s last trusteeship proposal seems to me to have been to provide a facade behind which transfer to the Indos could take place. From the Indonesian point of view the virtue of having a Malayan as administrator would be that he would be quite susceptible to pressures from them and would be unlikely to bar their access to the population. (While a trusteeship plan may have to include, as Mr. Acheson suggests, a group of guarantor nations who would seek to assure against an Indonesian takeover during the period of trusteeship, such a group should not be designed to keep the Indos out of WNG politically.)

It must be in this kind of context that we do any talking with Sukarno about the “problems of the transition” in WNG. If we talk about such problems in a way which indicates that we really expect the area to go to Indonesia and we want Indonesia to begin thinking about the problems of how it is going to handle the problems of administration; if we talk about them in order to suggest that one must talk about them to let the Dutch feel that the interests of the Papuans are receiving due recognition, that is one thing. But if we talk about them in a way that suggests that we have doubts about the Indonesian ability to administer the territory, that we really believe that self-determination is a significant principle in this backward area, that we believe that the period of transition must be a very long one, we will gain no capital with the Indos and we shall only be deluding ourselves.

The problem of West New Guinea, when seen from the perspective of Indonesian takeover rather than from a perspective of self-determination leading to self-government, is not in any way comparable to that of, say, the Congo. It isn’t a matter of raising the level of education, or producing a class of politicans and administrators and an effective military force. The Indonesians are, I am sure, quite confident of their ability to administer the area with Indonesian administrators. While we may be more skeptical and may believe that problems of dissidence could become troublesome, we must view the problem as being quite different in kind from that of the Congo.

In short, I believe that there are real dangers in an approach to Sukarno which would emphasize problems of the transition unless we make it quite clear that the transition we envisage is one to Indonesian rule in a quite short period of time: Otherwise we will seem to him to be espousing the Dutch line.

To conclude on a positive note, let me recapitulate my belief that as an approach to an ultimate solution we ought to stick with the last State trusteeship proposal or some variant of it (including a definite early terminal date). Perhaps the much more vague Indonesian suggestion of a three-nation group to arbitrate the dispute and/or temporarily administer the territory is a variant of this general approach that would be worth exploring as well. My paper of yesterday was directed more toward immediate tactics. In the immediate future I believe we should put all possible pressure on the Dutch and make it clear to Sukarno that we are doing so.

Though eventually we may have to help the Dutch and Indonesians work out a plan for orderly withdrawal of Dutch officials, etc., it seems to me that to prepare such a plan now, before we have decided upon the basic pattern of the trusteeship or other arrangement, would be quite premature. It is just not the key problem. So far as the other aspects of Mr. Acheson’s proposal are concerned, they are either covered or could be covered in the State trusteeship plan as follows:

a. A trustee of suitable neutrality—Malaya is, of course, State’s candidate.

b. A plan for a plebiscite—The State proposal called for self-determination which would presumably be accomplished through a plebiscite. As I have indicated on several occasions, I consider the question of how soon the plebiscite will be held to be the key matter to be first decided. Detailed plans for a plebiscite should be developed following initial agreement on a general proposal. Presumably it would be run by the U.N. Five years seems to me the outside maximum of what might be acceptable to the Indos as the length of the trusteeship. This will hardly be a long enough period to prepare the Papuans for self-government. If you were really preparing for that eventuality, you would have to accept the Dutch view that ten years or more would be required. Finally, the accession of WNG to Indonesia could not be a sort of residual possibility in such a plebiscite, as Mr. Acheson seems to imply. It would have to be one of the principal alternative choices offered.

c. A group of guarantor nations—The proposed consortium in the State plan could be the international guarantors of the trusteeship.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4/16/61–4/30/61. Secret.

1 No record of the conversation has been found.

2 Attached but not printed.

167. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 167. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 19, 1961.

WWR—

“First Principles” on West Irian

I fear, from reading the now voluminous State traffic on West Irian, that we are in danger of losing sight of the main purpose of the exercise.

(1) A major crisis is brewing over West Irian. The Indos have gone too far to turn back. They are more than ever confident of victory. With Bloc aid and backing, they are preparing for a military show-down if necessary, though they prefer to use this threat to force a political solution.

(2) However the issue comes up, Indonesia will sooner or later get West Irian. Whether there is a military show-down, the issue is precipitated into the UN beforehand, or there is a separate negotiation, Djakarta stands to win. To a UN majority, the issue will appear as one of anti-colonialism, and we will take a whacking defeat (with Soviets on winning side).

(3) US strategic interests require that we move toward the Indo side. We not only can’t prevent Sukarno from winning; we have a positive interest in convincing him that our policy is not hostile. A pro-Indo policy will not solve our problems with Sukarno but is an indispensable holding operation to forestall his moving even closer to the Bloc. A forthcoming US attitude would also give us more leverage in insisting that Sukarno help the Dutch save face. And, clearly, the Dutch attitude is softening to the point where this is what they really want.

Only if the above basic assumptions are borne clearly in mind can sensible tactics be devised. If we let Sukarno leave Washington for Moscow without a clear impression that we are moving in his direction, we leave all the cards in Moscow’s hands. Then, when we are ultimately dragged reluctantly in Sukarno’s direction (as we will be), it will appear as a victory at our expense.

Thus, if we try to sell Sukarno some form of trusteeship ending in a plebiscite, we must get across that we regard it as a transitional facesaving device. Otherwise, we will find ourselves caught up in a series of moves and counter-moves eventually leading to the same result, but without our getting any credit for it.

Our overall pitch to Sukarno might be that we recognize and will support a transitional formula if he and the Dutch can devise a satisfactory one. If he attempts to take over unilaterally, he will force us to oppose him, to the benefit of neither of us. But if something can be worked out it will open a new chapter in US-Indonesian and, we hope, Dutch-Indonesian relations. In essence, we would attempt to put the bee on him.

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 4 /16/61–4/30/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Bundy. Komer wrote the following note on the source text: “Walt—Bob Johnson and I are on quite the same frequency.”

168. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President Kennedy 168. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Bowles to President KennedySource

Washington, April 20, 1961.

SUBJECT

Visit of President Sukarno

President Sukarno of Indonesia will visit Washington on April 24 and 25 at your invitation. You have agreed to meet him at Andrews Air Force Base, receive him and his aides for discussions and host a luncheon in his honor.

Our chief hopes for this visit are that it will (1) help improve the cordial but still somewhat distant tone of our relations with Indonesia, (2) provide evidence of friendly U.S. interest and concern in the West New Guinea dispute which will encourage a peaceful settlement, (3) result in Sukarno’s greater understanding and appreciation of our position in the Cold War and (4) dispel his evident belief that we oppose him personally.

Although the formal initiative was ours, the desire for this visit on Sukarno’s part is great. His prime purposes will be to seek our understanding of Indonesia’s position in the territorial dispute with The Netherlands and to establish a personal relationship with you. While we have been neutral in the West New Guinea dispute, the Soviet Bloc has given him strong support. He will visit Moscow and possibly Communist China after leaving Washington and before returning to Indonesia. Sukarno also, it is thought, will wish to explain to you his domestic policy of “Guided Democracy” and review the international scene generally, possibly touching on specific points such as Laos, the Congo, Communist China and disarmament.

Our relations with Indonesia reflect the influence of the Cold War and Indonesia’s leftist-inclined neutralism, the West New Guinea dispute, the basic pro-Western orientation of many Indonesians, the potential threat of Communist China and Indonesia’s need for economic development assistance.

Our relations with President Sukarno are strongly affected by his unique personality. He is extremely vain, wishes to be considered a major world voice, will be grateful for minor gestures of little intrinsic importance and is likely to be piqued if they are omitted. He has an undeniable speaking talent, political intuition and a magnetic personality which were valuable to Indonesia in revolution, but his incapacity and dislike for routine have handicapped national development.

Sukarno has come to believe that we dislike him and would like to see him unseated. He associates the U.S. with foreign aid to the rebels in 1958. He was annoyed that President Eisenhower failed to include Indonesia in visits to other countries in the area and he was reportedly highly indignant when, in 1960, President Eisenhower kept him waiting in an ante-room for some 10 minutes rather than meeting him on the White House steps.

He is reported to be favorably impressed by the attitudes of your administration toward world problems, especially colonialism, and we believe that he is anxious to gain your friendship and understanding. In this connection, we suggest that you seek an appropriate opportunity to draw President Sukarno aside for a completely private talk of a few minutes duration with you.

“Bung” (brother, comrade) Karno, as he is familiarly referred to by his countrymen and addressed by his close associates, speaks English well and is at ease in all situations.

Points you may particularly wish to make to Sukarno are noted in connection with the following papers:1

1. Photograph of President Sukarno—Tab A

2. Biographic sketches of President Sukarno, First Deputy First Minister Leimena, Foreign Minister Subandrio and Ambassador Zain—Tab B

3. West New Guinea Dispute—Tab C

We have no specific plan but believe a trusteeship of some form may be a feasible approach. We would like his views. We are willing to help find a peaceful settlement.

4. East/West Relations—Tab D

Laos—We continue to view the Soviet delay in definitively answering the British proposals of March 23 as the most serious obstacle to progress toward successful peaceful solution of the Lao crisis.

Congo—The U. S. believes that there has been sufficient United Nations’ discussion of the Congo problem for the time being and that the Congo would benefit from a period of tranquility in which it may seek solutions to its many pressing problems free from outside intervention.

Communist China—Communist China’s refusal to renounce the use of force in pressing its claim to Taiwan and its record of belligerency against the free nations of Asia justify the maintenance of U. S. collective and individual security arrangements in the Far East. The price that Peiping demands for any improvement in relations with the U.S., namely that we permit the 11 million anti-Communist people of Taiwan to fall under Communist control, is absolutely unacceptable. While we do not always agree with the policies of the Republic of China on Taiwan, we will honor our commitments to help defend Taiwan against external attack.

Disarmament—Free World security requires an adequate inspection system.

United Nations—The U.S. hopes that Indonesia will join the other non-committed nations in making clear its opposition to Soviet attacks upon the United Nations, the Secretary General and the specialized agencies.

5. Indonesia’s Guided Democracy—Tab E

6. U.S. Military Assistance to Indonesia—Tab F

7. Economic Support for Indonesia—Tab G

We are prepared to cooperate in the 8 year economic development plan and, if agreeable, will send top level consultants to work with the Indonesian Government. We respect each country’s right to follow economic policies of its own choosing.

8. Pope Case—Tab H

We have no wish to interfere with legal procedures in this case. We hope, however, that it will not be allowed to disturb our good relations.

9. S.S. Hope—Tab I

We are grateful for the welcome this vessel, sponsored by the People-to-People Health Foundation, has received in Indonesia.

10. Ibu Sukarno Hospital—Tab J

We wish to cooperate in this project and will provide $200,000 worth of equipment. We understand President Sukarno is especially interested in this hospital.

Chester Bowles2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/4–2061. Secret. Drafted by Lindquist and cleared by Bell and Steeves. The original of this memorandum is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, 4/24/61–4/25/61.

1 All the tabs were attached but are not printed.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Bowles signed the original.

169. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 169. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 21, 1961.

SUBJECT

State’s Briefing Papers for the Sukarno Visit

In response to your suggestion to Mr. Bell that the papers include an outline of the points to be covered, State has included in pp. 2–4 of the transmittal memo to the President1 a very brief summary of the proposed general position on each issue. In its transmittal memo State emphasizes the importance of dispelling Sukarno’s belief that we oppose him personally. In view of this emphasis, with which I agree, I think it might be highly useful if the President could be given a somewhat fuller background on the reasons for Sukarno’s belief; I recommend that a statement along the lines of the attached be provided to him. (It is a slightly revised version of something I gave you in mid-March.) If you agree, I will have Sam Belk include it in the briefing material he is getting together for the President.

I. West New Guinea (Tab C)2

The objective of the U.S. approach is a very minimal one of providing “evidence of friendly interest and concern in the West New Guinea dispute which will encourage a peaceful settlement” (p. 1 of memo).

State proposes that we advance the Malayan trustee idea and ask that Sukarno give us his reaction after he had had time to study it. No reference is made to self-determination, a plebiscite or a terminal date for the trusteeship, but reference is made (Tab C, p. 3, par. 4) to replacement of Dutch officials and to the fact that Indonesia would have access to the territory under a trusteeship. This is a more forthcoming position than I had anticipated. I recommend, however, that we make three additional points. If we are not prepared to go as far as the third, as I would prefer, it would be possible to stop after the first or the second.

1. “We are prepared to use our maximum powers of persuasion with the Dutch in order to obtain a solution that will be acceptable to Indonesia. President Sukarno realizes of course that many Dutch feel very strongly about this issue and that it will require some flexibility on all sides if a solution is to be found.”

2. “While it is impossible for us to suggest now exactly how long a trusteeship might last, we would anticipate that it would be a transitional arrangement and not of indefinite duration.”

3. “West New Guinea is not ours to dispose of, but, as we look at the various possible ways in which the situation might evolve, it seems most likely to us that sooner or later it will go to Indonesia.”

The discussion of the WNG problem in the State paper covers most of the essential points but buries, in the first two full paragraphs on the last page, the discussion of the urgency of the situation.3 It also does not consider the question of where an immediate negative Sukarno reaction to our proposals would leave us.

II. East/West Relations (Tab D)

So far as I know current policy on the subjects covered, the material seems accurately to reflect it. However, the following ideas have occurred to me in reading this section.

1. Laos (p. 1): Would there be any value in the President’s taking off from the statement that we support the goal of a neutral Laos to digress briefly on this Administration’s general view of neutralism?

2. Communist China (p. 5, par. 4): Bob Komer is giving you a memo on the general subject.4 Whether or not they are so intended, the first two sentences of par. 4 could be interpreted by Sukarno as being directed toward GRC support of the Indonesian rebels. If so, the assurances contained in them are pretty weak. Why not delete them and revise the third sentence to read: “We make every effort to dissuade the GRC from policies and actions which are contrary to the interests of other friendly countries, but it should be appreciated that we cannot and do not control the GRC’s policies and actions.”

3. Disarmament (p. 6): The principal point of this discussion is to explain the significance we attach to inspection. Yet, it seems to me that par. 3, which is intended to do so, does not clearly state the case for inspection.

III. Economic Support for Indonesia (Tab G)

The second paragraph of “recommendations”5 raises two questions:

a. The point that the United States has the resources, competence and leadership to “win” the cold war seems a much broader point than just an economic one and, if it is to be made, should probably be made in a broader context than that of U.S. support for Indonesia’s eight year plan. I am rather surprised to see it included at all, in the view of the opinion I have heard expressed several times by State people that it can be best made implicitly rather than explicitly.

b. I think it is tilting against windmills to suggest to Sukarno that his connections with the USSR and Communist China be limited to “facade connections”. The figures under Tabs G-2 and G-3 indicate that Bloc aid offers total over one billion dollars, U.S. aid, $572.6 million.

Perhaps State intends that the U.S. will assume most of the burden of support for the eight year plan for it suggests that the President say (last sentence, p. 1): “We would anticipate that the magnitude of this [U.S.]6 assistance would cover a substantial part of the resources required by the plan.” In the Embassy’s despatch analyzing the plan, it is indicated that the Indonesian Cabinet believed that Indonesia would absorb additional credits of $40 million per year. If this Cabinet view were accepted at face value, perhaps the U.S. can cover a substantial part (or all) of the resources required. However, it is also evident that the plan contemplated unrealistic amounts of foreign private investment and that the Cabinet has not really made up its mind about foreign investment, a subject that the government has debated inconclusively since independence. Thus, actual requirements for additional aid could be a good deal more than $40 million per year. In any event, it seems quite unlikely that Sukarno will be willing to forego Bloc aid.

The first full paragraph on p. 3 outlines a more extensive role for the proposed high level mission than I think it will be likely to be able to play; the first line of the paragraph is a general expression of State’s own doubts on this score.7

The Pope Case (Tab H)

I remind you that you have a TS memo in your file on this subject8 that you may want to use in any talk with the President.

Other

Though not mentioned in these briefing papers, you may recall that Mr. Bell thought it would be useful sometime in the conversation if the President could outline his own domestic policy plans. He mentioned education as an example. (The Indonesians are very keen on education and it is one of the few fields in which they have done a quite effective job since independence.)

Bob

Attachment9

Washington, April 20, 1961.

PAST U.S. POLICY TOWARD INDONESIA: AN INTERPRETATION

Our policy toward Indonesia for the last several years has been based upon the hope of strengthening an anti-Communist element or grouping in Indonesia in order to force Sukarno, in his manipulation of Indonesian political forces, to move in a more anti-Communist direction. Our immediate objective—except possibly for a short period in 1957–58—was not to supplant Sukarno himself, but to influence his political balancing act in a direction favorable to ourselves.

In the early and mid-1950’s we based our hopes upon Hatta (the anti-Communist Vice President), and upon the Masjumi (liberal middle class pro-West Moslem party) and the Indonesian Socialist Party (pro-West, rationalist intellectual). The national elections of 1955 and provincial elections of 1957 demonstrated the weaknesses of these bases of non-Communist opposition. When dissidence in the Outer Islands, always an important factor in Indonesia, broke out into an open rebellion in 1957–58 led by anti-Communist regional military commanders and certain prominent members of the Masjumi, we put our chips on the revolutionary government and hoped to identify Sukarno with the Communists. But the revolutionists soon proved unable to stand up to the military forces of the central government.

However, the rebellion brought to the fore another non-Communist alternative—the central army command under General Nasution. Accordingly, when it became evident that the rebellion would fail, we extended military assistance to Indonesia and sought to build up the army as a non-Communist political force. (During the period when the rebellion had been developing we had turned down Indonesian government requests for military aid.) There also continued in existence a significant anti-Sukarno non-Communist political party remnant. The army under Nasution showed signs from time to time of a desire to cooperate with that remnant in building a national anti-Communist political movement. We encouraged such efforts. One such attempt by the army was the creation of the National Front for the Liberation of West Irian. A more recent effort was the creation in mid-1960 of the Democratic League which had discreet army support. Both of these efforts failed and both organizations are now dissolved.

Through all of this period Sukarno has sought two objectives: (a) to so balance and frustrate sources of potential or actual opposition to himself as to maintain his own pre-eminent political position; and (b) to create an organized mass political base which is loyal to himself personally. His balancing act initially involved balancing the non-Communist political parties off against each other; then the central army command against the political parties; finally the Communists against the army. Through it all Sukarno has manipulated the emotions of nationalism and revolution to maintain his own popular political strength as the foundation for a political movement based upon personal loyalty to himself. (Unlike other Asian political leaders, he did not come to power as the actual head of a political movement.) His campaign against Dutch economic interests, against the rebels and against the indigenous Chinese as well as his campaign for West Irian have all served this purpose.

Sukarno’s leadership combines strong charismatic qualities with an adept Machiavellianism. The opposition caves in when it faces even the prospect of a confrontation. This was true of Hatta; it is true of Nasution. In his search for a personal political base he has created a political philosophy and political slogans which appeal to a deep synoretic tendency in Indonesian culture and which at the same time provide an all-encompassing political-ideological umbrella under which he can operate to unite the most diverse political factions. “Pantshila”, and more recently, “Usdek”, both quite devoid of genuine content, are expressions of this syncretism. He has no interest in administration or in economics; his passion is revolutionary politics directed toward securing his own position. The first five year development plan was a bust; the new eight year plan may suffer the same fate. Both, however, have served useful personal political purposes.

Sukarno must now consider that he is at last approaching the culmination of his endeavors. He has used the concept of “guided democracy” and the return to the 1945 constitution to destroy the governmental institutional bases for opposition as well as to destroy the principal opposition political parties. The Masjumi and the Socialist Parties have been dissolved. The two remaining non-Communist parties of any consequence—the National Party (PNI) and the Muslim Scholar Party (NU)—have subordinated their views to Sukarno’s. The PNI has always, in any event, derived most of its strength from its identification with Sukarno. Sukarno is now launching a new National Front which is designed to provide, at long last, a mass political base loyal to him.

The Indonesian Communists. (PKI) early learned that opposition to Sukarno did not pay. Since their armed revolt of 1948 they have, with only minor deviations, identified themselves with Sukarno’s objectives. They have, of course, prospered. They have long had the most effective village-level political organization in Java. Meanwhile, the USSR has also given Sukarno increasing support.

Whereas the PKI and the USSR have given consistent support to Sukarno, we have given our support to the anti-Communist forces with the result that we have often seemed to oppose Sukarno. In view of this it is not surprising that, as the recent SNIE on Indonesia states (Par. 33, SNIE 55–61):10

“. . . . Sukarno appears to be increasingly convinced that he personally does not have the sympathy and support of the U.S. and that the U.S. not only would be happy to see him replaced but would be willing to assist a local initiative to this end. His suspicions of the U.S. are buttressed by his belief that the U.S. was behind the 1958 rebellion of the outer islands. He has interpreted the failure of President Eisenhower to visit Indonesia during his Pacific tour as a personal snub. Moreover, U.S. policy regarding the West New Guinea issue has always antagonized Sukarno. These factors have accelerated Sukarno’s current slide to the left in domestic and foreign policies.”

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 4/61. Secret.

1 Document 168.

2 Reference is to Tabs A-J outlined in Document 168.

3 These two paragraphs of Tab C read as follows:

“We believe that a solution must be found as the Dutch position is untenable and Indonesian frustration, with Communist goading, may if not ameliorated lead to hostilities which could be ruinous to the Free World position in Southeast Asia. Indonesia may have the requisite military capability by the end of this year to launch an offensive campaign.

“We do not want uncontrolled UN discussion of the issue as we would be placed in the uncomfortable position of choosing between a key Asian power with a strong psychological and historical case and a faithful European ally espousing the cause of ‘self-determination’.”

4 Not found.

5 This paragraph of Tab G reads:

“Given the penchant of President Sukarno to play both ends in the cold war and attempt to line up with the winner, President Kennedy should seek to induce a conviction on the part of Sukarno that the United States has the resources, competence and leadership to win, hence he would be well advised to go along with the West and eschew anything but facade connections with the Chinese Communists or the Soviet Union. The President could refer in a confident tone to the plain facts regarding U.S. resources, demonstrated capabilities and intentions.”

6 Brackets in the source text.

7 The first sentence of this paragraph of Tab G reads: “To the extent that Indonesian officials will listen and cooperate, the proposed economic mission might outline a simplification of the foreign exchange system and the adoption of realistic rates, also seeking to reduce the recurrent budget deficit and minimize punitive measures against private industry and entrepreneurs.”

8 See the enclosure to Document 153.

9 No classification marking. Drafted by Robert H. Johnson.

10 See Document 151.

170. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 170. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Visit of President Sukarno

The following is a résumé of the principal points you may wish to emphasize during your discussions with President Sukarno:

Personal Relationship with Sukarno

1. Sukarno places great store by personal relationships and will be at least as much impressed and influenced by your attitude toward him personally as by the substance of the discussions.

2. He will be pleased if you express your knowledge and appreciation of him as father of Indonesia’s independence and as a major voice in world affairs.

3. He considers himself a political innovator, having devised the concept of guided democracy by which his country is governed. He sees this essentially as development of a social and political system harmonious with Indonesian traditions and subservient to neither the West nor the East. Evidence that you understand and sympathize with his desire for a culturally and ideologically independent Indonesia will be extremely gratifying to him.

West New Guinea

1. We are disturbed by this long and bitter dispute between Indonesia and the Netherlands and we believe it is in the best interest of all that a peaceful and satisfactory settlement be found.

2. We have no specific solution to suggest but our study of the problem leads us to believe that some form of trusteeship involving the use of the United Nations may be a feasible approach. We would like President Sukarno to consider this possibility very seriously and let us have his comments. Dutch Foreign Minister Luns has indicated that he would consider this suggestion very carefully.

3. We would be most unhappy to see armed hostilities erupt as we believe this would be contrary to the best interest of all concerned.

Economic Aid and Planning

We believe that the Indonesian 8-year plan provides a good framework for national economic development and we would like to cooperate to a substantial extent. If agreeable to President Sukarno, we would be willing to send a top-level economic team to Indonesia to consult with his Government as to the best ways that we can work together on this.

Pope Case

1. We realize this case is in the courts and we have no wish to interfere with judicial processes.

2. However, we sincerely hope that this might well not be allowed to be exploited by those wishing to disrupt our good relations.

United States Position on Colonialism

1. Our position on Angola demonstrated the attitude of this administration toward colonialism.

2. We would like President Sukarno’s understanding and help in meeting the aspirations of present and former colonies in ways that ensure genuine attainment of their goals rather than using them as propaganda pawns.

Laos

1. Recent Soviet Union policy toward Laos has been very disappointing and leads us to question the sincerity of Russian policy toward that small country.

2. We want a genuinely neutral Laos and we would be extremely grateful for President Sukarno’s help and understanding in achieving this aim.

Dean Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia, Indonesia—Security, Sukarno Visit, 4/24—4/25/61. Secret.

171. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 171. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, April 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Main Points for Sukarno Visit (Supplement to the authoritative State Department summary)1

1. Personal. The red carpet treatment, in human terms, should not merely include personal warmth but willingness to discuss—as one statesman to another—your domestic objectives and international perspectives. Some form of assurance should be given that we are his “friend”; that is, not engaged in hostile action against him. Details include gifts of a portrait and a book; family comment on Indonesian art books; introduction to family. The chopper—to be delivered later—is on hand at our end. Colonel McHugh is informed to be ready to discuss with Sukarno’s staff.

2. West Irian. We believe the status quo of West Irian should not be maintained. The Dutch understand this. We are anxious to hear Sukarno’s views. As for ourselves, we have been considering the possibilities of a Malayan trusteeship which would, in an orderly way, phase out the Dutch presence. (There are some 8,000 Dutch administrators and a total of approximately 18,000 Dutch nationals in the area, aside from 2,500 Dutch troops.) It is our view that it would be most unfortunate if an attempt were made to settle this problem by military means. Flexibility on all sides will be required if we are to meet the legitimate interests of all parties and the interests of the Papuans. During the trusteeship we would expect that Indonesia would have normal access to the territory. You might inquire what Sukarno’s views are about the possibility of coming to a direct understanding with the Dutch in future months. You may state that it is your view that the Dutch are increasingly flexible on the matter of West Irian, although, as Sukarno is aware, strong feelings are involved on both sides. We have no direct interests aside from the tranquility of the area and the avoidance of the kind of confusion and difficulty which we have all seen in the Congo. We are prepared to be helpful if all interested parties so wish. You should not commit yourself at this time on the length of the trusteeship or on the question of ultimate Indonesian takeover. The Indonesians are very sophisticated on this issue, and if transitional measures of the Malayan type are proposed, Sukarno is unlikely to press you further, although he may express his own views.

3. Economic aid. You might explain the new policy of working on long term with countries which create economic development programs. You might express an interest in their new 8-year plan. You might say that we are prepared to help them in a substantial way in bringing that plan to life. We believe the long run independence, as well as economic strength of Indonesia will depend substantially on their development effort. Specifically, you might suggest that the Indonesian government might wish some outside experts—governmental or nongovernmental—to discuss their plan with them in the manner in which the India and Pakistani plans have been discussed by both the Oliver Franks mission and the World Bank. We would also be pleased to receive here members of the Indonesian government concerned with economic development matters. (For your information, it is our hope that the two senior officials of Sukarno’s government who are seriously interested in economic development—Djuanda and Saleh—will come here this summer.) In line with our general policy, no specific figure of aid should be suggested until more serious discussions have taken place.

4. Military aid. We hope that Sukarno has found our modest military aid program useful. He may wish to expand it by our providing a team to work with the Indonesian army in a “civil action” program. We have in the U.S. a tradition in the Army Corps of Engineers of this kind. We have trained personnel and know-how: Army engineers, medical specialists, administrative specialists, etc., to help the Army make a contribution in the field of engineering, public health, public administration, transportation, communications, etc.

5. Mr. Allen Pope. The maximum that we can do is to express the hope the Indonesian government might see fit to be lenient to Pope, as a gesture of good will.

6. American oil companies. We understand that the 8-year plan depends heavily on the development of foreign exchange through the export of oil and other natural resources (notably timber and fisheries). Given the development of strength by the Indonesian government and the changing attitudes of the oil companies, we should think that their presence would represent no threat to Indonesian sovereignty. The experience elsewhere is that such foreign enterprises can make a constructive contribution to economic development in newly independent countries, within the framework of their programs. But this is, of course, a matter wholly for the Indonesians to work out with the oil companies. (For your information, the issue of private companies in Indonesia has been hotly debated for many years. It could go either way.)

7. Laos. It is our hope that all of us together may make good on the Asian scene the concept which both sides have accepted of an independent, neutral Laos along Austrian lines. The subject of Laos might be the occasion for you to express your generally benign view towards neutralism when neutralism is really neutral. Our objective in the world is simply to see the new nations maintain their independence and develop their societies along lines truly of their own choosing, conforming to the will of the majority and not a minority. We shall continue to aid nations—such as Viet-Nam—whose independence is threatened.

8. Should Cuba arise, a suggested line (in conformity with Stevenson’s UN approach) is that Castro, unlike Sukarno, has betrayed a truly nationalist revolution in Cuba with grave consequences for the military and political situation in this area.

9. On other items in the black book, the State Department’s line seems O.K., with two minor exceptions. In Taiwan it would be best to indicate that we seek to discourage them from disturbing actions in friendly states, although our influence has its limits. On disarmament, the case for our concern with inspection could be more clearly put.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 4/61. Secret.

1 Document 170.

172. Memorandum of Conversation 172. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 24, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

SUBJECT

Conversation Between President Kennedy and President Sukarno of Indonesia

PARTICIPANTS

Americans President John F. Kennedy

Secretary of State Dean Rusk

Ambassador Howard P. Jones

Deputy Assistant Secretary John M. Steeves

Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Walt W. Rostow

Indonesians President Sukarno

Deputy First Minister Leimena

Foreign Minister Subandrio

Ambassador Zain

After the usual exchange of courtesies, President Kennedy led the conversation into a general discussion of the attitudes and aspirations of the people of Southeast Asia.

President Sukarno launched forth into a long earnest dissertation on this subject. The crux of the attitude of the peoples of Asia is nationalism, he said. These peoples, long occupied by colonial powers, are longing and fighting for freedom. The need of these nations is not so much for political and economic assistance as for understanding and support of their national aspirations and to ensure their national freedom. This, President Sukarno stressed, is a subject he recognized was well understood in America as result of our own history.

“We know that America wants to reach our hearts,” Sukarno said. “If I am correct in this, please understand us in our national aspirations.” The focal point of Indonesia’s aspirations was West Irian. “How many times have I spoken to your Ambassador and pled for America’s support for the restoration of this territory to us. Let America say just one word to the effect that West Irian is a just claim. Give me something to say to my people. Give me something that will enable me to say that America is our friend,” Sukarno said.

“Before 1950 America helped us on our bid for freedom but after 1950 America seemed uncertain in its relations with us, its voice was no longer positive and clear,” Sukarno continued. “Why don’t you take the same position as you took before 1950,” Sukarno asked. “Before 1950, America said that Indonesia has the right to freedom. Why don’t you say so now? Why don’t you support our just claim to West Irian? The only answer to that question I have had is your friendship with the Dutch, your relations with NATO. America should not play the role of a tightrope dancer between Europe and Asia, always keeping a balance. Excuse me, Mr. President, I am speaking bluntly.”

“Why do you want West Irian?” President Kennedy asked, pointing out that Melanesians were a different race, that the territory cost the Dutch more money to administer than they could get out of it.

“It is part of our country; it should be free, “President Sukarno said.

“But the Papuans are a different race,” President Kennedy objected.

“Are the American people all white?” President Sukarno asked. “A nation is not only a matter of race or the color of skin.” Sukarno pointed to the negroes and to Hawaii to illustrate his point and stressed that Indonesia itself was composed of a mixture of different races.

President Kennedy brought up the subject of Australia’s attitude. President Sukarno commented that Prime Minister Menzies told him that he wanted to see the issue of West Irian settled in a peaceful way. If Indonesia could reach a solution with the Dutch, Australia would agree.

President Kennedy: “What about the eastern part of New Guinea?”

Sukarno: “This was never part of Indonesia, we have no claim to it, but West Irian is different. Long before the Dutch came, West Irian was Indonesian territory.”

President Kennedy pointed out that the Solomon Islands and New Guinea seemed to be of the same race and shared a common culture and history.

Deputy First Minister Leimena (who is a Moluccan from Ambon) interjected that the Molucca Islands touch West Irian and much of the culture of West Irian is derived from the Molucca Islands.

President Kennedy: “Why do you have such a strong feeling about this territory?”

President Sukarno: “Because it is part of our nation. The Dyaks of Kalimantan (Borneo) are also less developed, similar to the Papuans of West Irian. Hawaii is part of the U. S., but the Hawaiians are another race, the black negroes are another race, the Papuans—yes—they, too, are another race, and so are the Dyaks. But the Dyaks are happy as Indonesians.”

Sukarno pointed out that former Dutch High Commissioner Van Moltke admitted that West Irian was part of Indonesia. He pointed out that after the revolution the Government of the Republic of Indonesia had given the Netherlands the preferred position in the economy. “We wanted close relations with the Netherlands. But when we found no solution was possible to the problem of West Irian, we took drastic measures.”

Secretary Rusk raised the question as to when the problem of West Irian had last been discussed with the Dutch.

Deputy First Minister Leimena responded that it was in 1955 and he pointed out that he had been Vice-chairman of the Indonesian Delegation in Geneva and that he had tried very hard in Geneva to talk with the Dutch, but that the Dutch had insisted that they would not discuss the subject.

“What would the people of West Irian themselves choose,” President Kennedy asked. “Indonesia,” replied Sukarno, emphatically.

“Then why not hold a plebiscite to determine this?” President Kennedy asked, pointing out that such a result would have to be accepted by the Dutch.

President Sukarno queried as to why the use of this device was necessary since the territory had always been Indonesian.

President Kennedy noted that in the case of Hawaii the people had themselves decided by popular vote that they wished to become Americans. If the people of West Irian made such a free choice, then the Dutch claim would automatically be dropped, he emphasized.

“How can you have a free choice?” President Sukarno asked, citing the case of Algeria. “You must see this problem through the glass of nationalism,” he said.

President Kennedy turned the conversation to a discussion of other trouble spots in Southeast Asia.

President Sukarno referred to the large number of dissatisfied people in the area, citing Laos and Viet Nam as examples, and pled for America’s understanding of social revolution as an essential part of Asian nationalism. President Kennedy referred to the struggle in Viet Nam and asked President Sukarno what his judgment was as to how that situation should be handled.

“Execute what the Geneva Conference decided,” President Sukarno said. He pointed out that dissatisfaction in Viet Nam would continue so long as there was domination of the country by a family group. “How do you determine which group should control the country?” President Kennedy asked.

“I had a long talk with Ho Chi Minh,” President Sukarno observed. In this talk he said he raised the question as to whether Ho Chi Minh was ideologically invading Viet Nam and Malaya. Ho Chi Minh had denied this, saying he was interested in achieving social and economic revolution within the framework of nationalism.

The conversation turned briefly to Laos, Sukarno commenting that the reason that the Pathet Lao were successful in developing a following was that they represented the feelings of the people to a greater extent than the other side. He emphasized that social revolution in Laos was inevitable. He then reverted suddenly to his favorite topic.

“Why does America never say that we have a just claim to West Irian,” he asked. “Moscow is always saying our claim is just, that they support this claim. Please give me something to say to my people.”

President Kennedy pointed out that we had supported independence for Indonesia, that we had our relations with NATO to consider, involving considerable differences of opinion on this and other subjects, but that we were very much interested in ensuring a peaceful resolution of the West Irian question.

The discussion turned to consideration of what constituted progress for the less developed countries of Southeast Asia.

“Do you see a difference between progress and communism?”, President Kennedy asked.

Foreign Minister Subandrio replied, “Yes, based on nationalism; also on Islam.” Indonesians derive some of their socialism from Marx, but they had been searching for a real Indonesian identity. After the revolution there was no change of direction in the country. To progress they had to have a firm national ideology, not something borrowed from outside. President Sukarno had finally developed the philosophy of guided democracy and guided economy.

In response to a question by President Kennedy as to how he described this philosophy, Subandrio went into a long discussion of the Indonesian origins of guided democracy, pointing out that it was based upon the Pantjasila (the five principles of belief in God, democracy, nationalism, internationalism, and social justice), Gotong-Rojong (the Indonesian philosophy of individuals cooperating for the common good), Musjawarah and Mufakat (the philosophy of thorough discussion of any problem leading to a decision based on the meeting of the minds).

“Our people don’t know or understand the concept of a decision being made by one-half of a group plus one,” Subandrio pointed out, emphasizing that unanimity was the basis on which Indonesians determined policy and action—discussion until agreement was reached by all. A definition of Indonesian socialism thus was impossible to give in specific terms since its development involved a series of discussions and decisions over a period of time. “Over 30 years I can tell you what is Indonesian socialism,” Subandrio commented, emphasizing, however, that the essence of Indonesian socialism was nationalism in the sense of political and economic control of their own destiny.

“How can you be independent with 90% of your economy in the hands of outsiders?” Subandrio asked, pointing out that as a result of actions against the Dutch and Chinese approximately 70% of the economy was now in Indonesian hands.

In summary, Subandrio said one might say the Indonesians were in the process of discovering their national ideology. He emphasized that Indonesia was ahead of other nations such as Egypt and India which had not yet worked out this philosophy. “We haven’t solved our problems, but we know where we stand.” Guided democracy resulted from the failure of parliamentary democracy.

There followed a discussion of the unfortunate results of the parliamentary system and proportional representation, under which, Ambassador Jones pointed out, some forty-five political parties had emerged in Indonesia to create a political situation even more unstable than in France prior to de Gaulle.

President Kennedy raised the question as to why the Indonesians were not accepting communism.

President Sukarno replied that Indonesians believed in God. 90% of the people of the country were Moslems. It was impossible for them to accept communism. One could not pray five times a day and still accept communism.

“Communism interprets life in a material way,” Subandrio interjected. “This is not acceptable to us.”

“Would it trouble you to have Southeast Asia under communism?” President Kennedy asked.

“Your glass is wrong,” President Sukarno said, indicating that all these countries wanted to be free of domination from outside, that the framework within which the revolutionary forces were operating was the framework of nationalism rather than communism.

President Kennedy queried whether President Sukarno did not think that the Viet Minh were Communists.

“We feel that Moscow is supporting them,” President Sukarno replied. He emphasized that Viet Minh national aspirations were being supported by Moscow just as Indonesia’s aspiration to regain the territory of West Irian was being supported by Moscow, but that this did not mean the support was forthcoming because either the Viet Minh or the Indonesians were Communists. “Use the glass of nationalism to see Asia,” Sukarno added.

President Kennedy asked Sukarno regarding the Communist strength in his own country.

“The Communist Party—PKI—is party No. 4 in Indonesia,” Sukarno said, but even within the PKI, “only 10% are Communists; 90% are revolutionary nationalists.” The PKI is the best organized and most effective party, however.

President Kennedy pointed out that we were interested in supporting the independence of Asian countries regardless of whether they were neutralists or not. If the entire area came under international communism, he emphasized, the U.S. would still survive, whereas Indonesia would inevitably come under the domination of a foreign power. He asked Sukarno whether he thought the U.S. was unwise in supporting Diem in Viet Nam.

Subandrio interjected that the U.S. was supporting the ruling few. President Kennedy noted that the recent elections had indicated considerable popular support for Diem. “Can you really say that the people prefer Ho Chi Minh?”

“The U.S. is safe,” Subandrio said. “We Indonesians don’t want to be dominated by anyone—Peiping, Moscow or Washington. We maintain a firm attitude toward the Chinese Communists. We want to be friends with them because they are a strong nation, but we also want to be firm with them. We do not want to count on the U.S. for our security. We want to stand on our own feet. We want to depend upon ourselves.” He then went into an extensive discussion of the determination of the nations in the area not to be governed or controlled by outsiders and emphasized that in some of these countries social and economic revolution still must take place. Some nations such as Laos, Malaya and Viet Nam are governed by a few ruling families who control the economy. This is insupportable in modern times.

“We have hope for the future,” Subandrio added, “if you are afraid of international communism dominating the area, we are not.” Nationalism is the counter-force. In Indonesia steps are being taken to curb the influence of the PKI, both in ideological and organizational terms. The PKI would be confronted with a real Indonesian nationalist ideology as well as with a National Front which would unify the country organizationally.

At the suggestion of President Sukarno, Subandrio outlined the recent measures that had been taken to limit the number of and direct the philosophy of all political parties within the country. In so doing he emphasized that being anti-communist in Indonesia was not enough, that it was necessary to have a positive program to counter communism and this was what the Government of Indonesia was working toward. He had to admit that only the Communist Party in Indonesia “was progressive” and that the rest of the political parties were corrupt.

“Do you think that the Communist objective in the area is for liberation or to seize power for themselves?” President Kennedy asked.

Sukarno acknowledged that it was probably the latter. He pointed out that, however, since the Communist Bloc supported Indonesia’s national aspirations, it was impossible to convince the Indonesian people that “America is our friend.” At the same time, he stressed that “our people are not Soviet-minded.”

Secretary Rusk emphasized that there was clear recognition in the U.S. of the necessity for revolutionary economic and social progress in Asia and that the influence of the U.S. was “peacefully in support” of this progress. There was no basic conflict between the U.S. interests in the area and these revolutionary programs. What troubles America, Secretary Rusk pointed out, is that international communism has seized upon and exploited the ideals of nationalism and economic and social progress for their own purposes. He noted that it was not in harmony with the Geneva accords for Ho Chi Minh to send his guerillas into Viet Nam.

President Sukarno returned to the question of West Irian. Secretary Rusk pointed out that if the Indonesian claim was a legal claim, then there was a way to settle it through the International Court. We assumed, however, that it was a political claim. Our instinctive reaction in such a case was to ask, “what do the people of the area concerned think about it?” If there was some way that the people of the area could make clear their own desires, settlement of the problem would be much simpler. Dutch opinion, the Secretary pointed out, was changing.

“We are realistic,” Subandrio said, “we are prepared to find ways and means for the Dutch to save face in this matter. The current in Holland is favorable. We would be willing to consider a trusteeship for a period of one or two years to make the transition to Indonesia’s possession easier. West Irian, as you know, is a liability for the Netherlands.”

“What position would you take on recognition of the Netherlands if the claim were settled,” President Kennedy asked.

President Sukarno replied that recognition would follow immediately.

Secretary Rusk raised the question as to whether the Indonesians and the Dutch might get together and talk. He pointed out to pre-determine the time period might be extremely difficult but that the time period might well be left to the UN. If the Indonesians would talk privately and informally to representatives of the Netherlands about a trusteeship or discuss the Tunku’s proposals, this might lead to something.

“We would be willing to borrow the hand of the United Nations to transfer the territory to Indonesia,” President Sukarno said.

President Kennedy pointed out that the West Irian problem was a very great concern to us and that Australia was disturbed. “We want to see this matter come to an amicable conclusion,” he said.

Foreign Minister Subandrio commented on Indonesia’s relations with Australia, pointing out that several years ago these approached hostility. Australia wanted no relations with Asia. This had changed recently, however. Prime Minister Menzies was moving forward, demonstrating greater interest in establishing good relations with his Asian neighbors.

President Kennedy pointed out that Mr. Menzies feels that if communism is successful in Indonesia it would constitute a greater threat to Australia if West Irian were in the possession of Indonesia. He pointed out that the U.S. too was concerned about international communism in the area.

The question, Foreign Minister Subandrio said, is how to face the problem. In Indonesians as well as other Asian nations, nationalism was the only weapon against communism. It must be admitted that the Communists were hardworking, well organized and militant. Solution of the West Irian problem would help tremendously in Indonesia.

President Kennedy expressed the hope that the Indonesian Government would not consider the use of force in this situation, emphasizing that a calm climate was essential if a solution were to be found.

President Sukarno emphasized that this solution must be found quickly. “I cannot always keep my people in my hands,” he said. “Give me more grip on my people.”

President Kennedy again emphasized that the problem would be made more complex and difficult a solution if there were military action in the area.

Foreign Minister Subandrio pointed out that the Dutch were reinforcing West Irian and that this had caused considerable excitement in Indonesia. He emphasized that the Government of Indonesia had no intention of taking military action against West Irian but that various islands in the area were constantly changing hands and clashes conceivably might occur.

President Kennedy asked how the Government of Indonesia was paying for the military aid it was receiving from the Soviet Union. Subandrio replied that they are paying over 12 to 15 years with a period of grace. He said they would much prefer to spend this money on economic development, but unfortunately in the position they have found themselves this was not possible. He emphasized that Indonesia would not be a liability to the U.S., but an asset “if we are strong.”

During luncheon, President Kennedy brought up the subject of Indonesia’s Eight Year Economic Development Plan, indicated our interest in it, and said we would be glad to send a top level economic team to Indonesia to study the plan and in cooperation with the Indonesian Government determine how we could best contribute to its implementation.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/4–2461. Secret. Drafted by Jones and approved in S on June 6. The meeting was held at the White House. According to the President’s Appointment Book, Sukarno arrived at the White House at 10:25 a.m. and the meeting lasted from 10:28 a.m. to noon. (Kennedy Library)

1 President Sukarno and his party and President Kennedy were joined by Vice President Johnson, Rusk, Steeves, and Jones for lunch from 1 to 2:45 p.m. (Ibid.)

173. Editorial Note 173. Editorial Note

Under Secretary Bowles met with Subandrio in Bowles’ office at 3:45 p.m. on April 24, 1961, and with President Sukarno, Leimena, Subandrio, and others at the Mayflower Hotel at 6 p.m. Both conversations were more general than Sukarno’s discussion with President Kennedy (see Document 172). (Memorandum of conversations, April 24; Department of State, Central Files, 798.00/4–2461) On April 25, Sukarno and his party returned to the White House for a brief farewell ceremony from 10:15 to 10:38 a.m. The Indonesians then departed the South Grounds of the White House via helicopter for the airport. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

On May 2, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles sent Chester Clifton a report of Sukarno’s reaction to his visit with President Kennedy. There was unanimous agreement among Sukarno’s entourage that the two Presidents “got along well together” and that Sukarno was impressed with Kennedy. Although the talks fell short of Indonesian expectations on West Irian (West New Guinea), the door had been left open for further discussions. There was little expectation that Sukarno planned closer alignment with the Soviet Union. (Memorandum from Dulles to Clifton with attached report, May 2; ibid., President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia—Security, Sukarno Visit, 4/24/61–4/25/61)

174. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 174. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)Source

Washington, May 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

I talked with you the other day about the West New Guinea problem.1 The mounting evidence suggests that we are presently in a period which may present a unique but transient opportunity for action which might solve the problem. Both sides seem more interested in a settlement than they have been for some time.2 One of the latest bits of evidence on this score is the view of Prince Bernhard which this office recently received and sent on to Assistant Secretary of State McConaughy.3 At the same time, if the opportunity for action is not seized, and the Indonesians resort to military action, we shall be faced by most difficult policy dilemmas. Quite possibly the dangers of such military action will increase as a result of Sukarno’s visit to Moscow which begins on June 5.

In the light of these circumstances, I believe we need to get this question to the Secretary and to the President for consideration at an early date. There are various ways in which it might be presented to him. I would like to suggest that State develop for Presidential consideration an issues paper which would discuss the pros and cons of alternative solutions.

State should use its discretion in developing the alternatives to be considered. However, I think it ought to give consideration to possible variations on its last trusteeship proposal. The major sticking points at present seem to be the question of the terminal date of a trusteeship and the question of self-determination. Perhaps, therefore, we ought to give serious consideration to an approach along lines which, I believe, may have been discussed in the past, under which it would be agreed through the UN: (a) that the Dutch administration of West New Guinea would be phased out over a period of two to four years and a temporary administration by the UN or a group of neutral states substituted; and (b) that the ultimate disposition of the territory would be settled by the UN itself at the end of this phase-out period. Such an approach would temporarily bypass the self-determination issue without, however, turning the territory over directly to Indonesia.

Any such paper should consider major questions of tactics, including the U.S. role in efforts to obtain a solution. Thus, the existing division in the Dutch Government and the views of Prince Bernhard suggest that there might be real value in our putting considerable pressure on the Dutch to consider a proposal that would resolve this division in the government in a direction favorable to a solution. There is also the question of whether we need to convey to the Indonesian Government during the period prior to Sukarno’s visit to Moscow some kind of general reassurance that the U.S. is continuing its efforts to find a solution.

I would be inclined to defer to your judgment in this matter, but I do feel confident that State should promptly formulate a view for presidential decision before the Paris visit.4

WR

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–1261. Secret. Copies were sent to McGhee, McConaughy, and Battle.

1 No record of this conversation has been found.

2 After visiting the Netherlands, former Secretary of State Dean Acheson told Henry Owen of the NSC Staff that his visit “convinced him that public opinion there is much more receptive to the idea of giving up New Guinea than the Dutch Government would lead you to believe.” (Memorandum from Owens to Rostow, May 5; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, Vol. I, 5/61)

3 Prince Bernhard, husband of Queen Juliana, had no official position in the Netherlands Government. His views came to Robert Johnson of the NSC via Henry G. Walter of the law firm of Fulton, Walter and Halley. On May 3 and 8, Johnson wrote and then revised a memorandum to Rostow explaining Bernhard’s proposals: The Netherlands would announce its readiness to turn over West New Guinea to a multinational trusteeship (balanced between East and West but not including the Netherlands or Indonesia); in a plebiscite to follow trusteeship, return of West New Guinea to the Netherlands would not be an option; and Dutch civil servants would remain at the pleasure of the trusteeship organization. (Ibid.) On May 9, McConaughy sent Rostow his comments on Bernhard’s proposal, which he believed represented evidence of shifting Dutch opinion, but he raised questions about the practicality of the scheme. (Ibid.)

4 Kennedy visited Paris for discussions with President de Gaulle May 31-June 3.

175. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 175. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, May 23, 1961.

SUBJECT

Policy for West New Guinea

The attached memorandum from Walt Rostow (Tab B)1 results from a conversation in which he and I agreed upon the need for early action by the United States to achieve a settlement of the West New Guinea problem before it becomes explosive. In response to this request I have prepared a memorandum from you to the President (Tab A) reviewing four possible courses of action for the United States to pursue and recommending that which I consider the most profitable. It is also that which enjoys the greatest measure of agreement among the Bureaus of the Department interested in this problem.

The essence of the preferred solution involves a trusteeship to be undertaken by Malaya with material assistance from a consortium of nations organized by the United States but working to the extent possible through the United Nations. The trusteeship arrangement would not contain predetermined conditions governing the ultimate status of West New Guinea. It would therefore be without prejudice to the sort of self-determination which the Netherlands insists upon as well as without prejudice to the ultimate transfer of the territory to Indonesia which the latter insists upon. This open endedness would be accomplished by stipulating that a United Nations mission visit West New Guinea and report back to the Seventeenth General Assembly which, acting upon the report and recommendations of the mission, would, within the terms of Chapter XII of the United Nations Charter,2 consider the future status of the territory.

It is my belief that, with appropriate pressure from the United States upon both the Netherlands and Indonesia, it should be possible to reach this sort of understanding prior to the opening of the Sixteenth General Assembly next fall. If this is correct, it would be my recommendation that we be prepared in that Assembly to take the lead in achieving this sort of solution. To this end, I am suggesting below a series of steps which I recommend that you approve in order that we can begin implementing this proposal.3 Some of these steps may, of course, require modification in the light of the results achieved in the preceding steps.

(1) Consultations with Ambassador Stevenson during his visit to Washington this coming week.

(2) Transmittal of the attached memorandum (Tab A) from you to the President seeking Presidential concurrence to the proposal.

(3) Consultation with appropriate members of the Congress to obtain their support for this action.

(4) Instructions to our Ambassador in Kuala Lumpur to inform the Malayan Prime Minister of our intention to proceed with this sort of proposal.

(5) Detailed briefing in the Department of the Netherlands, Indonesian, Australian and Malayan Ambassadors coordinated with step No. 4. (To implement your commitment to Luns, we should perhaps see the Netherlands Ambassador 24 hours before the others.)

(6) Detailed briefing in New York of Secretary General Hammarskjold and appropriate members of the Secretariat concerning these proposals.

(7) Instructions to those Embassies in the countries which we will consider appropriate to approach for assistance in establishing a consortium to underwrite the Malayan trusteeship, proposing consultations on this aspect of the proposal. These would include our Embassies in the U.K., France, Australia, Canada, and Japan among others.

(8) Detailed briefing in the Department of representatives from the Embassies of those countries selected to participate in the consortium.

(9) Background briefings of selected press representatives in order to clarify the nature of our proposals and to obtain appropriate support for them in the national and international press.

(10) Assuming that there will be a degree of resistance encountered from the Dutch and Indonesian Governments, authorize contingency planning for high level approaches in the Netherlands and in Indonesia at an appropriate stage. For example, Dean Acheson was particularly effective in recent informal discussions with Netherlands officials and would make an excellent special envoy to discuss this problem with the Dutch. Ambassador Stevenson would be an ideal envoy to persuade the Indonesians.

(11) Authorize IO, in coordination with FE and EUR, to develop tactics for bringing these proposals into shape for discussion in the Sixteenth General Assembly and to make efforts to obtain support of the proposal by other UN members, with particular emphasis on the Afro-Asian group.

Tab A4

Washington, May 23, 1961.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

SUBJECT

Policy with Respect to West New Guinea (Irian)

There are four broad lines of policy open to us on this question: I. Continue our policy of “neutrality” on the issue, which includes, on the one hand, the urging of negotiations between the Dutch and the Indonesians and, on the other hand, urging Indonesia not to attempt to use force to settle the issue.

II. Work towards a “Melanesian Federation” which would involve placing all of the Australian and Dutch territory in New Guinea (as well as possibly some of the islands in the area) under a United Nations trusteeship (possibly with Australia and two Asian states as trustees), pending attainment of a sufficient degree of development to permit independence.

III. Place only West New Guinea (Netherlands New Guinea) under a UNGA short-term (two or three years) trusteeship agreement, with the Netherlands as trustee, under which the Netherlands would phase out most of its personnel, replacing them with non-Dutch personnel and providing that the General Assembly would decide the future status of the territory before the end of the trusteeship.

IV. Place West New Guinea under trusteeship with Malaya acting as the trustee and being provided with resources and personnel supplied by a consortium of states organized by the United States which would utilize United Nations facilities to the maximum extent and which would result in the rapid but orderly replacement of Netherlands administrators. Dispatch a United Nations mission to West New Guinea to make findings and give advice to the United Nations General Assembly which would then, acting on the advice of the mission and under the authority of Chapter XII of the United Nations Charter, recommend what the future status of West New Guinea shall be and what means shall be used to accomplish that status.

I.

The first course of action seems to be running out, with both the Netherlands and Indonesia adamantly refusing to enter into any meaningful negotiations and with an apparent growing danger of Indonesia mounting a para-military operation against West New Guinea. The Communist espousal of the Indonesian claim is greatly facilitating Communist infiltration into Indonesia and is promoting Indonesia’s alignment with the Sino-Soviet bloc. The issue also distracts Sukarno from his pressing internal problems, weakens the influence of moderate Indonesian elements, and is threatening to undermine the heretofore anti-Communist position of the Army.

On the other hand, Australian interests are considerably affected, and the Australian position has in general been that Indonesia may well fall under Communist control even if the West New Guinea issue is resolved to Indonesian satisfaction, and a Communist-controlled West New Guinea considerably complicates Australia’s defense problem. Thus, Australia would desire to do all possible to maintain the status quo.

II.

The second solution has many attractions as a long-range policy. It would be consistent with the principle of self-determination. It would, at least for the time being, better serve Australian defense interests. It would be difficult for the newly-independent and neutral countries to oppose, and to this extent would reduce support for Indonesia’s claim to West New Guinea.

On the other hand, it would probably take several generations to give the bare minimal preparation of the population for any meaningful independence or self-determination; it would not satisfy Indonesia, which would feel frustrated and balked; and even to get the proposal to the stage of presentation to the United Nations would require a long period of negotiation and public opinion preparation in Australia as well as in the Netherlands.

III.

It should be recognized that the third alternative is primarily designed as a “face-saving” device to transfer West New Guinea from the Netherlands to Indonesia. There have been many indications that important opinion in the Netherlands is increasingly seeking such a device. It would largely remove most of the disadvantages of the present situation vis-á-vis Indonesia and thus “draw the fuse” on this potentially explosive situation. It could be pointed out to Australia that, to the degree such a solution arrests the drift of Indonesia towards Communism, it promotes Australian security interests, and that a Communist Indonesia holding West New Guinea does not represent a materially greater threat to Australia’s security interests than a Communist Indonesia not holding New Guinea.

Even though there is increased receptivity in the Netherlands to some “face-saving”, it is unlikely that the Dutch Government could be persuaded to sign such a trusteeship agreement, and the pressing on the Netherlands of this solution would undoubtedly strain our relations with the Netherlands to a considerable degree. Such a solution also runs counter to the principle of self-determination, theoretical though this may be at the present stage of development of the peoples of New Guinea, and might be said to remove a primitive people from Dutch colonialism only to turn them over to Indonesian colonialism.

IV.

The fourth alternative is a modification of the third and designed primarily to bridge the gap between Dutch and Indonesian positions concerning trusteeship for West New Guinea. The Dutch have stated they would accept the idea of a trusteeship only if self-determination for the inhabitants of West New Guinea were guaranteed by terms of the trusteeship. The Indonesians have stated that they would accept trusteeship for West New Guinea only if it were designed as an interim arrangement to provide for the orderly replacement of Dutch administration prior to turning the territory over to Indonesia.

This proposed alternative would leave an “open end” with respect to both these stipulations. By making clear that the Malayan responsibility is an interim one pending further determinations on the question by the General Assembly, it does not preclude the prospect that the territory might go to Indonesia. By stipulating that the General Assembly should act in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII it provides the Dutch with an opportunity to turn over administration of West New Guinea without abandoning the principle of self-determination for the inhabitants and transfers the problem of implementing these assurances to the United Nations membership, leaving the Dutch without direct moral responsibility for the outcome. We must recognize, however, the distinct possibility that Indonesia will oppose such trusteeship and will introduce a counter resolution predetermining the turnover of the territory. We can best dissuade Indonesia from such a course of action if we have taken soundings and believe that two-thirds of the UN membership is prepared to support such a trusteeship solution.

Australian interests in this matter are regarded ultimately in the same light as discussed under the third alternative. The Australians are publicly committed to the proposition that anything acceptable to both the Netherlands and Indonesia would be acceptable to them. Therefore, while they might not favor, and may even resist, the solution envisaged under the fourth alternative, they would in the last analysis accept such a solution if we could, by applying pressure on both the Indonesians and the Dutch, get these two principals in this dispute to agree on such a course of action.

The Prime Minister of Malaya, who has taken an active role in attempting to settle this dispute, has been informally approached and has expressed his willingness to serve as a trustee for West New Guinea provided the United States would undertake to organize a consortium of nations which would supply him and his government with finances and personnel which would enable him to discharge his responsibility effectively and provided Indonesia can be brought to accept it. Despite the fact that both the Dutch and the Indonesians have some reservations concerning the Prime Minister of Malaya’s potential role in this matter, it is considered that he is the least objectionable to both participants of any single candidate that could be designated for this post.

Recommendation

None of these proposed policies is ideal. Each has certain drawbacks in terms of its acceptability to the nations primarily concerned with this problem. However, the fourth solution is specifically designed to minimize each of these drawbacks and to maximize the opportunity to enhance United States national interests in the solution of this problem. Therefore, on balance, I am inclined to favor the fourth alternative and recommend that you authorize the Department of State to undertake preliminary consultations with Malaya, the Netherlands and Indonesia, Australia and Secretary General Hammarskjold concerning the establishment of an interim trusteeship. It is further recommended that you authorize the Department of State to consult with those friendly nations which it considers willing and able to contribute finances and personnel to assist in the administration of such a trusteeship. Among the states envisaged for such consultations are the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Japan and others with an interest in the Pacific region. It would be anticipated that action for the establishment of the trusteeship and for the dispatch of the United Nations mission to West New Guinea would be undertaken in the Sixteenth General Assembly. It would be anticipated that the report and recommendations of the visiting mission be considered by the Seventeenth General Assembly which will convene in the fall of 1962.

Dean Rusk5

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2361. Secret. Drafted by Johnson and Sullivan.

1 Printed as Document 174.

2 Chapter XII of the U.N. Charter defined the composition, functions and powers, voting, and procedures of the Trusteeship Council.

3 There is no indication on the source text of Rusk’s approval or disapproval.

4 Secret.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

176. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 176. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, May 24, 1961, 4 p.m.

3213. For Secretary from Ambassador. During discussion West New Guinea problem with General Nasution today, I passed along our thinking expressed to Sukarno and Subandrio in Washington on desirability of Indonesians making secret contacts with Dutch in effort to work out bilateral solution to problem.

Nasution who had apparently been briefed on this aspect of talks, said he had already taken steps in this direction, that he had representatives in Netherlands at present time in contact with party leaders, including Catholic Party and that he was considerably encouraged by attitudes encountered.

He recognized difficulty in Dutch public position on self-determination with which he said Indos did not find it easy to take this too seriously after 350 years of occupation. [sic] Indos had real trouble with this too, because there continued to be strong regional centrifugal forces and if applied to West New Guinea, self-determination would only result in encouragement other dissidents. He was just winding up one rebellion, he didn’t want any more on his hands. Forging a nation out of such diversity as one found in Indonesia was not always an easy task.

Nasution suggested possibility of avoiding shoal of plebiscite by having Papuan council pass resolution expressing desire return to Indonesian fold. When I indicated some skepticism, he said he thought this might well be possible, particularly if Dutch and Indos actually got together.1

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2461. Secret; Limit Distribution.

1 Nasution also discussed with Jones on May 24 the capture of rebel officers who stated they were trained [text not declassified] by Americans, [text not declassified]. Nasution planned to keep the discovery secret for fear of serious repercussions in U.S.-Indonesian relations just at the time of improvement based on the Sukarno-Kennedy talks. Nasution suggested that the U.S. Government investigate and asked, if some agency were involved, would the United States stop further assistance to the rebellion. Generally, Nasution believed the settling of the rebellion was “way ahead of schedule,” and he planned to grant amnesty to rebels after all resistance had ended. (Telegram 3214 from Djakarta, May 24; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, 5/61–7/61)

177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 177. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, June 2, 1961, 9:36 a.m.

1880. Embtel to Dept 3165, Paris Unn, The Hague 154, Kuala Lumpur Unn, Canberra Unn, Moscow 43, London 121, CINCPAC 432.1 Department concurs Embassy estimate of potentialities Sukarno Moscow visit and desirability inform Sukarno we examining WNG problem urgently.

Accordingly, subject to concurrence by President, Ambassador should seek early appointment with Nasution or Djuanda, making it clear he is acting under instructions, for purpose making following points to be conveyed to Sukarno at earliest appropriate time: 1. President Kennedy extremely pleased by warmth of relationship established with Sukarno and gratified by frankness and friendly tone of recent discussion.

2. President fully appreciates desirability find peaceful solution to WNG problem and is giving personal attention to search for suitable formula. In this connection we appreciated frank presentation of Indonesian views by President Sukarno and Foreign Minister Subandrio. These views being given full consideration in our development new approach.

3. Basic to our approach is belief that calm atmosphere will be great help and it earnestly hoped that President Sukarno will be able lend his prestige and influence to maintaining tranquility.

Paris for Brubeck

If President approves, request you urgently instruct Embassy Djakarta (rptd info other addressees) proceed with approach as outlined above.

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/5–1561. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Lindquist and Bell on May 29; cleared by Wallner, Tyler, and McConaughy; and approved by Bowles. Also sent priority to Paris for Rusk and repeated to The Hague, Kuala Lumpur, Canberra, Moscow, London, CINCPAC, and USUN.

In a May 19 memorandum to Rostow, Robert Johnson described a conversation he had with Lindquist who indicated he was clearing a telegram (which was sent as this telegram to Djakarta) “designed to give some sort of general reassurances to Sukarno prior to his arrival in Moscow.” Lindquist said he feared there might be some delay in the approval of a new U.S. position and therefore was clearing the telegram separately and expected to ask for White House clearance. Johnson encouraged Lindquist in his efforts. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 5/61)

1 Dated May 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/5–1561) Johnson and Lindquist discussed telegram 3165 during the preparation of Tab A to Document 175. Johnson described the telegram in a May 24 memorandum to Rostow: “This message suggests that the U.S., before Sukarno reaches Moscow, make clear to him our intention to press forward with a proposal which contains within it the possibility of ‘recovery’ of West New Guinea by Indonesia. The Embassy suggested both an official statement and private assurances.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 5/61)

178. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 178. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, June 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

Allen Lawrence Pope, American Flyer under Death Sentence in Indonesia

Subsequent to your discussion of this case with President Sukarno during his recent visit here,1 the decision of the Indonesian Supreme Court to confirm the death sentence earlier imposed on Pope was announced officially in Djakarta on June 2, 1961. The only course for Pope now is to appeal to President Sukarno for executive clemency and it is believed that he will do this. His wife has gone to Djakarta to appeal personally to Sukarno, who received her graciously during a previous visit; Pope’s mother and sister will forward separate appeals. In addition, Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and Mr. Frank P. Graham have agreed to write to Sukarno in Pope’s behalf. These appeals have been sent to Djakarta.

More officially, Ambassador Jones will press Sukarno to demonstrate his generosity and goodwill by exercising leniency. The Ambassador’s case will emphasize recent large-scale surrenders of rebel elements, including prominent leaders, who are being rehabilitated without punishment, as well as candid discussion of the effect on American public opinion should Pope be executed.

In addition to the obvious humanitarian aspects of this case, it is of great importance to our interests in Indonesia that Pope not be executed. It also is most desirable that he be released as soon as possible. He has been imprisoned for more than three years and, in accordance with Embassy advice, patiently has waited out the lengthy process of investigation, trial and appeal. However, we are informed by both the Embassy and his family that he is increasingly impatient, that he may attempt an escape should Sukarno decide on further imprisonment without early prospects for freedom. Such an act on his part, whether or not successful, and success is doubtful, might be viewed by the Indonesian Government as having been instigated by the United States Government. This could lead to a much stiffened Indonesian attitude toward this case [8 lines of source text not declassified].

In these circumstances, Ambassador Jones has recommended, and I concur, that a letter from you to President Sukarno, to be used at the Ambassador’s discretion as a “last ditch” effort, would be highly desirable for use in the event that a harsh decision by Sukarno seems forthcoming.

I have in mind a frank expression of your pleasure with the warmth of your relations with Sukarno and a statement of confidence that he will weigh Pope’s appeal carefully.

Accordingly, I have enclosed a draft letter to President Sukarno which, if you agree with this approach, I recommend that you sign with the understanding that Ambassador Jones will use it only at his personal discretion.2

Dean Rusk

Enclosure3

Washington, June 21, 1961.

Dear Mr. President: I hope that your long trip was satisfying to you and fruitful for your country. It was a great pleasure for me to have had you visit the United States.

You will recall that I spoke to you about the matter of Allen Lawrence Pope. I understand that the Indonesian Supreme Court has sustained the penalty passed earlier on Mr. Pope and that he now, in accordance with Indonesian law, has appealed to you for executive clemency. I am also informed in accordance with your suggestion that Mrs. Pope has also communicated with you.

I am hopeful, in weighing Mr. Pope’s appeal, that you will consider the deep concern of his family and friends in the United States, and that your decision will reflect the humanitarianism for which you and your country are known.

It would please me to receive a message from you whenever you believe that our personal relations can serve the cause of our nations’ close friendship.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy4

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia—Security, 1961–1963. Secret.

1 No other record of a Sukarno-Kennedy discussion on the Pope case during Sukarno’s visit to Washington, beyond the references here and in the enclosed letter, has been found.

2 The letter was substantially revised by the President in his own hand to make it more personal and informal. The draft letter with Kennedy’s revisions is in the Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Indonesia—Security, 1961–1963. The letter printed as an enclosure below is the retyped one that incorporates the President’s changes.

3 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case. No classification marking.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Kennedy signed the original.

179. Memorandum of Conversation 179. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

The Under Secretary

Ambassador J. H. van Roijen, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. Huydecoper, Counselor, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. James Bell, SPA

Mr. William L. Blue, WE

The Ambassador opened the substantive portion of the conversation by stating that he had been instructed to see the Under Secretary to propose bilateral secret talks looking toward the internationalization of the West New Guinea problem. He said that he had also been instructed to mention two ideas in this connection neither of which was new, i.e., (1) a visiting mission to West New Guinea, and (2) a trusteeship. He added that the details would have to be worked out in both instances. With reference to the second proposal he said that Mr. Luns had often thought of a trusteeship along the lines of the Somali trusteeship, which idea Luns had thrown out to Cleveland when he recently visited The Hague. He said that this would call for a developmental agency, or some international body and allow the Dutch to remain in West New Guinea for a certain period, thus avoiding the vacuum which was left in the Congo. He concluded with a statement to the effect that all thoughts could be discussed if talks were arranged. He expressed the hope that the first round of talks could take place before his departure for the Netherlands on July 7.

Mr. Bowles said that the United States certainly wanted to be helpful in this question and that he was agreeable to the talks, but they must be on a very confidential basis as he did not think the United States should be going about the world trying to solve every problem. He added that consideration had already been given in the Department to various proposals, but that they had not been accepted; he added that we were, therefore, in the process of taking another look. He agreed to speed up the consideration of new proposals in order to have a meeting before the Ambassador’s departure.

The Ambassador stressed that he hoped the group involved in the talks could be kept small (two or three on each side) to which the Under Secretary readily agreed. He also said that he hoped that the Netherlands would have U.S. support should a plan develop from these talks. The Under Secretary replied that if we came up with a plan, it should be shared with various other countries which could carry the ball. He added that he thought tactics could be discussed later, that we must first come up with some proposals for discussion. The Under Secretary closed the meeting in saying that he would be in touch with the Ambassador soon.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–1661. Confidential. Drafted by Blue and approved in U on July 15.

180. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 180. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, July 10, 1961.

SUBJECT

Indonesia

Following your inquiry this morning, I have been in touch with the State Department (Lindquist, the desk officer) in order to get up to date on Indonesia.

West New Guinea

There have been four conversations between the State Department and the Dutch Ambassador.1 State promised to send us the memos of conversation within the next two or three days. In these conversations the U.S. proposal (to send a UN commission to West New Guinea to study the problem and to make recommendations) was not submitted as a firm U.S. position, but rather as a suggestion that the Dutch might consider.2

There was no meeting of minds in these conversations, but the Dutch are finally convinced that something has to be done. The Ambassador has now returned to the Netherlands. On Friday he left with the State Department a proposed draft UN resolution. The resolution proposes a visiting mission to West New Guinea but also continues to call for a plebiscite. The proposed mission would report in one year. The Dutch have proposed such a visiting mission before and it is not clear on the basis of State’s preliminary examination of the Dutch draft how much progress the resolution represents. It does state that the mission will make recommendations and indicates that any recommendations made would receive a good deal of attention from the Dutch. This is a new idea and represents some progress. Previous Dutch proposals for a visiting mission appeared to be designed to whitewash the Dutch Administration.

State is generally encouraged by the fact that for the first time in ten years the issue of West New Guinea is no longer stagnant. The very process of discussion has a value in forcing the Dutch to think rationally about the problem. Moreover, even though it may not be possible to get the Dutch to go any further than they so far have, once the issue gets into the UN the whole character of the problem will change.

The Dutch will probably never agree to our proposal because, for domestic political reasons, they must appear to be defending strongly the Dutch position on West New Guinea. But by agreeing to take the question into the UN they will be deliberately removing it from their jurisdiction and thus taking an action which may ultimately result in Indonesian control.

FE is presently pushing within State for initiation of similar talks with the Indonesians. FE doesn’t want to leave the impression that we are springing a proposal on the Indonesians after getting together with the Dutch. The general approach in the conversations with the Indonesians would be to ask them what they would find acceptable as a solution. In the course of the conversation the U.S. proposal would probably be exposed, but we would not begin the talks by advancing this proposal. As you know, Nasution made some unofficial contacts with the Dutch recently.

It seems to me that the situation is proceeding satisfactorily. I agree with FE on the desirability of early talks with the Indos.

Economic Mission

Professor Humphrey of the Fletcher School has agreed to head the economic mission and a search is now going on for other people to fill it out. I think it is a little too bad that State couldn’t have found a somewhat more prestigious figure to head this group.

We must recognize, Lindquist says, that when Saleh and Djuanda come to the U.S. in the late fall, they are likely to be seeking some kind of dollar aid commitment. As you may know, an initial plan to have Saleh and Djuanda come in mid-September had to be cancelled because of Sukarno’s plans to attend the Conference of Uncommitted Nations. State will send over to the White House today a memo requesting approval in principle for a visit in November. State is most anxious to get a decision in principle as quickly as possible since the arrangements for the visit have dragged out considerably. If we can do anything to help it will be appreciated.

The Attorney General has accepted the Indonesian invitation for a visit to Indonesia but left the date open for subsequent negotiation.

The Helicopter

State is pushing Defense for an early decision on the helicopter for Sukarno. The problem at the moment is the question of financing. Defense wishes to avoid, if possible, financing the purchase through MAP (though it has the money) for fear of antagonizing Congress. State thinks that eventually Defense will come around to the view that this is the only way procurement can be financed.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 5–8/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Bromley Smith, Komer, and Samuel Belk of the NSC Staff.

1 Regarding the first conversation, see Document 179. The other conversations were among Bowles, van Roijen, and others on June 29; Tyler, van Roijen, and others on June 30; and Tyler, van Roijen, and others on July 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–2961, 656.9813/6–3061, and 656.9813/7–361, respectively)

2 The proposals handed to the Netherlands Embassy on July 7 were headed “Thoughts on the possibility of creating an International Development Authority for Netherlands New Guinea.” Attached was a “Memorandum on Some Modalities Regarding an International Development Authority for Netherlands New Guinea” and a draft U.N. General Assembly resolution establishing the authority. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–2161)

181. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 181. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, July 24, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposed Course of Action on West New Guinea Problem

As you know, we have been discussing West New Guinea informally with the Dutch since the end of June.1 We have reached what may well be an important turning point in our handling of this problem. Mr. Tyler, Mr. Steeves and I met on July 222 and we agreed on the course of action outlined in the attached paper, which we propose to initiate subject to your approval.3

Attachment4

THE SITUATION: WEST NEW GUINEA PROBLEM

1. We are exploring informally with the Dutch possible courses of action which might achieve a solution to this problem. It is clear that the U.N. offers the only practical means to this end.

2. The U.S. should not become engaged as a broker between the two parties to negotiate an acceptable resolution of the difficulty at least at this stage. At the same time, we should not be under the illusion that we can encourage the Dutch and Indonesians to take the matter to the U.N. and then divorce ourselves from further involvement in this case. It seems likely that we will be involved in this matter as the drama unfolds at the U.N. Further participation by the U.S. is essentially a question of timing which would have to be determined at a later stage.

3. We should within the next three days talk again with the Dutch and tell them precisely the type of resolution we think most likely to succeed at the U.N. as indicated in the attached draft. We would not, however, give them a piece of paper. We would also state explicitly that this suggestion does not constitute a U.S. commitment to support a resolution containing this language. We would add our understanding that the Dutch will discuss the problem with other U.N. members in terms of a draft resolution of their own which they will not attribute to the U.S. in any manner, although they may state that the U.S. has been informed of their activity. We would consider the discussion with the Dutch concluded for the time being.

4. On the strength of the letter from President Kennedy to Sukarno prior to the latter’s visit to Moscow, we have an obligation to discuss this subject with the Indonesians. We will inform the Dutch that it is our intention to initiate conversations with the Indonesians on an informal, exploratory basis. We will assure the Dutch that talks with the Indonesians will be bilateral and will not advert to the substance of our conversations with them. Hopefully, we will be able to educate the Indonesians to the necessity of modifying their rigid position. We will not undertake joint action with the Indonesians and will leave the talks relatively at the same position as that at which we will break off with the Dutch.

5. With both parties to the dispute presumably considering referring the matter to the UNGA, the U.S. will withdraw from active participation at this stage. We will assess the situation in light of developments between now and the 16th Session to determine what future action may be necessary in our interest.

6. Our discussions with the Dutch have indicated their concern that the Australians be brought into the picture at an early stage. We agree that this is desirable and would recommend that an early opportunity be sought to have a full and frank bilateral review of the West New Guinea situation with the Australians. We would, inter alia, inform them of our talks with the Dutch, and our thinking as to the future. Before talking to the Australians, however, we would inform the Dutch of our intention to hold such bilateral talks.

Attachment5

DRAFT RESOLUTION ON WEST NEW GUINEA

The General Assembly,

Having considered item————of its Agenda entitled—————;

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) adopted on December 14, 1960;

Bearing in mind the functions and powers of the Assembly under Chapter IV of the Charter and, in particular, the provisions of Article 14 regarding the recommendation of measures for the peaceful adjustment of any situation which it deems likely to impair the general welfare of friendly relations among nations;

Bearing in mind also Chapter XI of the Charter, according to which the Members of the United Nations which have responsibilities for the administration of territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of self-government have recognized the principle that the interests of the inhabitants of those territories are paramount;

Recognizing the desirability of having a full and impartial report on the present conditions in the territory and on the possibilities for determining its future status;

1. Decides to establish a Committee composed of [Argentina, Burma, Denmark, Malaya, Nigeria and Japan];6

2. Requests the Committee to consider the question of Western New Guinea, and the conditions in the territory, and to make report to the General Assembly at its seventeenth session as to how this question may be resolved in accordance with the Charter.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2461. Secret. Drafted by Beaudry and cleared by Tyler and Steeves. Cleveland proposed this course of action to McConaughy and Tyler in a memorandum of July 21. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–2161)

1 Additional discussions took place among Netherlands Chargé Schiff, Tyler, and others on July 14, 26, 28, and 31. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–1461, 656.9813/7–2761, 656.9813/7–2861, and 656.9813/7–3161, respectively)

2 No substantive record of this discussion has been found.

3 U. Alexis Johnson approved for Rusk.

4 Secret.

5 Confidential.

6 Brackets in the source text.

182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 182. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, August 3, 1961, 9:53 a.m.

126. FYI. Over past few weeks Department, at Dutch initiative, has held series searching and candid exchanges with Netherlands Embassy regarding West New Guinea.

Premise our participation has been avoid role of direct stage manager or go-between while at same time demonstrating our deep concern over serious potentialities this dispute if left unresolved and our willingness encourage and assist indirectly in search for constructive solution.

Accordingly, we have not attempted obtain Dutch agreement to any specific formula or method of approach. We have reviewed with them various possibilities, including direct UN trusteeship, single or multination trusteeship and UN commission. We have told them that while trusteeship concept has many attractions we foresee certain obvious disadvantages such as difficulty of finding acceptable and willing administering powers and problem of financing. Preoccupation of SYG and delicacy his present position seem additional factors against direct UN trusteeship.

Our examination of problem, however, has led us believe that some degree of UN participation seems essential to satisfactory settlement and Dutch have been so advised. Although significant elements in both Indonesia and Netherlands might prefer direct negotiations, actual chances for such bi-lateral agreement now appear remote.

These considerations have led to development in Department of UN committee idea, in which five to seven nation body, appointed by GA, would visit WNG, examine prevailing situation and recommend means settlement to following GA. (Subsequent message contains draft of resolution which might serve introduce item to GA.1 This draft resolution has not been shown Dutch and must not be disclosed Indos.)

Conversations have served considerably advance Dutch thinking by requiring them focus on specific aspects of problem. It now clear Dutch recognize their best interests lie in disengagement from WNG. They assert they will not transfer territory to Indo (Dept spokesman July 28 declined Dutch request we so inform GOI).2 However, Dutch preparedness submit issue to GA treatment implies recognition that loss of sovereignty might be outcome. Dutch consistently express strong concern for welfare of Papuans and insist that Dutch stewardship cannot be relinquished without adequate provision for ascertaining Papuan desires re future political arrangements.

Having consulted with us (talks now in suspension although no decisions reached nor commitments made by either side), it believed Dutch now will quietly seek views of other selected nations, informing them that ideas have been exchanged with US but not identifying us with any specific concept or plan.

With this background, Dept believes time now ripe for similar talks with Indos. Basic objective will be to seek evidence and indication of extent of Indo flexibility and encourage them, by discussion and suggestion, as in case Dutch, to assess situation realistically. End FYI.

In view foregoing, Ambassador should seek earliest appropriate opportunity discuss WNG with Sukarno or Subandrio. Believe initial approach can effectively employ context of Sukarno visit Washington and subsequent exchange with President Kennedy. You should reiterate our deep desire help find an amicable solution but at same time make clear to them our belief that we can be most useful by avoiding role of direct intermediary. You may wish follow with review of our searching study of problem, briefly outlining concepts of direct and nationally administered trusteeships, and culminating with exposition of our present view that perhaps feasible approach to problem would be request to UNGA for establishment UN committee which would consider how dispute might be resolved in accordance with UN Charter. You should emphasize that we have reached no definite conclusions.

Believe statement along these lines will set appropriate stage for inquiring, possibly with observation that some months have passed since Washington discussions this subject, if recent Indo study of issue has produced conclusions or considerations which they might wish to discuss with us. (FYI. We hopeful this introduction will stimulate them to reply in other than general terms and possibly orient their thinking in direction serious consideration UN committee idea. End FYI.) If appropriate, Ambassador may wish refer to recent informal contacts with Dutch by Sukarno and Nasution as suggesting degree Indo flexibility.

If asked, you may state we have, at Dutch request, discussed problem with them in general terms but reached no conclusions or undertakings and made no commitments. Special effort should be made avoid any Indo impression we and Dutch have devised Western package.

GOI officials should be reminded of highly delicate position of US and urged in best interests all concerned maintain strictest secrecy.3

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–361. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist on July 31; cleared by McConaughy, Tyler, Buffum, U. Alexis Johnson, Bell, and Jenkins; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, London, New Delhi, and Rangoon for Bowles who was visiting the Far East.

1 Telegram 127 to Djakarta, August 3. (Ibid.) The draft resolution enclosed in telegram 127 was the same as the second attachment to Document 181.

2 In the conversation among Schiff, Tyler, and others on July 28; see footnote 1, Document 181.

3 Jones made this démarche on August 8 to Subandrio who described it as a “great step forward” and showed obvious gratification that the United States had taken the initiative. In a conversation later on August 8, Subandrio remarked that the U.S. suggestion was very timely because Sukarno, Nasution, he, and others were scheduled to meet on August 12 to discuss West New Guinea. Subandrio stated he was fighting the use of force and now he had better ammunition. (Telegrams 234 and 239 from Djakarta, August 8 and 9; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–861 and 656.9813/8–961)

In a memorandum to Rostow, August 1, Robert Johnson attached what he described as a “bootleg” copy of telegram 126 and informed Rostow that “the Indonesian Desk Officer points out that these instructions should be helpful in preventing the Indonesians from taking a very harsh line, which they might otherwise be encouraged to take, at the Belgrade Conference of uncommitted states.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 6/61–8/61)

183. Memorandum of Conversation 183. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, August 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Australian Views Toward Settlement of West New Guinea Dispute

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Beale of Australia

Mr. D. J. Munro, Minister, Australian Embassy

Mr. B. G. Dexter, First Secretary, Australian Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. James D. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

Mr. Edward C. Ingraham, Australian Desk Officer

Ambassador Beale said that he wished to present his government’s views toward the proposal we had recently advanced for a possible solution to the West New Guinea dispute (see Memorandum of Conversation between Mr. Munro and Mr. Bell, August 1, 1961).1 His government’s first concern was whether we intended to take the initiative in placing this proposal before the UN or whether we regarded it solely as a fallback proposal.

The Secretary replied that we considered the West New Guinea situation a dangerous one and that we believed the Dutch were seeking a way out. Under these circumstances, we believed that we should be prepared with a positive proposal for action. We would certainly regard the proposal as a fallback. We had not yet decided, however, whether to take the initiative ourselves of placing it before the UN at the next session.

Ambassador Beale observed that there was a good deal of difference between the two courses. If the proposal were to be used solely as a fallback proposal, Australia would be prepared to go along. If we intended to take the initiative of presenting it, however, his government would not be in accord. The West New Guinea dispute actually encompassed two separate problems, he continued, that of Indonesia’s intransigent demand for the territory and that of keeping the dispute from erupting into actual conflict. Regarding the first problem, Australia found it difficult to contemplate the United States acceding to Indonesia’s unreasonable demand. As to the latter problem, he said, Australia was genuinely interested in any feasible solution.

If the United States took the initiative of presenting this proposal to the UN, Ambassador Beale continued, Australia feared that the matter would quickly get out of hand and slip from our control. If the dispute reached the UN on the initiative of others, however, the proposal might serve as a satisfactory fallback.

The Secretary inquired as to how Australia would propose solving the West New Guinea dispute. Ambassador Beale [3 lines of source text not declassified] believed that his government would have no objection to a UN commission visiting New Guinea simply to gather facts, but he doubted that the commission should be given the authority to recommend a solution to the dispute, particularly as its membership was sure to include delegates from the African and Asian countries. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

The Secretary said that he doubted that the UN would simply brush aside the concept of self-determination in considering ways to solve the dispute. Ambassador Beale indicated his doubt that a really honest approach to the dispute could be expected from the UN.

The Secretary asked what Australia’s views would have been had West New Guinea been included within the Republic of Indonesia when the Republic was first established, as might well have occurred. Ambassador Beale replied that their attitude would have been the same, although probably less articulate. Australia was at the time—and still is—prepared to accept any disposition of West New Guinea freely agreed upon by the Dutch and the Indonesians. [6 lines of source text not declassified]

To sum up his government’s position, Ambassador Beale continued, Australia hoped that the United States would not take the initiative with our proposal. The Secretary said that we would certainly not do so without further consultation with the Australian government; the Australians could be sure that the proposal would not come up in the UN at our initiative unless they heard from us again on the matter. As to UN consideration of the proposal, the Secretary added, he did not believe that the question of self-determination would be ignored. He doubted that there would be solid Asian-African support for Indonesia’s position, and believed that certain of the Asian-African countries might well take a stance in favor of self-determination. Ambassador Beale agreed that this might occur, but said that he felt the great majority of the Asian-Africans would line up with Indonesia, as would, of course, the Soviet bloc.

The Secretary inquired whether Prime Minister Menzies would be attending the 16th UN General Assembly. Ambassador Beale said that he was certain the Prime Minister would not attend.

The Secretary asked if Australia had discussed the West New Guinea dispute and our proposal with the Dutch. Ambassador Beale said that his government had held conversations with the Dutch concerning the dispute but had not discussed that particular proposal.

He did not wish to emphasize the military aspects of the matter, Ambassador Beale continued, but his government was rather worried at the continuing buildup of Indonesia’s armed forces with Soviet support, when coupled with Indonesia’s belligerence in the dispute. At the same time, however, his government did not assess the chances of a military clash as any more imminent than a year ago. The Secretary asked whether we had made a recent assessment of the possibilities of such a clash. Mr. Bell replied that he believed the most recent assessment had been made about three months ago. The Secretary suggested that the time appeared ripe for another assessment. Mr. Bell said that he would ask for one.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–2261. Secret. Drafted by Ingraham and approved in S on September 11.

1 Not printed. (Ibid., 656.9813/8–161)

184. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy) 184. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Ball) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy)Source

Washington, August 25, 1961, 12:25 p.m.

Ball said he was just looking at a telegram on Indonesian oil situation.1 It is quite rough. McConaughy said yes, they are quite disturbed. It is going to be awfully hard on all three oil companies. There is a message from Caltex which seemed a little less pessimistic than the Stanvac report, but it is still bad. Ball said just as we are authorizing this road business we now get into this.

McConaughy said it seems like we ought to get some leverage. Maybe we can do it. We have a means of coming back. Sukarno said he would expect the government to bear the additional cost of the program. This is out so this means they have not accepted our terms. We now have a basis for calling it no deal, or at least sparring with them. Ball said he thought we should. We just can’t accept that. Ball then asked what did the Soviets do with the sports palace. Was it a loan or grant? McConaughy said he would have to check. It seems to him it is a grant. Ball said he would be inclined to get a telegram off to Jones saying we are greatly concerned by this oil situation. Certainly it is out of the question for us to pay additional cost of the road. If they want it we would hope they would take some of these other things into account. McConaughy said you don’t think he has to be too indirect about that? Ball replied he would just come right out. McConaughy agreed that he would be inclined to think so too.

Ball said if we go ahead with this thing we are exposing ourselves. This oil thing could blow up at the same time. He thinks Jones should have a very strong talk with Sukarno. McConaughy said Sukarno has already left but Jones could see Subandrio the Foreign Minister. Ball agreed to this. It should be put on record that we do not propose to pay additional cost for this road. McConaughy said he wondered if Harryshould not hold off on signing the contract. Ball said to tell him this thing may blow up. McConaughy said Harry’s reaction was adverse. Ball said he was more adverse this morning than last night. McConaughy said we might have some second talks. Ball said he thought now is the time to see how far they are prepared to go. Of course, when Sukarno gets back from Belgrade2 he may be really off the reservation. McConaughy said he is so susceptible to that sort of thing. Ball said Jones should have a tough talk with the Foreign Minister and see if he won’t agree to leaving everything up in the air until Sukarno gets back. McConaughy said every day counts. Ball asked how long would he be in Belgrade. McConaughy mentioned something like several days after the 1st of September but he then may go to UNGA, said he will check on that, however. It was agreed we should put them on notice.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office.

1 Ball was apparently referring to telegram 333 from Djakarta, August 23, in which the Embassy reported that the oil situation had reached a crisis. On August 22, the Government of Indonesia informed representatives of Shell, Caltex, and Stanvac of a decree that would regulate Indonesian relations with the companies. The decree postulated a 60–40 split, limited concessions to 20 years with 6 years’ exploration, reserved refining and marketing operations to Indonesia, and required that Indonesian national shipping be used for the transport of export crude and products. Caltex considered that American participation in the Indonesian oil business would end if Indonesia was not prepared to negotiate these terms. (Department of State, Central Files, 898.2553/8–2361)

2 The Conference of Non-Aligned States was held in Belgrade September 1–6.

185. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 185. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, September 2, 1961.

SUBJECT

Indonesia (with particular reference to West New Guinea)

West New Guinea

Attached is a telegram (Djakarta 370 of August 28)1 containing the latest Indonesian reaction to our suggestions with respect to the West New Guinea issue. This is not an encouraging message. Subandrio says that before Indonesia will commit itself to a UN solution it will want to know whether the Dutch really want to get rid of West New Guinea or whether they are simply talking about “internalization” as a delaying action, or as a means of keeping West New Guinea out of Indonesian hands. He must know that the Dutch do not really want to give up West New Guinea to Indonesia and that our real hope, in suggesting that the matter be referred to a UN Commission for recommendation, is that this may provide a vehicle through which Indonesia might hope to achieve its objectives without a direct frontal attack on known Dutch views.

It is clear that the Indonesians are very reluctant to take the issue to the UN, perhaps because they fear a muddle or the possibility that this will widen the degree of opposition to their position. It is also just conceivable that some sort of sub-surface negotiation is going on between the Indonesians and the Dutch, although we have no evidence whatsoever to support such a theory. State interprets Subandrio’s response as an effort to keep the dialogue going without committing Indonesia to the UN solution.

We have still not received any kind of direct reaction from Sukarno himself. It is conceivable that the Indonesians are deferring a decision on what action to take until they have had an opportunity to take soundings at the neutralist conference in Belgrade. The State Department considers it unlikely that Indonesia will take the West New Guinea issue to the UNGA unless Sukarno himself comes to the UN session. Whether Sukarno will come to New York is still uncertain but looks somewhat less likely than it did a week or so ago. Sukarno has hoped to come to the UN as the designated spokesman of the Belgrade group. He will obviously have a good deal of competition for this role from such as Tito, Nehru and Nasser.

The British and the Australians are opposed to our proposal on the grounds that, if the issue were taken to the UN in this way, the Afro-Asians would run away with it. Meanwhile the Dutch are approaching various Western European countries on the basis of a UN Trusteeship proposal which is obviously not going to get any place.

In the light of all this, the State Department is rather puzzled as to what, if anything, we can do next. We surely do not want to take the issue to the UN ourselves in the absence of any support from any of the interested parties. Yet we cannot just sit still and let the dispute continue to simmer along. My own feeling is that if we do not succeed in getting any support for our proposed UN Commission at the upcoming General Assembly meeting, we ought to reconsider our position following the meeting, giving thought once more to the possibilities of (a) stimulating bilateral talks between the Dutch and Indonesians; (b) at some appropriate time shifting our own public position to one of clearer support for the Indonesians; or (c) reviving the suggestion we made to State last May for a gradual phase-out of the Dutch Administration, to be replaced by a temporary administration by the UN or a group of neutral states, and with ultimate disposition to be determined by the UN itself at the end of the phase-out period. This last proposal was, you may recall, rejected by the Secretary of State on the grounds that it involved too complicated a maneuver. We have therefore gone for a simple UN Commission to make recommendations on the subject.

The Saleh Visit

Saleh is now definitely scheduled to come to Washington. He will be here with his wife for the period approximately September 24 through 27 and will be in the U.S. through October 8. State would like very much to have you get together with him for lunch sometime during his visit. Would you be agreeable? The U.S. economic mission to Indonesia should be back sometime in the next week or so but it seems doubtful whether we will be able to talk very specifically with Saleh about economic aid by the time he arrives. Recent reports indicate that Djuanda is quite seriously ill. It seems most unlikely that he will make his scheduled visit.

Visit by the Head of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce

A Mr. Soebchan, head of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce, will be here for about a week beginning September 3. He is a second-level individual in Indonesia but a representative of what there is of private enterprise in that country. He is a member of the Moslem Scholars Party (NU). He has been helpful to the West in international economic conferences where he has done good work within the Indonesian delegations to moderate anti-Western views.

The Indonesian Embassy in Washington would like to have him visit you. State does not plan to approach you on the matter, recognizing that you have a very busy schedule. I volunteered, however, to ask you whether you would like for reasons of your own personal interest, to see Mr. Soebchan. He is described as a person who is knowledgeable not only with respect to the Indonesian economic situation but also with respect to the political situation. Would you be interested in seeing him?

Addendum

Saleh has asked whether it would be possible for him to make a brief call on the President during his visit here. State is of the view that the President should not be asked to see Cabinet Ministers and therefore does not plan to initiate any request in response to Saleh’s inquiry. I am informed that, generally speaking, the President has not received such callers except in unusual circumstances—for example, when a Cabinet Minister is bringing a message to the President from his Chief.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61. Secret.

1 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–2861)

186. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 186. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, September 8, 1961.

SUBJECT

Indonesian Economic Development

I understand that you are to see Don Humphrey, head of the economic team to Indonesia,1 Saturday morning.2 In preparation for this meeting you may be interested in the following brief account of the briefing by the team which I heard this morning at the State Department.3

Some Aspects of the Current Indonesian Economic Situation

1. Indonesia has been having some trouble with its exports partly because of inflation. A state trading corporation has been created to subsidize exports. It may also be used to drive the private traders out of business, although it is conceivable that the difficulties inherent in running such a state-run operation will force the Indonesians into some continued reliance upon private traders.

2. In general, the atmosphere for private enterprise is poor in Indonesia. In view of the uncertainties in the economic situation and with respect to government policy, Chinese entrepreneurs prefer to put their earnings into trading enterprises, where large profits can be made, rather than to reinvest them in manufacturing. There does seem to be some recognition of the need for foreign private enterprise to exploit Indonesian petroleum resources although the Indonesians are being very tough in current negotiations with the oil companies.

3. In general, Indonesian absorptive capability (admittedly a vague concept) has to be created in connection with any capital projects that we may support. There is increasing recognition by the government of Indonesia of the need to emphasize “turnkey” projects. It is the economic team’s view that what is generally needed is turnkey plus outside management for an initial period.

4. Most of the financing of Indonesian economic development has been accomplished by a combination of inflation and letting the economy run down through failure to maintain existing capital. Indonesia is some distance yet from the take off stage.

Tentative Recommendations of the Economic Team

1. Skills. The lack of technical skills is one of the greatest deficiencies of Indonesia. Training in vocational skills and in management is needed. The U.S. should give high priority in its aid programs to general education, vocational training and management training.

2. Spare parts and maintenance. There is much unused plant capacity in Indonesia. This is partly attributable to a lack of raw materials, but it is also due to the fact that equipment is not well maintained. U.S. aid to provide spare parts would produce more output for a given amount of input than any other kind of assistance. However, we also need to do some institution building in the form of training in preventive maintenance, spare parts inventory control, and planning and procurement of spare parts.

3. Export Commodities. The present Indonesian rubber replanting program is quite inadequate and needs to be considerably accelerated. Indonesia will need assistance to tide it over the 5–8 year period that it takes for rubber trees to come into production. Without such assistance, the replanting will not be undertaken.

4. Infrastructure. Lack of transportation has kept some exportable commodities from being moved to ports. Road and railway rehabilitation and harbor facilities are needed.

5. Electric power. It is not clear what stage Indonesia is in so far as its electric power program is concerned. Probably the primary need is for a preparatory stage of determining exactly what is required.

6. Mineral and forestry resources. Additional surveys would be desirable.

7. Light industry. There has been some screening of projects by the government and there is a Development Bank which is designed to finance such projects. This Bank has one of the most capable staffs that the team ran into in Indonesia. In part because of the favorable impression that that staff made, the team is inclined to believe that a loan to the Development Bank would be desirable.

8. A regional research center. There is a need for a center some place in Asia which could study the problems of adapting Western technology to societies which have a manpower surplus and capital shortages. There are good political reasons for establishing it in Indonesia and Indonesia would also offer good examples of this problem in many conspicuous forms. Such a research organization should probably have an international staff. (I would have some doubts as to whether location of such a center in Indonesia would make for receptivity to its activities elsewhere in Asia.)

Other areas that need attention and which might get or are getting some attention either from the U.S. or otherwise are tourism, improvement of statistical services and help to the Council of Sciences.

The team thought, when it left for Indonesia, that it would be very useful to find at least one capital project in Indonesia that we might finance which has political appeal and at the same time makes economic sense. The team had greater difficulty in finding such a project than it had anticipated. One possibility would be help to the rayon production complexes which Indonesia plans to build. However, the team has the gravest doubts as to the capabilities of Indonesia to manage such a complex operation. For example, what is likely to happen is that the plant will be built before local timber is available for use in it. Indonesia will be forced to import the required pulp wood and the net result will be an increase in import demand rather than a reduction as hoped by the Indonesians. Furthermore, the demand for rayon is partly due to its status value which might be destroyed if it were produced cheaply. These rayon complexes will cost $87 million each. The team is doubtful whether we should become involved even though this is a project within Saleh’s responsibility and would, therefore, produce some political credit for him if it is successful.

There was some discussion of what, it seems to me, is going to be a key issue if we get into significant economic assistance for Indonesia. That is the question of the extent to which we can get our aid program on a sound economic basis and get away from projects based primarily on Sukarno’s desires. Mr. Burgess, the ICA representative on the team,4 observed that we have taken a too defeatist attitude toward the possibility of serious work on economic problems and toward elimination of aid given for political reasons. Someone else from ICA who was present observed that the analysis that this team had made of Indonesia’s economic problems was exactly the kind of analysis we had made ten years ago but our aid continued to be dominated by political considerations.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61. Secret.

1 Professor Don D. Humphrey of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Georgetown University, headed a team of academic and government officials who went to Indonesia in August 1961 to study the Indonesian economic situation, the proposed 8-year (1961–1968) economic plan, and what the United States could or should do in relation to the plan. The team was proposed by President Kennedy to President Sukarno during his visit to Washington in April 1961. An interim report of the team was submitted to McGeorge Bundy on November 3. (Ibid., 10/61–12/61)

2 September 9. No other record of the Rostow–Humphrey discussion has been found.

3 No other record of the briefing has been found.

4 David S. Burgess, Acting Chief, Burma–Indonesia Division, Office of Far East Operations, ICA.

187. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 187. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, September 9, 1961.

SUBJECT

Discussion of West New Guinea with Sukarno

I have noted from your letter to Prime Minister Macmillan1 that you are considering urging Sukarno to help improve the world atmosphere by starting fruitful negotiations with the Dutch on West New Guinea. There are certain developments which have occurred recently, pertinent to this proposed course of action, which I wish to bring to your attention.

During Sukarno’s world tour last spring he met with private Dutch businessmen here in Washington and elsewhere. General Nasution also met with Dutch politicians and businessmen when he was in Europe this summer. According to reports the Indonesians indicated readiness to resume normal diplomatic and commercial relations if the Dutch would agree in advance to transfer West New Guinea to Indonesia. The Dutch government has disavowed these private efforts and has reaffirmed its policy which insists that the inhabitants of the disputed territory be given the right of self-determination.

Within the past week we have learned that the Dutch intend to introduce into the UN General Assembly a resolution to establish a Visiting Mission to West New Guinea to report on conditions in the territory. The Dutch hope thereby to “internationalize” the problem and thus forestall military action by Indonesia. We understand that the Dutch have some flexibility concerning the terms of reference of such a mission. Over the past few weeks we have held exploratory talks with Dutch Embassy on this problem during which we indicated our belief that the UN represents the most reasonable hope for a solution. I am convinced that the present Dutch Government is not prepared to undertake direct negotiations with the Indonesians at this time. As a very minimum the Indonesians would have to initiate a move to re-establish diplomatic relations before the Dutch would even consider sitting down to talk with them.

Sukarno severed diplomatic relations with the Netherlands in August 1960 over the West New Guinea issue.

In view of these developments I believe that you may not wish to urge Sukarno to deal directly with the Dutch since he might well reply that he is ready and has in fact made himself available to responsible Dutch citizens. Sukarno might then suggest that the United States persuade the Netherlands to this course of action. Under the present circumstances we have little hope of convincing the Dutch that such negotiations are in their interest and we risk being charged by them with being indifferent to an ally’s interest at this crucial time. Therefore, I recommend that you approach the question of possible direct Dutch-Indonesian negotiations from the point of view of obtaining information in the matter, rather than as a direct recommendation by the United States.

Dean Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Countries, Indonesia, Security, Sukarno–Keita Visit, 9/13/61. No classification marking. Assistant Secretary Tyler urged Rusk to send this memorandum, which was drafted by Beaudry, to President Kennedy, fearing that “the President might be put in an exposed position if he should urge this step on Sukarno because we are convinced that the Dutch Government is not at this time prepared to negotiate directly with Sukarno.” (Memorandum from Tyler to Rusk, September 8, with attached memorandum from Rusk to Kennedy; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–861)

1 Not further identified.

188. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 188. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, September 10, 1961.

SUBJECT

Brief for Sukarno/Keita Visit1

Herewith some observations supplementary to the State Department briefing papers.

[Here follow items 1–8, Rostow’s suggestions on the President’s attitude to the Belgrade Conference initiative, arrangements for the visit, the summit, Germany, nuclear blackmail, inspections for disarmament and the test ban, a communiqué, and follow-up.]

9. Wednesday Talks—Sukarno.

a. West New Guinea. Although Sukarno has indicated that he does not want bilateral talks, it is in U.S. interests that there be such talks if at all possible on the West New Guinea issue. The issue now seems headed for a crucial debate in the UN General Assembly. We cannot stand still; perhaps the only reason that the situation has not yet moved to a crisis stage is the initiative we have already taken.

After discussing the matter with Secretary Rusk, you may wish to urge that Sukarno accept our idea of a UN committee to investigate the dispute and to make recommendations on the future political disposition of the territory. This approach sidesteps the self-determination issue. It would internationalize the problem without handing the territory over to the Indonesians, thus saving Dutch face. At the same time, because of the influence that the Afro-Asians would exert in the establishment and operation of such a committee, Indonesia might feel reasonably optimistic that the outcome would be favorable to them.

The Dutch now recognize that their interests lie in disengagement. They are willing to internationalize the problem through establishment of a UN Visiting Mission to West New Guinea to report on conditions there. They might be willing to agree in the UN to a mission with broader terms of reference, but may continue to insist upon self-determination, however little sense that makes for the stone-age Papuan population of New Guinea. The Indonesians seem to fear that the Dutch see internationalization as a way of keeping West New Guinea out of Indonesian hands. On the other hand, the British and Australians fear that UN consideration will get out of control, with the Afro-Asians dominating proceedings.

Because we have been reluctant to put ourselves in a position of appearing to back the Indonesian claim, we have not felt it desirable to spell out to the Indonesians our belief that their chances should be quite good if a UN committee were established. It would be very useful if you could probe further the reasons Sukarno seems reluctant to accept a UN committee approach. There is a serious question in our minds as to whether we should not be more explicit in suggesting to the Indonesians that they would probably come out very well under such an approach. We might, for example, either in these talks or later, suggest that, since some countries (Australia and Britain) have rather opposite concerns from those of the Indonesians, the idea may not be as bad from the Indonesian viewpoint as they seem to think.

Since the Indonesians seem to be looking for a sure thing, Sukarno might then ask for assurances that a UN operation could be managed favorably to his interests. He may ask, more specifically, whether we are prepared to put pressure on the Dutch to agree to a UN committee with sufficiently broad terms of reference and a membership sufficiently favorable to Indonesia. Our feeling is that we ought to put real pressure on the Dutch if such pressure is necessary in order to assure an agreed resolution. However, our approach to the Dutch on this question raises larger policy issues which we recommend that you discuss with Secretary Rusk in advance of the meeting with Sukarno.

b. The Pope Case. State proposes that you talk about the Pope case.2 It is our feeling that to do so again would only inflate the importance of this case in Sukarno’s mind and suggest that, if he showed clemency, he could expect a good deal from us in return. We, therefore, recommend that you consider the matter carefully with Mr. Rusk before you raise it again. Perhaps the Secretary of State should handle it.

c. Aidit. You may not be able to control who Sukarno brings along on Wednesday. He introduced Aidit to President Eisenhower; and you may have the pleasure.

d. Economic Development. Professor Don Humphrey is back from his economic mission to Indonesia, and I have had a preliminary verbal report from him.3 He is at work on his formal report, a preliminary version of which should be available when Cherul Saleh (Sukarno’s rising minister, who is serious about economic development) comes to town late in September. With Sukarno you may wish to confine yourself to saying that you understand the mission, was very well looked after; you await a report of their recommendations; you look forward to the discussions your officials will have with Saleh later in the month. We may have some further suggestions about conversation on this point late Monday or early Tuesday.

[Here follows item 10, Rostow’s suggestions for the President’s discussion with President Keita.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Indonesia, Security, Sukarno–Keita Visit, 9/13/61. Secret.

1 Presidents Keita of Mali and Sukarno were visiting Washington as representatives of the Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned States to urge Kennedy and Khrushchev to carry on direct negotiations for disarmament and peace. Therefore, a September 8 Department of State briefing memorandum for the President did not contain information on U.S. Indonesian bilateral relations. (Ibid., 9/12/61) A separate summary of the West New Guinea dispute, September 8, was sent with the memorandum. (Ibid.) Komer commented to Rostow in a September 8 note: “I can’t see the logic for avoiding things like West Irian,” and noted that Robert Johnson felt the same way. (Ibid.) In an undated note to Komer, Johnson stated that “the most useful result we might get out of the whole visit might be some forward movement on the West Irian problem” and thought it was the only bilateral problem Sukarno and Kennedy should discuss. (Ibid.)

2 Executive Secretary Battle sent a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy September 12, reiterating the history of Allen Pope and noting that the Department of State was under “extreme pressure” from the Pope family Battle recommended that President Kennedy raise the case with President Sukarno. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case) There is no record of Kennedy raising the Pope case with Sukarno.

3 See Document 186.

189. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 189. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 11, 1961.

SUBJECT

Blow-Up Over West Irian

In talking with Sukarno we must bear in mind that we are heading almost inexorably toward a major crisis over West Irian, unless it can be forestalled. The Indos aren’t getting those $800,000,000 worth of Soviet arms for any other reason than to overawe the Dutch.

While the best guess still seems to be that Djakarta hopes to scare the Dutch so as to get West Irian short of force majeure, a fracas could certainly occur. In my opinion, most of the world will see this as a pure anti-colonial issue, and we’ll be in a real dilemma. At any rate if we take steps then toward a solution giving West Irian to Indonesia, we’ll buy no credit for it; instead we’ll look as though we succumbed to a Soviet-backed power play.

Painful as it is to accommodate a demagogue like Sukarno, Indonesia is a mighty important place. Sukarno won’t be around forever, but logical heirs apparent are the strongest CP in any country outside the Bloc. What price holding on to mainland Southeast Asia if we have a hostile Indonesia at its back?

All this is merely to urge that statesmanship may call here for forehanded action. The problems involved are numerous and painful, but the cost of not moving faster may be greater yet. True, we may have trouble with the Dutch (who’d like to disengage but don’t know how), but this hardly outweighs the alternative risks. Like Angola, this is a case where European interest must be subordinated; unlike Portugal, however, Holland would be unlikely to cut off its nose to spite its face.

R. W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Sukarno-Keita Visit, 9/12/61. Secret.

190. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 190. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, September 14, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

Unless the President talked with Sukarno about West New Guinea privately at the airport, the subject was not discussed with the Indonesians during the Sukarno visit.1 We also continue to lack specific information as to the Dutch plans for the UN. I am informed by Bob Lindquist, the State Indonesian Desk Officer, that the Secretary of State will see Luns in New York on Monday, September 18.2 A talking paper has been prepared for the Secretary for that conversation.3 It is expected that that talk will produce more specific information as to Dutch plans. The Secretary will probably also urge the Dutch to be as forthcoming as possible.

As I see it, we have, up to now, played a useful, but rather gingerly, mediatory role. We have “suggested”, but not pushed our proposal for a UN Commission with broad terms of reference. We have never gone so far as to show either the Dutch or the Indonesians the draft resolution that we prepared and circulated for information to the U.S. embassies concerned. (That resolution would create a Commission with authority to “consider conditions” in the territory and to report to the UNGA “as to how the question may be resolved in accordance with the Charter”.)4

You may recall that some months ago I did a paper5 on our policy alternatives in West New Guinea in which I analyzed various alternative approaches in terms of the extent to which they would achieve one of two policy objectives: (a) a solution of the West New Guinea problem; and (b) the achievement of a major gain in U.S. relations with the Indonesians (by taking a position which was favorable to their interests.) The approach we have taken has emphasized the first objective over the second, though it has gained us some good will from the Indonesians. Given this emphasis, the cautious approach we have taken up to now has had real utility. The series of talks we had with the Dutch helped them to face up to the real situation and to arrive, on their own, at a more realistic and flexible position. They have come, as a result of these talks, to recognize the need for disengagement and to think specifically about how it might be accomplished. At the same time they have not been left with the feeling that the U.S. is seeking to force them out of WNG.

We are going to have to continue to play our role with some finesse if our objective continues to be one primarily of finding a solution rather than one of making absolutely clear to the Indonesians that we are in their corner. However, I think we have now arrived at the point where we are going to have to put some pressure on both sides if the Dutch are going to be sufficiently forthcoming and if the Indos are going to be brought around to a realization that they too must take some chances. It is Lindquist’s judgment that, if the Dutch drop a resolution into the UN hopper, they are likely to be quite flexible about accepting amendments. They want to be able to show that they stood by their principles, but that the UN took matters out of their hands. If this judgment is correct—and no one can, of course, be positive that it is—it suggests that we ought to be taking two kinds of action in anticipation of the UN debate:

a. We ought to ascertain Dutch intentions more precisely, if we can. That is State’s plan. However, we also ought to make very clear to the Dutch that we believe that it is of great importance that they maintain maximum flexibility with respect to possible amendments to any resolution that they submit. We should go beyond that and say that we will ourselves be prepared to work for or support amendments designed to give any UN Commission sent to the area the broadest possible terms of reference.

b. Following talks with the Dutch, we ought to have serious talks with the Indonesians in which we (1) point out that a UN Commission with very broad terms of reference would offer them a real opportunity to achieve their objectives—we might make the point that some (the British and Australians) seem to fear that the Afro-Asians will run away with any UN consideration of this problem; (2) recommend strongly that they take a constructive attitude toward any Dutch proposals because it is our judgment that there is flexibility in the Dutch position and that the Dutch will accept amendments to their proposal; and (3) that we will work positively for a UN Commission with broad terms of reference and that we assume that the Indonesians will interest themselves in the question of the composition of any such commission.

My recommendations go very much to questions of tactics. They may, therefore, seem to be matters that should be left entirely to the State Department. However, the question of tactics here is not unlike the question of tactics on a UN Angola resolution.6 It is a question of how far we should be prepared to go in risking Dutch displeasure in order to get a resolution that offers real promise to the Indonesians. It therefore becomes a rather important policy matter.7

If we could reverse our present course—and eventually we might be forced to—the question could become one of simply choosing up sides in this dispute. But as long as we are on the present course with its emphasis upon seeking a mutually accepted (if not mutually acceptable) solution, the questions do present themselves as questions of tactics. We ought always, of course, to bear in mind that if we do not maintain the momentum on this issue we may very well be faced by the question in the more dramatic form of a military confrontation which would present us with a real dilemma and out of which we would stand to lose much.

I recommend that you suggest to Alexis Johnson that the Secretary review with the President either before or immediately following his talk with Luns (preferably before), his ideas as to how this matter should be handled. In this review, I would like to see some discussion of the kind of tactics I have suggested above.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 9/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Komer.

1 On September 13, Sukarno and President Kennedy met in the White House from 12:17 to 12:50 p.m. (Ibid., President’s Appointment Book) According to the memoranda of conversation of that meeting, both September 13, the two Presidents discussed China, the Non-Aligned Nations Conference at Belgrade, and the German problem.

2 The record of the Luns–Rusk conversation at the United Nations is in a memorandum of conversation, SecDel/MC/10, September 18. (Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330) Rusk listened to Luns’ proposals and provided encouragement.

3 Memorandum from Tyler to Rusk, September 16. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.56/9–1661)

4 See the second attachment to Document 181.

5 Not further identified.

6 U.N. Doc. S/4835, June 9, 1961. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 888–889.

7 Johnson added the last sentence by hand.

191. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 191. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of StateSource

New York, September 16, 1961, 4 p.m.

782. Re: West New Guinea.

1. At his request I met 14 Sept. for one and one-half hour discussion with Sukarno of which principal subject, at his insistence, was West New Guinea. Other subjects, which he sought exclude insofar as possible, being reported separately.1

2. Sukarno began by saying flatly Indonesia would not raise WNG at 16th GA. He and Subandrio noted growing desire in Netherlands on part not only of businessmen but more recently also political parties to find some way disengage Netherlands from WNG. Political leaders of Catholic and Labor Parties had contacted Sukarno, most recently in Vienna, and said on personal basis they sought face-saving means to turn WNG over to Indonesia. Subandrio said that in response to Indonesian query as to whether these leaders could also speak on behalf of their political parties, these leaders had later sent word that views they expressed had been endorsed by and become part of platforms of their respective political parties.

3. Sukarno claimed that in his 17 Aug “State of Union “speech2 he had attempted respond to this situation by making distinction between “sovereignty” of WNG and “administration” of WNG. When he proposed that good relations between GOI and Dutch could be, and should be restored if Dutch would agree turn over administration of WNG to GOI, he had sought not only avoidance of hostile relations and possibly, physical acts between GOI and Dutch, but also full restoration of diplomatic relations and mutually profitable economic relations. He regretted there had been no response by Dutch Govt to his 17 Aug statement. He felt progress toward solution now could be assisted by us.

4. With deliberate vagueness Sukarno and Subandrio then outlined their ideas for utilizing UN as “conduit” through which “administration” would be passed from Dutch to GOI. They felt Dutch could save face by passing “administration” of WNG to UN for one—at most—two year period after which administration would pass to GOI; role of UN apparently being to supervise or implement this passage. Sukarno several times referred to Dutch “turning over WNG to SYG” in this connection.

5. They noted Dutch made much of self-determination for Papuans but dismissed this as false issue because (a) they had tape recording of statement by Labor Party leader to effect issue of self-determination had been “invented” by Dutch, (b) sovereignty of GOI included WNG and it could not be permitted that under guise of self-determination encouragement would be given to secession. (They commented US-supported attempts break up Republic of Indonesia through armed rebellion had failed and they could not accept similar attempts under new guise of self-determination in regions which rightfully belonged to GOI.) Included in rationale was argument self-determination could be defended only on basis of ethnic differences of Papuan people; but these ethnic differences existed to greater or less degree in other parts of Republic. They pointedly stated GOI claims extended only to limits of former Dutch-East Indies and did not, and would never apply to British and Portuguese controlled areas on fringes, i.e. North Borneo, Sarawak, Timor and East New Guinea.

6. Sukarno said Dutch, in seeking way disengage, considering idea of UN commission to investigate conditions in WNG, but he rejected this concept emphatically on basis colonial power could always point to puppets, schools, hospitals and roads, as they had in Indonesia before independence, and deceive commission as to reality. Hundreds of “nationalists” who escape to GOI every month testify to Papuan longing to become again part of Indonesia.

7. Sukarno said Luns most stubborn of stubborn Dutch and noted he already in US for 16th GA. Said he would not rule out bilateral discussions with Luns so long as there were prior agreement as to purpose and some indication Dutch sought solution. He also thought possibility existed Luns might leave govt this winter.

8. Neither Sukarno nor Subandrio asked questions as to Dutch intentions, either in general or at coming GA, nor did they make specific request for US good offices. However, Subandrio expressed himself as greatly encouraged by his recent talks with Amb Jones and they clearly sought our assistance in furthering their scheme for taking possession of WNG. Sukarno said he hoped we had noticed that in his wisdom he had not sought have his position on West Irian endorsed at Belgrade.

9. In attempting gain insight into actual mechanics which Sukarno had in mind we met with no success. We suggested at one point that whether “real” or “invented”, issue of self-determination for Papuans seemed clearly endorsed by Dutch people and political parties, and therefore if Sukarno sought face-saving device it appeared necessary and reasonable that self-determination would in some way be included. We suggested that if UN were to take over administration of WNG, while leaving unsettled conflicting claims as to sovereignty, during term of administration UN would undoubtedly remove any barriers of communication between Papuans and their neighbors. We foresaw possibility that after several years UN administration might find conditions had been achieved which would permit self-determination through plebiscite at which point GOI might, for constitutional reasons, have take public position of opposing plebiscite yet in fact acquiesce in its being held with full confidence that results of plebiscite would be favorable to GOI and would settle question of sovereignty once and for all.

10. Neither Sukarno nor Subandrio rejected this concept but Subandrio remarked Dutch influence, particularly military and police forces, would have be eliminated during UN administration.

11. We also suggested some form of UN commission of member states would seem necessary in order supervise administration by UN; there was no objection to commission of this sort.

Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–1661. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

1 Telegram 774 from USUN, September 16. (Ibid.)

2 The text was transmitted in despatch 131 from Djakarta, August 25. (Ibid., 798.11/8–2561)

192. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 192. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of StateSource

New York, September 16, 1961, 7 p.m.

783. West New Guinea (WNG). At lunch today FonMin Luns (Netherlands) presented his thinking and ideas for internationalization of WNG.

I outlined to Luns my 14 Sept talk with Sukarno1 touching specifically on Sukarno’s vague proposal for UN administration of WNG with pre-condition that end result would involve reversion of WNG to GOI sovereignty, Sukarno’s rejection of self-determination, Sukarno’s optimism that pressures were at work on Dutch Govt to disengage from WNG, and Sukarno’s claim to be seeking full restoration of diplomatic and economic relations between GOI and Dutch.

Luns and Meijer said on most confidential basis they were considering, but had not yet decided upon, initiative at 16th GA either in form of requesting separate item on WNG or introducing draft res during debate on colonial declaration (GA Res 1514),2 which they and NZ had supported at 15th GA.

Dutch position has now evolved to point where Luns can state to GA his govt’s willingness divest itself of sovereignty over WNG provided GA endorsement is found for UN administration of WNG leading to self-determination for Papuan people.

Luns indicated full flexibility as to manner in which UN would administer WNG. He had in mind precedent of Somalia in which sovereignty was given to people under UN trusteeship and administration. He also had in mind something along lines of TVA. Sole condition was that administration would be under UN auspices. He foresaw likelihood that Dutch administrative personnel in WNG would come under UN supervision with slight augmentation by other nationals. In answer to our query as to whether he could state to GA Dutch acceptance of Indonesian participation in administration of WNG under UN auspices, Luns said his Parliament would not permit such statement.

Luns did not profess to believe that this new position would be acceptable to Sukarno who views WNG as under GOI sovereignty and whose ambitions are territorial. Nonetheless he felt encouraged by conversations with Nehru, by Sukarno’s inability to obtain at Belgrade endorsement of his position, and by complete discretion which had been maintained by govts, including India, Malaya and Japan, with whom Dutch have discussed their proposal. He recognizes likelihood of Indonesian opposition at GA but felt two-thirds majority might be found for appropriate res.

We commented that we viewed this new position as extremely forthcoming and that, as he knew, U.S. hoped progress could be made toward some solution of WNG and lessening of Dutch–GOI differences. We were unsure that even with this new position Dutch could succeed in isolating Indonesia from ASAF group to extent Indonesia would be unable to build blocking third.

Luns commented they had discussed matter with 40 countries and were encouraged by responses received.

Luns did not go into pros and cons of separate item versus consideration under colonial item but mentioned advantage he saw of raising matter under colonial item in that this would make it more difficult for Indonesians to put in counter item. He also saw advantage for West in taking initiative which would show that WNG is not, strictly speaking, “colonial” question in light of new Dutch position.

We also asked Luns if he did not envisage some form of member state study commission which would supervise UN administration and be responsible for conduct of plebiscite. Luns said he did. We asked him if he would be able to state to GA that his govt would not object to Indonesian membership on this commission. Luns felt that he could so state so long as composition of commission was balanced.

I am very favorably impressed with this new Dutch position which I think goes long way toward establishing Dutch bona fides and exposing Indonesian territorial ambitions. I think concept of self-determination for Papuan people is sound and worth our support. I recognize likelihood that Indonesia will argue that self-determination in WNG amounts to attempt by colonial power to dismember GOI through secession, similar to arguments which were made about Katanga. I am unable to evaluate likelihood that Indonesia would be so isolated within ASAF group that Dutch have reason to be confident in obtaining two-thirds majority support. In any case it seems unlikely that any scheme could be found which would be acceptable both to Dutch and Indonesians. However, in light of my recent talk with Sukarno I suspect Sukarno may need continuing dispute with Dutch for domestic purposes. Nonetheless Luns’ proposal seems to come as close to Sukarno’s ideas as is possible without involving direct transfer of WNG to GOI.

Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–1661. Secret; Limited Distribution.

1 See Document 191.

2 U.N. Resolution 1514 (XV), adopted December 14, 1960, is entitled “Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.” For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1960, pp. 110–111.

193. Editorial Note 193. Editorial Note

On September 26, 1961, Foreign Minister Luns told the U.N. General Assembly that the Netherlands was prepared to transfer control of West New Guinea to the United Nations. He proposed that the United Nations send a commission of inquiry to West New Guinea with a view to organizing a plebiscite to determine Papuan self-determination in accordance with the terms of the U.N. Charter. He also proposed that the United Nations should, at the same time, replace the Netherlands as the trusteeship authority responsible for administration of the territory and its economic development. Luns promised that the Netherlands would continue its financial aid to the territory at the current level of $430 million per year. He urged that Dutch officials in West New Guinea remain there as U.N. officials. This proposal was then submitted on October 9 to the U.N. General Assembly as a draft resolution along with an explanatory memorandum. (U.N. Docs. A/4915 and A/L.354) The text of the proposal is also in Department of State, FE/SPA Files: Lot 65 D 553, 322 WNG Jan.–Dec. 1961.

194. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 194. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, September 29, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

It is rather difficult to keep up with developments on the West New Guinea issue. I have had a memo in preparation for a week, but each time I return to the subject I find an important element changed. The attached telegram,1 which I believe you have seen, is the latest and most interesting development. At last we have some idea of what the Indonesians might settle for.

There are some obvious difficulties in the Indonesian proposals, but they have the virtue of being relatively sophisticated and possibly negotiable. The crucial question remains whether the Dutch are prepared for some form of transfer of sovereignty to Indonesia.

Note that Subandrio “pleaded for active U.S. sympathy and support in finding a workable solution”. It seems to me that it is now time for us to move again. But how? We are now in a negotiating situation in which the U.S. can play two useful roles—to serve as intermediary and to put pressure on either side as it seems required. In particular, we ought to make absolutely clear to the Dutch the importance that we attach to their taking a flexible, forthcoming position.

I think it would be useful if the Secretary had a very frank talk with the Dutch in which he might make the following points:

a. That we now seem to be at a stage in the evolution of the West New Guinea problem where the prospects for a solution seem more favorable than they have at any time in the past.

b. That it seems to us absolutely crucial that this opportunity be seized; that if we do not make progress now there is a very strong possibility of a situation developing in which West New Guinea is not only lost to them, but Indonesia is lost to the West.

c. We commend the Dutch for the initiative they have shown in searching for a new approach and introducing their trusteeship proposal, but that we do not believe that the scheme, as so far developed, will be a solution which is acceptable to the Indonesians.

d. Accordingly, we hope that they will be very flexible in accepting amendments or alternatives. We should make clear that we feel that many of the concessions must come from them if there is to be a solution.

Throughout the subsequent negotiations, while we attempt to get both sides to be reasonable, we ought in general to maintain a posture of particular pressure on the Dutch.

I have tried this general approach out on Bob Lindquist, the State Desk Officer. He indicated that an immediate matter that we will need to clarify is whether Sukarno and Subandrio had read Luns’ speech at the time of Subandrio’s conversation with Jones. The apparent inclination of the Department seems to be to leave the questions of tactics largely to the Secretary in New York. Jim Bell, the Office Director, is also in New York at the UN for the session.

I asked Lindquist what he thought the Secretary’s reaction to the current situation was likely to be. He said that the Secretary has a very strong feeling that we ought not to get too deeply involved in any negotiation on this issue for fear that, if it breaks down, we will be blamed by both sides. I expressed the view that this risk seemed minimal if we put ourselves in the position where we did not stand on dead center, but somewhat on the Indonesian side. That is, if it was evident to the Indonesians that we were doing our best to make the Dutch see reason, we could only gain credit with them. Any bruising of our relations with the Dutch would, it seemed to me, be minimal. Now that the Dutch have made the first move themselves to get out of West New Guinea they can hardly blame us for forcing them out.

I asked Bob whether the WNG question was getting continuing high level attention in the Department. I asked whether, for example, Alexis Johnson was keeping up with it. He said that Alexis Johnson had not been much involved but that the Secretary himself took a considerable continuing interest.

I fear that a position of complete dead-center neutrality risks the loss of an important opportunity to settle the West New Guinea problem and of an opportunity to gain political capital with Indonesia. We can’t know now what our position will be on particular issues because we don’t know how those issues will present themselves. But I think we ought to develop a little more clarity about our objective. It seems to me that our objective must be to find an approach which will give the Indonesians real assurance that they will gain control of WNG. If we adopt this objective, our role in the negotiations will be a good deal clearer to ourselves and to the Indonesians. We will necessarily be in a position of applying pressure to the Dutch.

Again I suggest that the question involved here, though it presents itself at present in the form of a question about negotiating tactics, is actually a high policy question about which there ought to be conversation between the President and Secretary Rusk. Could it be suggested to the President that he have a talk with the Secretary?

(It is possible that the Secretary’s attitude is affected by the Dutch reaction to our role in the negotiations that led to Indonesian independence. I know from personal contact with Dutch in The Netherlands at the time how bitter their feeling was about our role, though I think they exaggerated it. But the other side of that coin is that we earned political capital with the Indonesians which we have retained even to this day, though it was considerably dissipated by the rebellion. Moreover, as I have suggested above, the public Dutch decision to get out of West New Guinea creates a situation in which we can hardly be charged with pushing them out.)

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 9/61. Secret. A copy was sent to Komer.

1 Reference is to telegram 582 from Djakarta, September 27, in which Jones reported that Subandrio had come to see him on what he described as a matter of urgency. Subandrio stated that the Dutch position was beginning to change and prospects for a solution to West New Guinea looked brighter. Sukarno had ordered Subandrio to New York. Subandrio acknowledged that U.N. trusteeship for a short duration might be necessary to save Netherlands face before transfer of the territory to Indonesia. Subandrio made a strong plea for U.S. support. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/9–2761)

195. Editorial Note 195. Editorial Note

Chaerul Saleh, Minister of Construction, Minister of Basic Industry and Mining, and Acting Chairman of the People’s Consultative Congress, visited the United States September 24–October 8, 1961. While in Washington he met with Department of State officials on September 25 and Walt Rostow at the White House on September 26. He also met with officials from the International Cooperation Administration, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Export-Import Bank.

One of the issues within the government was whether or not to use the interim and preliminary conclusions of the Humphrey mission (see Document 186) as a topic of discussion with Saleh. In a memorandum to Walt Rostow, September 22, Robert Johnson summarized the problem:

“State is very much of the view that it is too early to start talking in specific terms about economic projects; the visit is occurring at the wrong time for that. I agree that we need to have the Humphrey report and get it reviewed within the government before we can move. However, I suggested to the State officer that the value of the Salant memo will be to indicate those subjects on which you might express friendly, interested noises and those on which (like rayon) you might ask a few questions. He believes, however, that Saleh will want to talk with you primarily about general U.S. policy toward economic development.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, 8/61–9/61) Walter S. Salant of the Bookings Institution was a member of the Humphrey mission; his memorandum has not been identified.

Accompanied by the chiefs of the Indonesian oil and tin industries and Indonesian Embassy officials, Saleh met with Avery F. Petersen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs, and other U.S. officials on September 25. Later in the day, at 5:30 p.m., Saleh met with Acting Secretary of State Chester Bowles for an hour. (Memoranda of conversation, September 25; Department of State, Central Files, 898.00/9–2561 and 611.98/9–2561)

No record of the Rostow–Saleh conversation has been found beyond Johnson’s memorandum cited above. Telegrams 343 and 346 to Djakarta, September 29 and 30, transmitted accounts of Saleh’s discussions with the President of the IBRD, Eugene Black, and a summary of Saleh’s discussions with officials at the Department of State, International Cooperation Administration, the Export Import Bank, and members of the Humphrey mission. (Ibid., 033.9811/9–2961 and 033.9811/9–3061)

196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 196. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United NationsSource

Washington, October 11, 1961, 9:13 p.m.

887. Following is summary uncleared memcon Secretary meeting with Subandrio, Oct 11.1

Subandrio made following points: 1. Trend of opinion in the Netherlands moving toward accommodation with Indonesia.

2. While Dutch proposal to be commended as step forward ending colonialism it did nothing to solve problems of Indonesian-Dutch relations and was in fact a device to deny Indonesian’s claim to WNG.

3. Indonesians believe Dutch not prepared to relinquish sovereignty WNG until some form of self-determination carried out.

4. The real reason why it is impossible to reach “accommodation” between Indonesia and the Netherlands is because of intransigent attitude of Dutch Foreign Minister Luns who is determined that WNG will not go to Indonesia.

Secretary made following points: 1. Dutch initiative in no way joint U.S.-Dutch proposal.

2. It is our understanding that Dutch offer would result in transfer of sovereignty to UN as soon as Dutch constitutional processes satisfied.

3. The Indonesians should not appear to be fearful of self-determination—by so doing they might arouse certain doubts.

4. They would be in a stronger position if they were to appear confident that self-determination would achieve result satisfactory to Indonesia.

5. Indonesia should try to advance the Indonesian position on the basis of Dutch offer to relinquish control of WNG. Relinquishment of control is first of two chapters and an important step forward. Second chapter is question of disposition of WNG.

6. Indonesians would strengthen their position if, on the basis of Dutch offer to relinquish control, they would suggest resumption of diplomatic relations.

7. Such positive attitude would also help trend of opinion in Holland.

8. Any building up of firm antagonistic public position would make improvement in Dutch-Indonesian relations even more difficult.

At several times during meeting Minister expressed preference for accommodation with Dutch privately rather than public confrontation at UN. Minister stressed Indonesians in no hurry for solution and avoided strong language which reportedly characterized his statement in New York yesterday. He seemed impressed and even somewhat discomforted as Secretary made his presentation. Secretary was persuasive but firm in indicating Foreign Minister should take advantage Dutch offer rather than refuse participate debate. When Minister cited objections to his suggestion that Indonesians consider re-establishment diplomatic relations with Dutch, Secretary said many more unpalatable suggestions regularly made to U.S. concerning conduct of its foreign affairs including recent mission to suggest we get together for talks with Soviet Union with which we have diplomatic relations and representatives of which we see on daily basis.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/10–1161. Confidential. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Sisco, Blue, and Steeves; and approved by Wallner. Repeated to Djakarta and The Hague.

1 The memorandum of conversation is ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

197. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 197. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, October 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

1. I want to say one further word on West New Guinea before departing for Saigon.1 I believe that it is more urgent than ever that you find an occasion to talk with Secretary Rusk about the American position on the issue.

2. The only resolution of the West New Guinea issue with any permanence will be one that clearly looks to Indonesian control. Otherwise the issue will continue to divert Indonesian attention from the constructive tasks of economic development, strengthen extremist forces in Indonesia and threaten a military showdown which could throw Indonesia into the arms of the Bloc.

3. It now seems increasingly clear that the Dutch are playing a double game with us. On the one hand, they continue to hint that the real effect of their plan for UN administration and ultimate self-determination by the native Papuans will be to give West New Guinea to Indonesia. On the other hand, there are increasing indications that the intent of Mr. Luns is to put the United States, as well as Indonesia, in a very difficult diplomatic position. His purpose seems to be to keep West New Guinea out of Indonesian hands and to force the U.S. to choose between siding with the Dutch against the Indonesians by accepting his proposal, or appearing to oppose the self-determination principle by rejecting his proposal.

4. Despite our efforts to dissuade him, Luns tabled the Dutch resolution in the UN on Monday2 immediately following Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio’s speech to the General Assembly. The Dutch said to us that their proposal for self-determination was a totally separate matter from any Indonesian claim to sovereignty.

5. Subandrio is quite discouraged. He does not believe it useful to attempt to offer a counter-resolution or amendments to the Dutch resolution. He has stated privately to us and to the Afro-Asians that he considers the Dutch resolution a “declaration of war” against Indonesia and has indicated that he will say as much publicly when he returns to Djakarta, probably some time next week. We have attempted to dissuade him from taking so antagonistic a public position and to convince him to take advantage of the Dutch offer rather than refuse to participate in the debate. While Subandrio was understandably incensed by some aspects of Dutch actions and attitudes, he has not helped his cause by the brittle, unyielding posture he has-assumed with the Afro-Asians and the Latin Americans.

6. Thus, events seem to be moving rapidly to a situation of diplomatic impasse and heightened tensions with a very real prospect of a future military confrontation which would present us with a most difficult dilemma.

7. Secretary Rusk is understandably reluctant to get caught in the middle of this dispute. But our recent efforts to facilitate a solution and the movement of the situation toward a climax is forcing us into a more active role. Both sides recognize that our position could be crucial to the outcome.

8. Though we have generally taken an uncommitted position, we have left the impression with both sides that we consider the Dutch move a considerable step forward. We have never clearly indicated to the Dutch that their proposal is inadequate and that we feel that changes are needed. We have never attempted to determine how far the Dutch might be prepared to go in making changes, but we have implied to the Indonesians that perhaps they could obtain changes that would make the proposal acceptable to them.

9. It is time that we talked very frankly to the Dutch. We should emphasize to them that, if they continue to ignore the Indonesian interest in West New Guinea, their actions can only lead to a political collision in the UN and to ultimate military collision in West New Guinea with disastrous results for all concerned. We should make very clear to them that we consider the self-determination principle as embodied in their resolution to be rather meaningless— Because the stone-age Papuans cannot be prepared for meaningful self-determination during any feasible UN trusteeship period; the problem simply will not sit still that long.

Because the continuation of an administration made up largely of Dutch administrative personnel (as the Dutch intend) will be hardly conducive to genuine self-determination.

10. We should make clear that we cannot endorse the Dutch proposal in its present form. We should seek to determine how far the Dutch are willing to go in accepting amendments. If they will not accept amendments which offer a hope of making their resolution acceptable to the Indonesians, we should encourage them to withdraw their proposal. We would then have to explore other alternatives such as bilateral talks (which the Indonesians desire) or our own suggestion for a UN Commission with broad authority to recommend disposition of the territory. The Dutch proposal to turn the territory over to the UN has put us in an advantageous position in one respect: we can apply pressures on the Dutch without being accused of attempting to force them out.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 10/16/61–10/31/61. Secret. This memorandum was not initialed by Rostow nor was there any indication that the President saw it. On October 13, Robert Johnson submitted a draft of this memorandum to Rostow under cover of a memorandum that reads as follows: “Attached, as per your suggestion on Wednesday [October 11], is a draft of a new memorandum to the President on West New Guinea. I think it is very important that this go forward as quickly as possible.

“You will note that I have introduced the idea that we should speak frankly to the Dutch and put some real pressure on them. I know that FE would be in favor of this kind of an approach—which I have long advocated—but is up against opposition from WE and IO. The Secretary’s reluctance to become more actively involved is also an important factor. I think that the President will have a much more fruitful discussion with the Secretary if he is given a point of view to present than if he simply raises the question in a rather bland fashion.” (Ibid., 10/1/61–10/15/61)

On October 16, Johnson sent a copy of this memorandum to the President and McGeorge Bundy, indicating in a covering memorandum that “this question could be a live one during the next couple of weeks.” (Ibid., 10/16/61–10/31/61)

1 Rostow was a member of the Taylor Mission to South Vietnam, which left Washington on October 15 and did not return until the beginning of November.

2 October 9. Regarding U.N. Doc. A/L.354, October 9, see Document 193.

198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, October 13, 1961.

JCSM-725–61

SUBJECT

US Strategic Interest in Indonesia (U)

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are increasingly concerned over the steadily deteriorating position of the United States vis-à-vis the Communist Bloc in Indonesia. Neither the short range objective of preventing communist control of Indonesia nor the long range objective of establishing a politically stable and economically viable nation friendly to the West is being accomplished, and there is no expectation that the US effort in its present scope will alter the deteriorating course of events.

2. Indonesia’s large population (sixth ranking in the world), wealth of natural resources, and strategic location constitute a major prize in the East-West struggle. All the major trade routes between the Far East and points west must pass through or near this massive island complex. The loss of Indonesia to the communists would gravely undermine the Free World military position in the Western Pacific.

3. Evidence is mounting that the Soviet Union is making a determined effort to win Indonesia for the Bloc. Internally, the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) has become the largest communist party outside the Bloc. Externally, the Soviets have wooed the Indonesians by supporting the latter’s position on West New Guinea (WNG) and have plied them with massive economic and military aid. Soviet military aid commitments total $840 million, which places Indonesia second only to the UAR among non-Bloc recipients. A major Soviet objective appears to be the seduction of the one remaining pro-Western element in Indonesia—the Army.

4. Sukarno’s internal policy of coddling the PKI and his external pronouncements on world affairs indicate the degree of success the Soviets have thus far achieved.

5. US efforts have been handicapped by an apparent lack of determination to institute a broad and effective program that would insure the achievement of US objectives in Indonesia. Although US economic aid commitments ($500 million) are approximately equal to Soviet commitments, US military aid commitments total only $61.6 million—one-fourteenth the Soviet effort.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff strongly believe that a communist or even a pro-communist Indonesia would be a tremendous asset to the Bloc. Communist military bases in Java, Sumatra, etc., would militarily outflank all the SEATO nations as well as the US strategic military position in Southeast Asia. It would clearly isolate Australia and New Zealand, serve as a communist launching area for covert and overt operations against the Philippines and the numerous islands of the South Pacific, and deny to the Free World countries the tremendous oil, tin, and rubber resources which the United States seeks to deny to the communists. In addition, the emotional and psychological impact of such a communist victory would have a major effect on the Free World military forces in Asia and their continued alignment with the United States. Communism as the “wave of the future” would be given alarming impetus, for there is no other country in the region which could serve communist military purposes so well, and few that are more vulnerable to communist penetration. The loss of Indonesia to the communists might well start a chain reaction that would culminate in the eventual relinquishment of the principal US military bases in the Far East, with consequent serious implications for the over-all US military posture in the Western Pacific.

7. On the other hand the strategic importance of Indonesia to the United States is such that a genuinely neutral or preferably pro-Western government would significantly enhance the US military position in Asia. Ultimately, Indonesia can be expected to exert a commanding influence on all the other non-communist Asian states. A politically stable, economically viable nation of one hundred million or more people producing, consuming, and trading with the community of free nations cannot fail to make a positive impact on the political, economic, and military complexion of this strategic region.

8. Accordingly, it is recommended that these views form the basis of a Department of Defense position, and that the matter be referred to the National Security Council for consideration on a priority basis. In recognition of the strategic importance of Indonesia to the United States, and the serious and determined efforts the communists are currently making, it is believed that the United States must undertake the following actions as a matter of utmost national urgency: a. Exert a major effort in Indonesia to salvage it from the communists.

b. Enunciate US objectives in Indonesia and determine what specific actions the United States must take to insure the achievement of these broad US objectives. The following are typical areas in which decisions must be made and action taken: (1) US position on the West New Guinea dispute.

(2) Extent of US support and encouragement of General Nasution and other pro-West military leaders.

(3) US attitude toward Sukarno.

(4) Amount and type of US military and economic aid to Indonesia.

c. Develop and execute a detailed and dynamic national plan to take the political, economic, and psychological offensive in Indonesia. Such a plan should include the provision of general guidance, the assignment of agency responsibilities, the appointment of a plan director, and the establishment of specific schedules for measuring the progress of plan fulfillment.

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that one of the fundamental problems in connection with the erosion of our position in Indonesia stems from our partial failure to gain and maintain a pro-Western orientation of the other countries of Southeast Asia. The Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to reaffirm the strategic importance they attach to all of the countries of this area. In arriving at any politico-military decisions with respect to Indonesia due regard must be given to their effect upon the rest of Southeast Asia. Conversely, any decisions pertinent to the rest of Southeast Asia should be considered in the light of their possible effect on Indonesia.1

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L.L. Lemnitzer
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 091 Indonesia. Top Secret.

1 .In his October 24 reply to this memorandum, Secretary McNamara indicated he shared the Chiefs’ concern. He informed the Chiefs that “events in Indonesia have been the subject of continuing review at the highest levels of the government for the past several months, and the Department of State is currently preparing a new policy paper on Indonesia.” McNamara forwarded JCSM–725–61 to the Department of State and assured the Chiefs that they and Defense would get an opportunity to comment on the policy paper on Indonesia before it was approved. (Ibid.)

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 199. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, October 18, 1961, 3 p.m.

721. Deptel 393.1 President Sukarno assured me today when I saw him pursuant instructions reference telegram he already had instructed Foreign Minister Subandrio to work out possible compromise solution to WNG problem at UN rather than reject Dutch initiative out of hand.

Upon receipt reference telegram I asked to see President on urgent basis since, as Department aware, he is departing for Vienna tomorrow for treatment and probably surgery for kidney stones. He received me for few minutes morning of October 18, interrupting inner cabinet meeting at which he was presiding to do so.

In introducing the subject, I said my government had asked me to pass on some thoughts on WNG in connection with developing situation in the UN. Sakarno said at once: “you know my position. There is really nothing to talk about.” I countered by pointing out that it seemed to us situation in UN provided tactical milieu which Indonesia could utilize to advance its position if GOI maintained sufficient flexibility. I said we considered solution WNG problem had two phases: first, Dutch relinquishment of its claim to sovereignty and second, development of a formula leading to permanent solution.

I pointed out that although we had not taken sides in this dispute, we recognized clearly that any permanent solution must be one which was acceptable to the Indonesians.

The President interrupted at this point to inquire specifically what I had in mind. I said it seemed important to us that Indonesia preserve a flexible, constructive attitude at the UN and consider ways to modify Dutch resolution which I knew to be unsatisfactory to Indonesia. At this point, I emphasized that resolution in no way represented US/Dutch joint effort.

“That was instruction to Subandrio,” Sukarno replied. “I am willing to use the UN as an arm in this case in the transfer of the administration to Indonesia”. But, he emphasized, “this is as far as I can go,” indicating that he had already come down substantially from his original insistence on direct transfer of sovereignty to GOI.

I added that we hoped real progress could be made in this session of the UN in finding a formula which would solve the WNG problem and we felt that Indonesians had an opportunity here which could be exploited if they played their cards right.

The President who had listened to what I had to say, albeit with some impatience, stemming from kidney pains and interruption of cabinet meeting, indicated he must return to the cabinet meeting thus cutting off further discussion. As we were walking back to the cabinet meeting, I asked whether he expected to see Subandrio (who is expected to return to Djakarta October 22) in Vienna. He replied in the affirmative, saying Subandrio would fly to Vienna to meet him before returning here.

Comment: Although interview not wholly satisfactory due pressure of circumstances which could not be helped, I was able to get across main points and obtain some assurance from “horse’s mouth” that Indonesians would seek compromise formula at UN.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/10–1861. Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, The Hague, London, and Canberra.

1 Telegram 393, October 18, instructed Jones to encourage Sukarno to be flexible. Jones should stress that Dutch willingness to relinquish sovereignty and shifting public attitudes in the Netherlands were positive elements that could be exploited if the Indonesians “played their cards right.” (Ibid., 656.9813/10–761)

200. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 200. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

This memorandum represents an effort to bring you up to date on the West New Guinea question and to review where we ought to go from here.

Our General Posture

Our general posture during the last two or three weeks has been partly one of applying some pressure on the Indonesians to maintain a flexible approach and to seek to make use of the Dutch initiative in a constructive way. We have, so far as I can ascertain, never indicated to the Dutch that we considered their insistence upon self-determination something of a sham. We have never argued with them the need to take greater account of the Indonesian claim. We have constantly taken the position with them that their resolution is a considerable step forward. (Cleveland characterized it as “serious, ingenious and very forthright” in a recent talk with Van Roijen (Deptel 1056 to USUN).)1

Our Immediate Tactics

In the past several weeks we have developed the theory of the two-stage or “two-bite” approach to the problem. The first stage would be relinquishment of Dutch sovereignty. Final fate of the territory would be left to a subsequent second-stage decision. We have argued that the Dutch proposal represented an advance because it clearly called for moving into the first stage.

To carry out such a two-stage approach we proposed to the Dutch on October 27 an alternative resolution (Deptel 1057 to USUN). Basically, the resolution is a variant of the proposal we floated several months ago with the Dutch and the Indonesians.2 It would create a UN Committee to inquire into conditions in the territory and to recommend arrangements for an interim UN administration. As a concession to the Dutch point of view, the preamble affirmed the importance of respect for the principle of self-determination and stated as a “belief” that the future status of the territory should be determined in accordance with that principle. However, the operative part of the resolution left the future status of the territory open and stated that, during the period of interim UN administration, sovereignty would rest with the people in WNG.

The Dutch Cabinet considered this draft last week and insisted that the resolution, in both its preamble and in its operative section state that the people of WNG should make the decision as to its ultimate status. Van Roijen indicated to Cleveland that, with these changes, the resolution represented the “absolute ultimate fallback position” of the Netherlands and that the draft could not be revised in any essential respect by a UNGA bargaining process if it were to continue to be acceptable to them.3 The draft we initially showed the Dutch proposed Burma, Malaya, Sweden and Tunisia as the members of the UN Committee. Because of Dutch objection to Malaya, the composition of the committee has been left open in subsequent drafts. This question is clearly one over which there would be a serious struggle if our resolution is ever seriously considered. (The Dutch have suggested New Zealand, Tunisia, Sweden, Burma and Mexico, a group that could be expected to favor their approach.)

We redrafted the resolution to include the Dutch language in the preamble, but not in the operative section and sent it to Djakarta for Indonesian comment.4 On Friday we received Subandrio’s preliminary comments.5 His more definitive comments may be received today.6 (He is leaving Djakarta to come to New York to conduct the fight on WNG personally; he will see Sukarno en route.) Though he characterized the U.S. draft as a “substantial advance”, he was predictably unhappy with the fact that it ignored Indonesian identification with the territory and included the “essence” of self-determination in a manner which, he said, Indonesians would find difficult to accept. He also stated that he had received that afternoon a message from Bonn conveying Luns’ desire to meet him and to attempt to work out a mutually acceptable solution. This he characterized as a “three-fourths miracle”.

The Present Situation

I continue to be very troubled by our apparent lack of any clear idea of where we are going other than that general notion that what we want is a “mutually acceptable solution”. Where do we go if we can’t get one? Cleveland, in his last talk with Van Roijen, implied to the latter that we were engaged in a squeeze play directed against the Indonesians. He stated that “present circumstances may have built-in sanctions with regard to the nature of the Indonesian response to the current U.S. initiative.” He went on to explain that the “choice for the GOI increasingly is between trying to work out something on the basis of the U.S. draft and pushing the U.S. towards support of the first Dutch draft” (Deptel 1084 to USUN).7

At the same time, I am assured by the Indonesian Desk Officer that the Secretary is very clear that the U.S. will never vote for the Dutch resolution. (Presumably we would abstain.) Ambassador Jones went so far as to say that we recognized that any permanent solution must be one which is acceptable to the Indonesians (Djakarta 721).8 This statement was apparently the basis of the claim by the Dutch that Jones has assured the Indonesian Government that the U.S. would not accept any UN resolution to which Indonesia objected (Deptel 1084 to USUN). We replied that Jones had given no such assurance. The distinction is a rather subtle one and indicates something of the ambiguity of our position.

Meanwhile a recent telegram from USUN (No. 1432)9 suggests that our strategy should be one of strongly supporting and vigorously lobbying for the new proposed U.S. draft taking a “plague on both your houses” line in our argument.

The Dutch conservatively estimate fifty votes for their resolution and are fairly confident that the Indos cannot muster a blocking third. There are indications that the Indos may propose some third alternative, possibly a version of previous UN resolutions which called upon the two parties to engage in bilateral talks. (The Indos continue to prefer such talks despite little current evidence of any basis for agreement.)

There is a further element in this situation which, it seems to me, needs to be paid the closest attention. That is the economic situation in Indonesia. There has been a spate of intelligence reports recently indicating that the Government is very worried about its foreign exchange position. The Indonesian Desk Officer considers it possible that, as some evidence indicates, they have almost no uncommitted foreign exchange. It is a puzzle as to whether this concern will cause Indonesia to be more or less aggressive over WNG. Subandrio, who tends to talk in quite belligerent terms about WNG is reported to have stated that the economic situation is so desperate that a military attack on WNG is impossible [document number not declassified].10 On the other hand, while Sukarno is also said to be very worried by the economic and political situation, it is alleged that he is nonetheless prepared, despite this worry, to use force if necessary to solve the WNG problem and is trying to muster all political forces behind a new WNG campaign [document number not declassified]. Another report indicates that a full-scale assault will be mounted by June 1962 [document number not declassified].

While the reliability of this evidence is uncertain, it seems to me conceivable that Sukarno might at some stage in the foreseeable future throw all rationality to the winds and mount an all-out military attack which would be designed to unite all elements in Indonesia behind him in an effort to conclude the “anti-imperialist struggle”. Nasution and the army can be expected to continue, up to a point, to be a restraining influence. But a kind of Gotterdammerung climax for Sukarno’s career cannot be ruled out. An attack in the face of economic difficulties could create the gravest problems. Indonesia might be thrown into the arms of the Bloc for economic as well as military support. The resulting confusion and chaos and the concentration of the army’s attention on WNG rather than on the situation within Indonesia could create a situation most favorable to the Communists.

My guess is that the Indonesians are going to make a serious effort to reach an agreement, as Sukarno has indicated that they will, but that if they clearly fail, an attack can be expected despite economic difficulties.

Recommendation

So far as I can tell, State is not aware of a White House view on this question. While the situation is somewhat different from what it was when the question was discussed with the President three weeks ago, its basic elements remain the same and his advice to “lean gently on the Dutch” is still very applicable.11 In the next week we are likely to be engaged in critical negotiations over our resolution. We have never put as much pressure on the Dutch as we have on the Indonesians. Pressure now could be crucial. I therefore recommend that the President’s view be passed on to State. I recommend that it be given to Harlan Cleveland and Walter McConaughy or, alternatively, to Alexis Johnson.

I do not see the point of an all-out effort behind our proposed draft if it proves unacceptable to both sides. That would accomplish nothing and alienate both. For reasons I have spelled out many times, I continue to believe that we should decide that we will not vote for a resolution which is unacceptable to the Indonesians, provided the latter are not completely unreasonable. I continue to believe that a discussion between the President and the Secretary of State would be useful at some early stage. I wonder whether we shouldn’t flag the issue with the State Department indicating that we want the President to have a chance to participate in any decision determining how we cast our own vote in the event that agreement between the Dutch and the Indonesians proves impossible.

RHJ

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/1/61–11/15/61. Secret. Also sent to Rostow.

1 In telegram 1056 to USUN, October 27, the Department summarized a conversation of that day between van Roijen and Cleveland. During the conversation, Cleveland handed van Roijen a draft resolution (the text is in telegram 1057 to USUN, October 27) and explained that the underlying concept to move toward establishment of a U.N. authority to take over administrative responsibility for West New Guinea was the first phase of a process of which the second phase would be an act of self-determination under U.N. auspices. Cleveland stated that at the beginning of the first phase sovereignty would pass to the people of West New Guinea and that the resolution avoided the question of sovereignty. The cable noted that there was no prospect for the United Nations solving the issue, so it was proposing to finesse it. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/10–2761)

2 See Documents 181 ff.

3 The conversation between Cleveland and van Roijen was reported in telegram 1084 to USUN, November 1. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–161)

4 Sent in telegram 468 to Djakarta, November 1. (Ibid.)

5 In telegram 830 from Djakarta, November 3. (Ibid., 656.9813/11–361)

6 In telegram 832 from Djakarta, November 4, Jones reported that Subandrio had “studied the resolution carefully,” acknowledged again it was a “real step forward,” but still found it unacceptable. (Ibid., 656.9813/11–461)

7 See footnote 3 above.

8 Document 199.

9 Dated November 1. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–161)

10 None of the intelligence reports has been found.

11 No record of this discussion with the President has been found, except that on October 19, Robert Johnson wrote McGeorge Bundy a memorandum asking if he “had a chance to talk with Harlan Cleveland about the President’s view that we keep gentle heat on the Dutch while at the same time attempting to avoid direct involvement?” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 10/16/61–10/31/61)

201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, November 15, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea: One Step Forward or Two Steps Backward?

We have reached the critical juncture in UN consideration of the West New Guinea issue. The present situation has developed in large part because of encouragement that we have given to Dutch initiative to resolve this matter peacefully by UN involvement in a two-stage program. USUN’s 1600 of November 11 (Tab A)1 recommends that the best alternative is to table a slightly-revised version of the U.S. compromise draft resolution (Deptel 1096 to USUN—Tab B).2

Review of the U.S. Role in the Present Initiative: Attitudes of the Parties

Last summer we were disturbed by indications of official Indonesian inclination to attempt to resolve the West New Guinea dispute by force, and Soviet commitments to provide Indonesia with a considerable amount of military matériel. With your approval we commenced a series of intimate discussions with the Dutch on possible means to advance from this dangerous impasse. At your suggestion, we proposed that the GON consider a UN commission of inquiry which would examine the situation in West New Guinea and make appropriate recommendations to the 17th General Assembly. After initial hesitation, the Dutch have agreed to abide by the recommendations of a U.N. commission to make recommendations on the disposition of West New Guinea, with the sole proviso that the right of self-determination of the population be guaranteed (Tab C).3

Recognizing the Dutch proposal as an imaginative and constructive decolonization scheme, we have endeavored to work out with the two primary disputants a compromise resolution which would more adequately meet the Indonesian point of view than the Dutch draft (Tab D).4 At the Cabinet level the Dutch have decided that our proposal as it stands, i.e., with minimally adequate reference to the principle of self-determination, would be acceptable to them in the event their draft resolution failed of General Assembly approval. They have stressed that our proposal represents their rock-bottom position.

In sharp contrast, the Indonesians have to date displayed no flexibility whatsoever. Significant concessions, meeting the Indonesians’ original objections to our draft, have been met with continued insistence that they be guaranteed West New Guinea will be turned over to them.5 In a final attempt to meet Indonesian demands insofar as reasonably possible, we proposed two modifications of our draft resolution: (1) the omission of all reference to sovereignty and (2) a preambular reference to the dispute. These were dismissed as not far-reaching enough.6

The Indonesians have again publicly threatened military action against West New Guinea unless they get their way, regardless of the degree of UN involvement. Probably their intransigence has been encouraged by Dutch willingness to leave West New Guinea, by our attempts to secure agreement to a compromise even more favorably slanted toward Indonesia, by our lack of a definitive position on the Dutch draft, and by their apparent certitude about having a blocking third on the Dutch draft.

The Indonesians contend that time is on their side insofar as Dutch domestic politics are concerned. In the considered judgment of EUR, there is very little likelihood that any foreseeable Netherlands Cabinet or Parliament would, in return for commercial advantages, abandon West New Guinea to Indonesia without a reasonably effective provision for an expression of the will of the Papuans.

Alternatives for the U.N.

Fundamentally the choice is between action which points to the relinquishment of Dutch administrative control and sovereignty in a year, and the maintenance of the dangerous status quo. Regardless of what the Indonesians may say in the current bargaining situation, the relinquishment of West New Guinea by the Dutch cannot objectively be regarded as anything but a step forward. On the other hand, if no resolution comes out of the 16th General Assembly, two steps backward will have been taken: (1) Indonesia would regard its intransigence as having paid off and might seize the excuse of non-action by the U.N. to resort to violent means to expel the Dutch. (It seems less likely that the Indonesians would launch military action against the U.N. than against the Dutch); (2) the Dutch would have learned that the U.N. is incapable of helping them to decolonize in a principled manner. Such lessons would not be lost upon other governments. The ill effects would be compounded were the United States to attempt to weasel away from its responsibilities in this specific initiative and its commitment to the principle of self-determination.

Our direct behind-the-scenes involvement in this manner was directed towards the achievement of a viable resolution, one agreed to or at least acquiesced in by both Indonesia and the Netherlands. It is now apparent that “viability” of this nature is not attainable at this time.

Because of the role we have played with regard to this item we do not think that a U.S. abstention on the Dutch resolution would be a defensible course of action. Such a position would be doubly difficult not only because the Dutch have advanced this far largely on our recommendation, but also because the substance of the position embodied in the Dutch resolution is consonant with our own policy views. If we do not support the Dutch proposal or float our own, we would appear to be compromising our adherence to the principle of self-determination to a substantial extent and in the face of at least majority support for the Dutch position. Not only the Dutch but also the Australians and the British would feel that we had failed loyal allies and sacrificed basic principles in favor of at best uncertain “neutralists”.

The only two feasible alternatives, therefore, which we see are: (a) to support the Dutch resolution, or (b) to float our own resolution (we might, for example, have Iran introduce our text). One, but not the only, important factor to be considered in this connection is whether a U.S.-initiated resolution would be more likely to be adopted than the Dutch draft.

A precise estimate of the outcome of the vote is very difficult to obtain inter alia because the position of the United States is not known and we have not attempted to influence votes. According to our present best guess, the Dutch can probably not obtain a two-thirds majority for their resolution in its present form. If we float our resolution and work for it actively, there is a reasonable chance it will obtain a two-thirds majority. The key element in this outcome will be whether the French Africans will vote affirmatively as they have indicated. (They have publicly announced that they favor self-determination for the Papuans.)

In any event, of course, U.S. sponsorship of a resolution which we can honestly say as a result of our consultations comes closer than the Dutch draft to a middle position between the two parties should be less offensive to the Indonesians than U.S. support for the Dutch resolution.

Recommendation:

That you approve the attached instruction (Tab E) to Ambassador Stevenson.7

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–1561. Confidential. Drafted by Stephen Palmer and Buffum of UNP and cleared by Tyler and Blue, but FE did not concur. A note on the source text indicates that Harlan Cleveland “presented these views to Sect’y orally.”

1 Not attached. A copy is ibid., 656.9813/11–1161.

2 Telegram 1096 to USUN, not attached, was also sent to Djakarta as telegram 468; see footnote 4, Document 200.

3 Tab C, not attached, was the Dutch draft resolution, U.N. Doc. A/L.354, October 9.

4 Tab D, not attached, was the draft U.S. compromise resolution. For text, see the attachment to Document 203.

5 Reported in telegram 1163 to USUN, November 8. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–861)

6 Reported in telegrams 1172 and 1191 to USUN, November 8 and 9, and telegram 1628 from USUN, November 14. (Ibid., and ibid., 656.9813/11–1461)

7 Not attached.

202. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 202. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, November 15, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

I don’t know whether, following our conversation yesterday,1 you had a chance to talk with Alexis Johnson and indicate to him our view that the President should have an opportunity to participate in any decision relating to how we finally play out the West New Guinea issue at the UN.

I. The Situation

I am unable to follow this issue on an hour-by-hour basis as is necessary at this stage in order to be fully informed of its status. However, it seems increasingly obvious that neither the Dutch resolution nor our counter-proposal offers the basis of agreement between the Dutch and the Indonesians at this session of the General Assembly. The Dutch seem absolutely determined to ensure that Indonesia does not get West New Guinea and the Indonesians appear unwilling to compromise because of their apparent belief that they have a blocking third against the Dutch resolution and their view that time is on their side.

USUN in a telegram of November 112 outlined four possible courses of action:(a) support the Dutch resolution; (b) abstain on the Dutch resolution; (c) float a resolution calling for simple UN inquiry along the lines of proposals we advanced last summer; or (d) float or sponsor a resolution along lines we have recently been trying out on Dutch and Indos with some changes. USUN recommended course (d). The Department instead made the changes, which were designed to satisfy some of the Indonesian objections, and tried the new draft out on the Indos. The reaction was negative. The Indonesians indicated that they hoped we would abstain in the vote on the Dutch resolution and that, unless we can accept their idea that Indonesia should be the sole administrator of the territory for the UN under our proposed draft (an idea which we have been unwilling to accept), that we drop our efforts altogether. Indonesia would rather face the Dutch alone than the Dutch with the UN behind it. The Department has not yet sent a new instruction to New York in response to its outline of the alternatives.

It is clear that the hour of decision on our position on West New Guinea is close at hand. The Dutch are pressing us hard to come out in support of their resolution or, at least, of the principles embodied in it. The Australian Ambassador is going to see the Secretary of State today, presumably with the same message; possibly also to recommend that we now surface our draft resolution.

One danger that is beginning to cause some concern is the possibility that, if the Dutch are defeated on their resolution, they may introduce the draft that we have been floating. If this should occur we would be placed in a terribly difficult position. On the one hand, it would be difficult for us to vote against a resolution that we have ourselves drafted. But to vote for the resolution would not accomplish the objective for which it was advanced and would seriously antagonize the Indonesians. It is hard to believe that the Dutch would put us in this position, but Luns feels so strongly on this issue that I would not rule out the possibility.

II. Recommendations

If you have informed Alexis Johnson of our view that the President ought to participate in the decision on the position we should finally take, I would like to know so that I can also pass the word to the FE Bureau.

I have stated many times why I do not think that we can afford to be in a position of opposition to the Indonesians. In the immediate situation we must, it seems to me, abstain in the vote on the Dutch resolution. We should not float our own resolution and, if it appears that the Dutch might do so, we should use all possible pressure to dissuade them. We can argue, as we have been arguing with the Dutch, that our draft was advanced only for the purpose of attempting to find a middle ground which might be the basis for agreement. Now that it is apparent that the Indonesians will not accept the resolution with the amendments which the Dutch desire, we do not believe that it should be introduced.

If we had been telling the Dutch what we consider to be wrong with their resolution rather than simply telling them that it represented “an advance”, our position would be much less subject to misunderstanding than it now is. Even now we should indicate frankly to the Dutch why we cannot support their resolution.

It would be preferable if we could be in a position of voting for the Indonesians. I can think of only one kind of resolution on which we might just possibly be able to vote with them now. That would be a resolution like those that the Indos have sponsored in the past recommending bilateral talks between themselves and the Dutch. In the past we have abstained on such votes. The Indonesians continue to be interested in bilateral talks, but I do not know whether they would now favor a UN resolution on the subject. If the net result of all of the UN activity is no resolution, I think we ought to urge the Dutch privately to undertake such bilateral talks.

I have the feeling that it may be time for another memorandum for the President which would outline the alternatives. It will be difficult to provide him one that will be up to date on the tactical situation, but perhaps that could be treated in general terms. If he is going to have any influence on the decision he will have to get into the act very soon.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/1/61–11/15/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Komer.

1 No other record of this conversation has been found.

2 Telegram 1600; see footnote 1, Document 201.

203. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 203. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, November 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

As I have indicated to you, the Secretary of State has decided to float our draft resolution on West New Guinea despite Indonesian opposition.1 The draft, as it now stands, is attached. The Secretary presumably was unaware of any possible Presidential interest.

We have informed the Dutch and the Australians of our plans. We have indicated that we will actively support our draft resolution though we have not decided whether we will be one of the sponsors.

From an objective point of view it can be argued, as we have argued, that this resolution would offer real possibilities to the Indonesians if they attempt to make use of it to accomplish their purposes. One of the key questions will be the membership of the proposed UN Commission. If the Indos attempted to get friendly nations represented on it, they might be able to obtain recommendations favorable to themselves.

However, from the Indonesian point of view we have now entered the lists against them. They do not favor this resolution and will probably strongly oppose it. There is a fair chance that they may have a blocking third against the resolution just as they apparently have against the Dutch resolution. (They claim to have forty votes lined up against the latter and the Dutch seem to have grown quite pessimistic about its prospects.)

Thus, the end result of all of the months of work has been to put us in a worse position vis-á-vis the Indonesians on this issue than we have ever been in the past. In the past we have at least not actively opposed them in the UN.

We are almost certain to be in for rough days ahead with the Indonesians. At a minimum, our bilateral relations will suffer severely. I would consider it very doubtful, for example, that we will now get a favorable decision on the Pope case; the most we can probably expect will be further delay. In combination with what will be to the Indonesians a very disappointing economic aid program, our decision on West New Guinea will quite probably increase Indonesian reliance on the Bloc for aid. We will also have to be very careful to keep our heads and avoid reacting to what may be some unpleasant Indonesian statements and actions in a way that will simply accentuate the process of deterioration.

I also believe that, unless the Indonesians radically alter their attitudes toward the possibilities that a UN commission may offer to them, the pressures in Indonesia for a military attack will mount. Surely our action will hurt the efforts by moderates like Nasution to restrain the extremists. The Indonesians might also decide that, if our resolution passes, they must speed up the military timetable in order to insure that they have control before a UN commission has time to report, or even to begin its work. In the event of such an attack, our sponsorship of the UN resolution will accentuate our problem. It would be very difficult indeed for us to do anything but support a Dutch effort to secure UN action against the Indonesians. As I indicated recently, the Indonesian financial position seems very serious. An attack on West New Guinea could create a disastrous situation within Indonesia.

Perhaps all of this is too pessimistic. Admittedly, it will be some time before we can be really certain how it will all come out. The two best possible outcomes would be defeat of our resolution or a change in the Indonesian attitude toward it. No one can be certain what the prospects may be for the first of these possibilities. A defeat would not leave our relationship unaffected and would not eliminate the possibility that the Indonesians would decide that a military solution is now the best out, but it would leave us in a position where, over a period of some considerable time, we might be able to do a reasonably satisfactory repair job. An Indonesian change in attitude seems highly unlikely; rationality has never characterized attitudes on either side of this question.

As soon as we have an idea as to how this is going to come out, we will need to decide what we should do to attempt to make the best of a bad situation. For example, we will need to take a very hard look at what we should do to help the Indonesians deal with their impending financial crisis and whether we plan to get more serious about economic development than AID proposes. Work on these problems can begin now. If we could move quickly on the economic front, we could develop an Indonesian interest in avoiding a bad upset in our relations. On the other hand, they may reject U.S. offers if they see it as an attempt to buy them off on WNG. If we are going to be increasingly sensitive to continuing or expanding aid to countries that do not pursue a correct policy line, it is not going to be easy for us to opt for increased aid.

In conclusion, I believe that it was very unfortunate that the Secretary did not talk to the President about the policy issues involved. State’s lack of a clear view of how it wanted this one to come out has caused us to change from honest broker to advocate on the wrong side.

Bob

Attachment

DRAFT RESOLUTION ON WEST NEW GUINEA

Recognizing that the territory of West New Guinea will require for some time administrative, technical, and economic assistance and guidance, and in this connection;

Recognizing that the territory of West New Guinea has been the subject of dispute between Indonesia and the Netherlands;

Believing that it would be desirable to establish an international authority to assume responsibility for the administration of the territory;

Affirming the importance of respect for the principle of self-determination as expressed in the Charter of the United Nations;

Considering that the future status of the territory should be determined by its people in accordance with this principle;

Recognizing further the need for a full and impartial report regarding the territory;

1. Establishes a Commission composed of (three to five countries);

2. Requests the Commission: (a) to inquire into conditions in the territory;

(b) to consider and report on arrangements for bringing the territory during an interim period under the administration of a United Nations Authority established by and operating under the United Nations;

3. Declares further that this is without prejudice the people’s decision on the ultimate status of the territory;

4. Requests the Commission to report to the General Assembly at its Seventeenth Session;

5. Requests the Secretary General to make available to the Commission the necessary staff and administrative facilities.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/16/61–11/20/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Komer.

1 Secretary Rusk approved the recommendation in Document 201.

204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 204. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, November 29, 1961, 7:48 p.m.

577. Re Djakarta’s 975.1 Dept regrets that intense U.S. efforts over prolonged period help find viable way out of West New Guinea impasse were not successful in NY.2 We believe, however, that exercise has been very useful in that positions interested parties have been considerably clarified and exercise has had salutary effect on both parties. Most encouraging is now clear evidence that Dutch wish disengage from WNG at earliest time possible and that Dutch conditions are more flexible than as previously enunciated. On Indonesian side, believe they now more assured that Dutch in fact serious about getting out of WNG. Moreover, UN discussion of issue probably is most effective deterrent available to possible Indonesian use of force.

Dept wishes to consider carefully all implications GA consideration before deciding whether and in what direction further U.S. role should be undertaken. Dutch may be sticky on question bilateral talks now that “moral victory” achieved by them at UN. On other hand, they may be willing to engage in talks provided such bilateral discussions are without preconditions. For time being, however, until Dept has analyzed situation carefully you should avoid giving any precise indication as to what we believe next steps might be.

In discussions with Sukarno, you might keep to following general line: 1. U.S. fully understands respective Indonesian and Dutch positions and has exerted sincere efforts find way out of impasse, continuation of which we believe to be detrimental best interests both countries. Our objective with respect this issue continues, as in the past, to be to help parties concerned find peaceful solution.

2. We regret Indonesia could not, as we did, see Brazzaville res3 as realistic reflection present situation. In fact, in our judgment, Brazzaville res met fully both points made by Sukarno as reported in first para of urtel 968.4

3. We believe both sides now have made significant steps toward resolving this issue, and it our hope that UN debate can serve as springboard for further sincere efforts. Although both Brazzaville and Indian res defeated, voting pattern clearly demonstrates wide interests and views of other nations and can be interpreted both as rationale and as mandate for further efforts on part both sides seek solution.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–2961. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Lindquist and Sisco; cleared by Emmons, Blue, and Sullivan; and approved by McConaughy. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

1 In telegram 975, November 29, Jones asked for guidance on whether to continue to try to bring Indonesia and the Netherlands together on West New Guinea. Sukarno seemed calm about the issue and asked “where do we go from here?” (Ibid.)

2 On November 24, the U.S.-conceived resolution was sponsored and submitted by 13 African nations to the General Assembly. On November 27, the Assembly voted on the 13-nation resolution, which failed to receive the required two-thirds majority by a vote of 53 (U.S.) to 41 with 9 abstentions. For text of the draft 13-nation resolution (U.N. doc. A/L.368), see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, p. 963.

3 Reference is to the 13-nation resolution.

4 Telegram 968, November 28, reported that Sukarno’s points were: “(1) withdrawal of Dutch from administration of territory; (2) complete access by GOI to territory.” The telegram concluded: “Points made by Sukarno represent considerable alteration his original stand which in brief could be said to be either recognition Indonesian sovereignty or, alternatively, Indonesian administration of territory, as minimum GOI could accept.” (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/11–2861)

205. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 205. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource

Washington, December 1, 1961.

SUBJECT

West Irian

Attached are papers on the West Irian matter which the Secretary of State will be raising with you next Tuesday.1 These are worth careful study because most of the specialists in the area believe that the Secretary’s respect for the Australians and dislike of Sukarno has led him to take a position in the UN debate which, if continued, can only help the Communists. Sukarno, I know, is not your own favorite statesman, but the real point is that at the moment we seem to be working against the interest of the Indonesian moderates—our one reliance against eventual Communist take-over there.

At Tab A is a covering memorandum from Walt Rostow. At Tab B is a sensible account of the whole affair from Robert Johnson of the NSC staff. At Tab C are relevant cables and ticker stories.2

McG.B.3

Tab A4

Washington, November 30, 1961.

Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

As Bob Johnson’s attached account of the West Irian affair (and the batch of telegrams) indicate, we have come to the end of one phase and must design another.

After a meeting at the State Department today5 it was agreed that the Secretary will have a position to present to you next Tuesday. In the meanwhile, the Department will be reassessing the situation, including the political situation in both the Netherlands and Indonesia as it stands after the debate.

So far as Indonesia is concerned, we have had two distinct noises from Sukarno. One, reported in the attached telegram No. 975,6 is relatively pacific and conciliatory. The other is a speech made to the Indonesian Army Staff College on November 30 in which Sukarno is reported as saying that the “present moment is the proper time” to settle the West Irian question and that “he is going to issue orders soon about the liberation” of the area. There is no doubt that the Indonesians in New York are furious with us.

The general assessment is that Sukarno’s threat is psychological warfare, although it will have the effect of stiffening the Dutch and strengthening Luns’ position. On the other hand, Sukarno may not be able to control the impulse to seize West Irian if it gathers momentum and there is no alternative diplomatic path in sight.

The Dutch have been equally unhelpful. Today they have changed the name of West New Guinea to West Papua and given the place a new flag. This is likely to infuriate Djakarta.

This diplomatic crisis coincides with two economic facts:

1. At the moment Indonesia is suffering a grave balance of payments crisis; and

2. There is a distinct upsurge of interest and concern with longer run economic development, centered around one of Sukarno’s possible successors, Chaerul Saleh, who was recently in the U.S.

One can conceive of the Russians assessing this moment as an occasion to make a double-barreled move: to push Sukarno towards war and to urge him to draw down his more than $500,000,000 in economic aid commitment from the Bloc. If this is the way things go, Sukarno would be isolated from the Western community diplomatically, increasingly dependent on the Bloc, the local Communist Party would be powerfully strengthened, and the hand of the moderates in Indonesia gravely weakened.

There is also the possibility of a double-barreled Western move: to press the Dutch towards a bilateral negotiation with Indonesia and to take measures to help Indonesia through its short-run crisis while beginning to work more systematically with those in Indonesia concerned with economic development.

With respect to the latter, Don Humphrey is filing his report on the Indonesian economy, which resulted from the first of your discussions with Sukarno in April. It is a good, sensible, and not unhopeful, report.

It is the feeling of all of us on your staff that the Western world has got to consider this problem somewhat less in terms of the pure diplomacy of West Irian and more in terms of a common interest in frustrating Communism in Indonesia. The Australians would benefit little from holding West Irian out of Indonesian hands if all of Indonesia should go Communist. In our view Communism in Indonesia is not inevitable. We have important advantages in the Indonesian army; in the younger Nationalists symbolized by Saleh; and in the predominant desire of the Indonesians to remain independent.

On the other hand, there is a powerful and well led Communist Party; and the Soviets have put up $833,000,000 in military credits, more than $500,000,000 in economic aid commitments. They understand well that this is a crucial piece of real estate.

I sense after today’s meeting that the State Department will move towards increased pressure on the Dutch to talk directly with the Indonesians. If we go that route, I think it will be important to persuade the Australians of the wisdom of looking at the problem rather more in terms of salvaging Indonesia from Communism and rather less in terms of the classic question of West Irian itself.

I know of no one in the town who does not believe that, soon or late, the Indonesians will get West Irian. If this is indeed the way it will go, it may be important for us to work with this trend, using it for the common benefit, rather than permitting the Communists to continue to exploit this issue to press Indonesia closer to the Communist Bloc externally and towards Communism internally.

A final word. We must move fast. In the wake of the UN fiasco both the Dutch and the Indonesians may do things which will quickly heighten tensions. In fact, as of today, they have both started down that track.

Tab B7

Washington, November 30, 1961.

Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

Background

At the Round Table Conference of November 1949 at which Indonesia was granted its independence from The Netherlands, the two sides were unable to agree upon the future of New Guinea. They agreed that its status should be determined by negotiations within a year of Indonesian independence. The Indonesians were under the impression that the Dutch had tabled the issue as a face-saving device to facilitate ratification of the Round Table agreement by the Dutch Parliament and that once ratification had been obtained, the Dutch would yield the territory to Indonesia. Negotiations in 1950–55 failed to produce agreement. Indonesia bases its claim to the territory primarily on the grounds that it was part of the Netherlands East Indies of which the Republic of Indonesia became the successor state. Indonesia’s claim is essentially that of any nationalist movement to the territory it identifies, because of past association, with the nation. The Dutch argue that geologically, ethnically and culturally the territory is distinct from Indonesia.

Indonesia has consistently sought UN action on a resolution calling for bilateral talks between Indonesia and The Netherlands. When it failed in 1957 to get a two-thirds majority, Sukarno took over all Dutch assets in Indonesia. When the Dutch sent an aircraft carrier and military reenforcements to West New Guinea in mid-1960, Indonesia broke diplomatic negotiations and concluded a $500 million arms deal with the USSR. This arms aid has been subsequently increased to over $830 million.

The issue of West New Guinea has been central to Indonesian politics, has diverted attention from Indonesia’s main task of nation-building, has been exploited by the Communist Party (which is nearly the largest outside the Bloc) and has been exploited by Sukarno as a means of frustrating opposition to himself and his policies. Thus a very heavy price has been paid by the Dutch and by the West more generally. We are approaching the point where the stake may be the future orientation of Indonesia itself.

Recent Developments and the Current Situation

In the past UN votes on Indonesian resolutions calling for bilateral talks, the U.S. has regularly abstained. We have taken a somewhat equivocal position with the Dutch on the question of whether we would be prepared to support them with U.S. forces in the event of an attack on West New Guinea. As a result of talks with Luns last spring the Dutch have, at least, been left in considerable doubt as to whether such support would be forthcoming.

This Administration, recognizing the great difficulties we should be in if the Indonesians did attack, has made a more active effort than has ever been made by the U.S. before to find a solution. Initially we attempted to float a proposal for a UN trusteeship under Malaya. When this failed to obtain support, we switched to a proposal for the establishment of a UN commission to investigate the problem and make recommendations. We had a series of talks with both the Indonesians and the Dutch. The result of those talks was to increase somewhat the apparent flexibility on both sides. However, neither side ever fully accepted our proposal.

It was never absolutely clear in these negotiations what true Dutch intentions might be. On the other hand, there were hints that their real purpose was to find a face-saving way to turn West New Guinea over to Indonesia. There is a significant body of opinion in The Netherlands that would favor, or at least accept, such a course. Foreign Minister Luns, on the other hand, has seemed intent to devise a formula that would keep West New Guinea out of Indonesian hands.

When the General Assembly convened this fall the Dutch introduced a resolution providing for the establishment of an interim UN administration to be followed by a self-determination plebiscite. This represented progress in the sense that it clearly provided for Dutch relinquishment of control. The Indonesians, however, were unwilling to accept more than a facade of self-determination. We resisted Dutch pressure to support their resolution, but stated that it represented an advance. We never indicated to the Dutch officially that we considered self-determination a meaningless facade when applied to stone-age people almost totally lacking in contact with the modern world.

Instead of supporting the Dutch proposal we launched a new version of our proposal for a UN commission to investigate the problem and make recommendations. The commission was to examine the possibilities of establishing an interim international administration. Various changes were made in the resolution to meet Dutch and Indonesian objections. The Brazzaville powers were finally persuaded to sponsor it. The Dutch finally went along with this resolution, but the Indonesians rejected it. The Indians also introduced a resolution reflecting the long-standing Indonesian position requesting bilateral talks between the Dutch and the Indonesians. The Brazzaville (U.S.) resolution was subsequently amended to call for such talks but to set a deadline of March 1 after which the UN commission would begin its work.

The U.S. decided to give full support to the Brazzaville resolution and to oppose all others. We were able to persuade the Dutch to withdraw their resolution, but the Indians would not withdraw theirs. The Brazzaville resolution was voted first. It was amended to delete a reference to self-determination, but failed to get the necessary two-thirds majority. We voted against the Indian resolution and it also failed to get a two-thirds majority. Thus, the net result of our many months of activity was not to produce the solution acceptable to both sides, which we had sought, but to vote against the Indonesians twice. Our vote on the Indian resolution represented a complete switch from our previous position of neutrality on such Indonesian-sponsored requests for bilateral talks.

The moderate forces in Indonesia, led by General Nasution, pled with us not to align ourselves with the Dutch on the West New Guinea issue. Nasution has used all of his influence to restrain preparations for an attack on West New Guinea and to seek a negotiated solution. Though full reaction has not been obtained from Djakarta, and Sukarno was taking a relatively moderate line a few days prior to the vote, the reaction of the Indonesian delegation in New York (including the moderates in the delegation) has been bitterly anti-U.S. A news dispatch indicates that Sukarno has stated that the “present moment” was the proper time for liberation of West New Guinea. The Dutch meanwhile have apparently flaunted Indonesian feelings by further steps to create a West New Guinea government.

Conclusions and Recommendations

There is only one solution of the West New Guinea issue that will be permanent and that will remove it from Indonesian politics, and that is Indonesian control. Indonesian control is inevitable and is even, recognized to be so by reasonable Dutch such as the Dutch Ambassador to the U.S.

The Indonesians are going through a foreign exchange crisis. This fact may restrain them from attacking West New Guinea. On the other hand, it might drive them only further into Soviet hands for economic aid, while the Soviets support and encourage an attack upon West New Guinea. In any event, the pressures upon Nasution are going to mount until they become irresistible unless there is real hope of progress through negotiations. An attack could so preoccupy the army as to open new opportunities to the Communists in Indonesia. The fact that the attack was launched with Soviet aid and support will also markedly strengthen the Communist position.

On the other side, Luns may be in serious trouble in The Netherlands because of the failure of his policy. Pressures in The Netherlands for a negotiation may mount.

We have exhausted all of the possible variations on UN action for the present. The only hope for a settlement appears to lie in negotiations. We can improve the prospects for negotiations if we apply pressure to the Dutch. Luns has insisted that recognition of the principles of self-determination is a prior condition to any negotiations. We must apply pressure to get him to agree to eliminate that condition. It may be that a combination of Luns’ failure and our pressure could change the situation within the Dutch Government itself in a favorable direction. In this connection we surely should exploit such capital as we have developed with the Dutch by lining up with them in the UN.

The position of the Australians is central in the Secretary of State’s thinking. It was after a conversation with the Australian Ambassador that he decided we should switch from the role of intermediary to that of active sponsor of a resolution. The Australians must be made to see that it is in their long-term interests that this issue is resolved in such a way as not to risk the loss of Indonesia to Communism. Before they reverse their present pro-Dutch position on West New Guinea they may need further assurances from the Indonesians that the latter have no designs on Australian East New Guinea.

Pressure on the Dutch to undertake really serious negotiations will probably cause some temporary difficulties in our relations with them. But our experience in 1948–1949 when we were applying similar pressures in connection with the negotiations for Indonesian independence, as well as our other experience with such problems, indicates that the effects will not be long-lasting.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/1/61–12/5/61. Secret. A note on the source text indicates this was part of the President’s weekend reading book for December 1.

1 December 5. McGeorge Bundy wrote the following note in the margin at this point: “He may have done so this AM.” According to Rusk’s appointment book, he met the President at 10 a.m. on December 1. There was an NSC meeting on the Volta River Project on December 5, which both Kennedy and Rusk attended. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book; Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) No record of the Rusk-Kennedy conversation has been found.

2 Tab C was not attached.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

4 Secret.

5 No record of this meeting has been found.

6 See footnote 1, Document 204.

7 Secret.

206. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 206. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, November 30, 1961.

WWR

Need for Movement on West Irian

I heartily second Bob Johnson’s plaintive memos on West Irian.1 Fortunately, we’ve just been saved from the worst consequences of our recent attempt to walk down the middle by the failure of our resolution in the UN. But time is running out; Indo preparations to force the issue by a military move will create a crisis next year.

The important thing is not to lose sight of the purpose of the exercise. Inevitably West Irian will go sooner or later to Indonesia. The only question is will it go with our help, and in such a way that we get some credit for it, or will this issue be left on a silver platter for the Bloc? All the economic and military aid we could give Sukarno would buy us far less than supporting him on this irredentist obsession. Moreover, he’s gotten Indos solidly behind him on it; even Nasution and the army back him.

So with the failure of our UN gambit, the time has come to take the gloves off, and adopt a frankly pro-Indonesian stance while there’s still time to get some political capital out of it. We, the Dutch, and Australians must face up to the fact that in time we’ll have to accept Indo hegemony over West Irian anyway and might as well roll with the punch. Continuation of our present policies won’t stop the inevitable; indeed it will only result in greater likelihood of losing Indonesia itself to the Bloc. With $833,000,000 in military and $600,000,000 in economic aid commitments, does anybody doubt that Bloc regards this key piece of real estate as a very choice target? Add that Aidit runs the largest and best organized free Asian CP and may well win the power struggle which will ensue upon Sukarno’s demise, and we have real cause for concern. CPI is making real hay on Irian issue. Yet we are not paying a tenth the attention to this incipient crisis in “offshore” SEA that we are to Laos, much less Vietnam.

Nor would we risk overriding complications with our allies. There are growing indications that Dutch are tiring of this hopeless issue. Their stand on self-determination is largely a product of Luns’ fanaticism. I can’t believe that Netherlands would quit NATO or otherwise cut off its nose to spite its face if we switched our policy (any more than Belgians have on Congo or even Portugal on Angola).

Australia is the real problem. Rusk was apparently swayed most recently by Spender’s passionate plea. Aussies are petrified over thought that if Indos get West Irian they’ll start on Papua next. But can’t we get across to Menzies how short-sighted Aussie policy is? West Irian or even all of this neanderthal island under Indonesian sovereignty would be an infinitely smaller threat to Australia than if Indonesia as a whole went behind the Curtain. Indeed, why shouldn’t Aussies insist on iron-clad guarantees for Papua as their price for acquiescing in West Irian switch.

US still has time before Sukarno in frustration mounts a military attack on West Irian and precipitates the crisis, or his death brings a CP bid for power. If we are to use this time wisely, however, we have to get the President personally to weigh in on State. Now that UN gambit has failed, time has come for him to press Rusk on why we shouldn’t now lean on Aussies and Dutch.

Indonesia would be worth Task Force treatment as device to overcome Foggy Bottom lethargy. What say?

Robert W. Komer2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 11/21/61–11/30/61. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Schlesinger, and Robert Johnson.

1 The most recent was Tab B to Document 205.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

207. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 207. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 8, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

I picked up at the State Department this morning both an FE draft of the letter from the President to Sukarno1 and a draft of the recommendations section of the broader paper on West New Guinea which has been in preparation this week.2 There was a meeting at 11:00 this morning, attended by Mr. Harriman and Harlan Cleveland, at which the FE draft was tabled along with a separate draft from IO. The discussion continued during the lunch hour and the formal meeting reconvened at 2:15. I have no information on the outcome of the meeting yet.3

The FE draft recommendations contain an interesting tactical proposal for creation of a bilateral Dutch-Indonesian “technical commission” to deal with the issues outstanding between the two countries. (This would bypass preconditions both sides have laid down for discussions of WNG alone.) However, like every State Department paper that has been produced on West New Guinea, this one is terribly fuzzy on the subject of exactly what kind of solution we would like to see. Even more important, it contains no recognition whatsoever of the fact that negotiations can succeed, and can hold but some promise to the Indonesians of succeeding, only if we are prepared to use our influence with the Dutch to attempt to get them to negotiate seriously and to recognize that self-determination is not the final answer. I believe that the fundamental reason for this continuous fuzziness if our failure to recognize clearly that West New Guinea is ultimately going to go to Indonesia and that the real problem is to find a way to effect the transfer. The reasons for the fuzziness are complex, but they include the divisions within the Department, and the Secretary’s dislike for Sukarno and concern over Australian views.

The FE draft of the letter from the President to Sukarno was defective in three respects:

a. It failed to exploit the point that Ambassador Jones has made—that whatever else the Indonesians may feel about our actions in the UN, they do recognize (and could be reminded) that our talks with the Dutch resulted in a Dutch decision to give up West New Guinea.

b. The heart of the message was a simple offer to help the disputants find a solution by direct negotiations. It did not state that we would use our influence with the Dutch in an effort to find a solution that can be accepted by Indonesia. The key to a solution is a change in the Dutch attitude (and to a slightly lesser extent, in the Australian attitude). The Indonesians have long wanted us to use our influence with the Dutch and Sukarno indicated in his recent conversation with Jones that this was the kind of specific help he is now seeking. Without such an indication our offer will not have the specific content that Jones has requested. It will have much the same flavor as previous efforts at reassurance. Such general reassurances have been employed so often that their value has been depreciated, particularly since Sukarno takes the view, with some justification, that our actions in the UN indicated not that we wanted a solution acceptable to both sides but rather that we were abandoning our policy of neutrality and siding with the Dutch.

c. The FE draft contained a reference to the possibility that, if the Indonesians took military action, friend might be pitted against friend. It seemed to me that this has the flavor of a threat that we would intervene on the side of the Dutch—something that we have not decided (and I hope never will decide) to do.

I have made all of the above points to the FE drafter of the message but have been unable to make them to those actually involved in the State meetings because of my inability to reach them. The FE drafter indicated that the point referred to in c above was put in, not in the expectation that it would be left in the final version, but rather as a stimulus to consideration of the alternatives by which we may be faced.

I have discussed the FE draft in some detail because, for all of its caution, it probably represents the “extreme” end of the spectrum. What we can expect to receive will be even less clear-cut and even further from what is required. This discussion may be useful background to our reaction to the State draft.

State is attempting to get a draft letter prepared today. It fears that if we wait until the President returns tomorrow the message may not get to Jones in time.

A recent message from London indicates that the British, who have previously thought that the U.S. was too exercised about the West New Guinea problem, now consider the situation most dangerous.4 This development can be used by us if we ever decide clearly on our own position. We should be able to build on the British concern as a means of getting them to influence the Australians away from their very short-sighted policy.

I learned that there is no contingency planning covering U.S. action in the event that the Dutch do attack West New Guinea.5 I suspect that one reason why there is no such plan is the impossibility of the choices. Nonetheless, I think that one thing that would be useful at this stage would be a request that such contingency planning be initiated. It would be one way of forcing us to face up to the ultimate choices and to weigh the importance of the ultimate loss of Indonesia against the danger of our relationships to the Dutch and the Australians.6

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/6/61–12/10/61. Secret.

1 For the letter as approved and sent and a related cable, see Documents 210 and 209, respectively.

2 The recommendations section apparently became the basis of Document 209.

3 No other records of these meetings have been found.

4 Not further identified.

5 An INR estimate assessed the military balance between the Dutch and Indonesian forces in the context of West New Guinea: Military intelligence officers were unsure of Indonesian amphibious and airlift capabilities and were skeptical of Indonesian ability to airlift many troops. The Dutch had three destroyers, miscellaneous smaller naval craft, and some naval patrol aviation, but there was little information on Dutch air strength in West New Guinea. INR concluded that, in general, “the Dutch could take care of themselves if attacked.” Rusk initialed the estimate. (Memorandum from Howells to Swank, December 8; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–861)

6 Johnson added the following handwritten postscript: “I have just learned that WNG is presently being discussed with the Secretary in a meeting attended by Harriman and Rostow. I have also heard from the FE desk-officer that subsequent drafts of the message which he has seen are weaker than the FE draft as I expected.”

208. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Palm Beach, Florida 208. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Palm Beach, FloridaSource

Washington, December 8, 1961.

CAP 5420–61. Here are two cables to Jones.1 One is your letter to Sukarno. The second is guidance to Jones. These cables move towards views of Rostow and others who have been critical of our UN position. If you want to go further, your letter could include an offer of direct efforts with Dutch somewhat as described in next to last paragraph of guidance to Jones. Letter could also be slightly warmer in tone and could refer to helicopter which has just arrived.2

Language about use of force in guidance to Jones seems strong to me, but it is important to bear in mind these cables are aimed simply and specifically at preventing a Sukarno decision to order force in Monday meeting. Question Jones has raised is whether such warnings work. Question we raise is whether we will want to take so strong a stand if in fact Sukarno moves.

I will talk to Harriman and others and be fully briefed when you call.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, Oct.–Dec. 1961: Secret; Operational Immediate. Sent to Evelyn Lincoln, the President’s secretary, for the President.

1 Not printed. The draft cables are almost identical to the cables as sent, Documents 209 and 210.

2 During his April 24–25 visit to Washington, Sukarno was offered a helicopter for his own use. It arrived in Djakarta on December 6. (Telegram 1009 from Djakarta, December 6; Department of State, Central Files, 798.5622/12–661)

3 No record of the President’s call to Bundy has been found.

209. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 209. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, December 9, 1961, 4:06 p.m.

601. Re: West New Guinea. Dept has provided you with Presidential letter (next fol tel)1 which we wish you give Sukarno soonest. In addition, we wish you make following points as appropriate to Sukarno as US position at time presentation letter. We have kept letter general, but believe important that reasoned oral presentation be made to Sukarno on three principal points; (a) use of force; (b) US role in UN; (c) future efforts US to facilitate solution.

A. Use of Force—You should make clear to Sukarno calmly and resolutely our unalterable and firm opposition to use of force by Indonesians.

In face strong feeling in GA in favor peaceful approach, and 53 votes in favor self-determination and UN administration, Sukarno would have little or no support in world if at this critical juncture he were to seek achieve his objectives by means of force. (FYI. Even if he had the means, which he presently does not. End FYI.) You should leave Sukarno with no doubt that use of force would undoubtedly bring UN consideration of this matter where US and preponderant majority would have no alternative but stand against Indonesia. Moreover, such action would alienate world opinion to point where present opportunities which exist for Indonesia achieve its objectives by peaceful means would be irreparably prejudiced. FYI. We do not like pressure tactics being used on us by Sukarno, and we believe you should make every effort dispel any notions he may still have that US would countenance use of force in these circumstances. End FYI.

B. US role in UN—We believe Sukarno does not fully understand or appreciate role we tried play in UN. Following for use in your discretion: 1) It not question being in favor of Dutch as against Indonesians. We were objective, not neutral. Our policy was based on assumption one critical change had occurred: a Dutch decision to get out of WNG provided this could be done in honorable way by means internationalizing problem and with some provision for exercise self-determination by Papuans. We sought facilitate withdrawal Dutch as first step, a step which we know Indonesians favor. We sought do this by side-stepping sovereignty issue, and by pinning Dutch to commitment to get out once UN administration established. This was to be done without prejudice to ultimate status of territory. We therefore actively sought way to help Indonesians, as Ambassador Stevenson indicated in NY, achieve 90 percent of what they wanted in first instance on assumption there was great likelihood that other 10 percent could be achieved by peaceful means. We believe Indonesians have seriously underestimated advantages Brazzaville res2 in getting Dutch out and substituting UN administration which would provide Indonesians with all opportunity it wants to achieve its objective by peaceful means.

2) We think your conversation indicates you have made headway with Sukarno and that gap has been narrowed between parties as result UN consideration. We hope Sukarno is convinced by now that Dutch are completely serious about getting out of WNG and that UN administration, which would provide Indonesia with access to WNG, would offer opportunity achieve their objectives by peaceful means. This was purpose Brazzaville res. You should continue drive home our belief Indonesia has best chance achieve its objectives by peaceful means if it does not insist that transfer WNG from Dutch to Indonesia must be achieved in one bite. Our impression is that it primarily question finding face-saving device so Dutch can get out. Dutch can and would get out so long as a UN administration (not including Indonesia) is set up. As long as Sukarno insists Indonesia must be sole administrator there can be no acceptance by Dutch or Australians.

3) You should explore further why it is Indonesians not willing proceed on basis of UN administration which would permit Indonesians full access to territory. We fully aware that present Dutch influence in WNG is such that if self-determination were exercised in immediate future result not likely be favorable to Indonesians. However, with time and full access to territory, Indonesians should be in position exercise their influence. It seems to us that timing of exercise self-determination by Papuans could be adjusted in such way so that Indonesians would have sufficient time exercise its influence in WNG. We believe Dutch would not object WNG going to Indonesia in such circumstances.

FYI. US relations with Australia are at least as important as our relations with Indonesians or Dutch. Australians feel at least as strongly as Dutch that transfer from Dutch to Indonesia (even though cloaked with facade of sole Indonesian UN administration) would be unacceptable. End FYI.

4) We note Indonesians keep coming back to point that US should not have requested publicly in GA that Indian and Dutch reses3 not be pressed to vote. One reason why we did this was we had been told frequently by Indonesians that best result from their point view would be if no res adopted. If Indonesians had accepted our counsel, this would have been achieved without embarrassing defeat Indian res, which we and Indonesians knew well before vote would be result if Indian res pressed to vote.

C. US Role in Future—You should also point out to Sukarno we would be prepared to play behind scenes role in order help bring about amicable solution. In first instance, we prepared explore with Dutch what first steps might be feasible to this end. In this connection, we encouraged by urtel 1024 which indicated Indonesians hope that we will take initiative in bringing about bilateral talks.4 You can assure Sukarno that US stands fully by Bingham speech in GA.5

In summary you should seek to persuade Sukarno that if he does not give a signal for force on Monday, we can and will intensify our efforts with Dutch and with Australians and will hope to be able to indicate significant progress to him as these efforts proceed.

We intend inform Dutch here of dispatch Presidential letter to Sukarno, indicating reasons for its dispatch and general contents.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, Cleveland, Emmons, U. Alexis Johnson, Rostow, Ball, and Battle; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

1 Document 210.

2 The 13-nation resolution; see footnote 2, Document 204.

3 The Indian draft resolution, U.N. doc. A/1367 (the 9-power resolution) was submitted to the General Assembly on November 20. As revised, it called for bilateral negotiations between the Netherlands and Indonesia under the aegis of the President of the General Assembly. The Indian resolution was voted upon on November 27, but failed to receive the required two-thirds majority. The Dutch draft resolution, U.N. doc. A/L.354, submitted on October 9, called for creation of a U.N. Commission for Netherlands New Guinea to examine the conditions in the territory, assess the opinion of the population about its future, look into the possibility of organizing a plebiscite, and inquire about the desirability and possibility of bringing the territory under U.N. authority during an interim period. It was never voted upon.

4 In telegram 1024, December 8, Jones reported that Subandrio expressed the hope that the United States take the initiative in bringing about Dutch-Indonesian bilateral talks. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–861)

5 The speech is printed in full in Department of State Bulletin, January 8, 1962, pp. 69–76; the portion on West New Guinea is also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 961–963.

210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 210. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, December 9, 1961, 4:07 p.m.

602. Please deliver following letter from President Kennedy to President Sukarno soonest. Separate cable gives instructions on points you should make orally to Sukarno at earliest appropriate time.

“December 9.

Dear Mr. President:

Ambassador Jones has promptly reported to me your discussion on December 8 on West Irian.1 I am naturally deeply concerned over the views you expressed to him.

I am taking the liberty of giving you my frank comments in the spirit of the very profitable discussions we have had together in Washington.

I have asked Ambassador Jones to have a further, frank and full discussion with you on this subject for I am convinced there is far from a full understanding of what we have been trying to do, in the United Nations and in private talks with your people and the Dutch, to help get West Irian off the list of dangerously unsettled international issues.

The airing of this matter in the United Nations served, as open debate so often does, to stir up some contentious issues. But the whole experience of the past few months has, in our judgment, narrowed the gap between the Dutch position and your own. Some definitive action which will result in the Dutch relinquishing their position in the territory, and give Indonesia a greatly enlarged opportunity to influence the territory’s future, now seems a wholly realistic prospect.

In these circumstances, we are quite ready to play whatever role you and the Dutch think would be useful in helping to work through this situation in a manner that accords with the principles of peaceful settlement of international disputes, a principle to which both our nations have contributed much.

Meanwhile, as a friend and one deeply interested in Indonesia maintaining her respected place in the family of nations, I most earnestly hope that you will avoid the use of force to settle the future of West Irian. All your friends will honor you for refraining from any attempt to bypass the sometimes difficult but always necessary processes of peaceful settlement, and more sympathy can then be mustered around the world for Indonesia’s position. But more than this, the use of force would make it very difficult for me to be as helpful as I would like to be in working out a satisfactory resolution of this matter.

After Ambassador Jones has had the opportunity further to explore this whole question with you, I will look forward keenly to an indication from you how we might most usefully contribute to a peaceful outcome.

Signed John F. Kennedy”.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–961. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution; Verbatim Text. Drafted by Steeves and Cleveland; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, Ball, Emmons, U. Alexis Johnson, Rostow, and Battle; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

1 In telegram 1018 from Djakarta, Jones reported that Sukarno had told him he was “shattered” by the U.S. abandonment of its historic position of neutrality during the U.N. General Assembly debate on West New Guinea. No denials by Jones could convince Sukarno that the United States had not abandoned its policy of neutrality. Sukarno remained adamant that the U.S. officials at the United Nations had supported the Dutch and stated that he must now consider the use of force. Since he was meeting with his military service chiefs on December 11, Sukarno stated he needed to know if the United States had any proposals before that meeting. (Ibid., 656.9813/12–861)

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 211. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, December 11, 1961, 4 p.m.

1033. Embtel 1025.1 President was in irritable mood when I arrived at Palace. He had been up entire previous night watching shadow play performance of old Javanese myths, a favorite pastime of his when weighing important decisions. What set him off, however, was report in press of Dutch Prime Minister’s statement to Parliament.

Because of his mood he was difficult to handle, constantly interrupting with emotional outbursts against the Dutch as I made points contained in Deptel 601.2 Nevertheless I managed to cover all the ground in detail, and in the end I was talking to him like a Dutch uncle for first time in my relationship with him and he was taking it.

Upshot was that although he made no commitment as to any specific course of action, by indirection—“I can’t wait too long; there isn’t much time; I can’t hold back my people much longer;” et cetera—he made it clear any military action would be deferred pending promised US initiative which he said he would welcome greatly.

Perhaps most telling point I was able to make was when President was talking about Indonesian youth becoming impatient, “fed up”, as he said, with hearing about peaceful solution which did not come to pass.

“Mr. President,” I said, “I know you pretty well. Here you are in a position where attainment of your objectives by peaceful means is in sight. Almost you could say it is just around the corner. I know that you would never forgive yourself if you sacrificed the lives of your young people while a solution was so close. What would the verdict of history be?”

This argument seemed to strike home, and Sukarno rather than resenting my comments, looked solemn and thoughtful. Then his mood changed again and he returned to the charge against the Dutch.

“I am fed up to here,” he burst out, holding his hands at eye level to make his point. “I can’t stand any more of it.”

Again I argued that it made no sense after being patient for so long to resort to force just at the moment when long sought goal was in sight.

Sukarno dramatically pressed his closed fists against the sides of his head. “I can’t believe it,” he said. “The Dutch won’t do it (relinquish sovereignty in West Irian or transfer administration to Indonesia).”

“You don’t know the Dutch,” Sukarno declared. “The only thing the Dutch understand is the use of force.” The US, Sukarno said, should “go to the Dutch and tell them.”

“That’s just what we are proposing to do,” I replied. “We are proposing to go and sound them out as to the next steps that can be taken. But we cannot do this if you are going to take precipitate action.”

“Time, time, time,” the President retorted excitedly. “I have run out of patience and we are running out of time. My people are impatient. There will be a mass meeting of one million people this week to demand that I give them the order to march on West Irian. What will I tell them? They already think I am getting soft, getting too old for action.”

“You are the best judge of what to say to your own people,” I said, “but as between peace and war to gain your objective, as long as there is a chance of a political solution, your people will choose peace.”

“No,” the President retorted sharply; “they would not; our youth are getting too impatient.”

At this point I asked if I were correct in my feeling that he appreciated the proposed US initiative.

“Yes,” Sukarno said warmly, “I appreciate it very much. If your people will talk to the Dutch I’ll appreciate that deeply, and please thank President Kennedy for his letter.” He went on to ask when he could expect to hear something, and I pointed out that these things take time, and there was no way I could assure him when progress could be reported.

I asked whether he would inform his military leaders at peace-or-war meeting December 11 of President Kennedy’s message and my comments, and he replied that he would, but he soon swung back to his favorite subject.

“Luns, Luns, Luns,” he burst out. “He is full of hate. He’s a scoundrel: The USG is going to have to tell him he’s got to transfer admin to Indonesia.”

I reminded him that he had said in his previous conversation with me that what he wanted was access to the territory and was willing to borrow the hand of the UN to achieve this. I went on to reassert our belief that he should seek to solve the problem not in one bite but in two.

Sukarno nodded and said he would accept that he would go along with a UN admin, but that when he had said he was willing to borrow the hand of the UN he had meant he was willing to do so for the purpose of transferring admin to Indonesia.

We then discussed the question of self-determination. “You aren’t giving self-determination to Katanga in the Congo, are you?” Sukarno asked. “How about self-determination for Texas? You must understand I can’t accept self-determination for a part of our territory.”

I pointed out that in our past conversation, Sukarno had said he was willing to accept a plebiscite.

“Yes,” he said. “I will accept a plebiscite reaffirming Indonesian sovereignty after we have had admin of the territory for a period.”

I indicated there was considerable doubt as to achieving that, but I couldn’t budge his position. Nevertheless my impression was he was not as tough on this point as he seemed, might be persuaded if settlement were in sight.

When I made the point that the US was unalterably opposed to the use of force and we were convinced that world opinion would be against Indonesia if they resorted to force, Sukarno retorted, “even peaceful India is about to use force in Goa.”

He then said, moodily, “there comes a time when a man must do what he must do. And at that time, he has to disregard everybody else.”

“No Mr. President,” I countered. “Not when he has a reasonable alternative. A young boy will kick or strike out just because he is controlled by his emotions. But a mature man who has acquired wisdom will weigh the alternative.” I thought perhaps I had gone too far at this point but the President nodded, sighed “yes, a man needs wisdom, great wisdom.”

He then noted that George Washington had paid no attention to those who counselled him it was wrong to wage war against the British.

There was a basic difference, I pointed out. We had exhausted all peaceful means; as in the case of his own revolution, we felt only force was left to us. The question he faced was to attain the objective by peaceful means. I was certain, I said, he would not wish to do this. Sukarno nodded, “you are right, of course.” But he was discouraged and did not believe the Dutch would ever agree to any solution which would result in Indonesia acquiring the territory. “You owe it to yourself, your people and the world to give us a chance to try,” I argued. “We have agreed to talk to the Dutch, but we have to have time.”

“Please tell President Kennedy,” Sukarno said finally, “first, I thank him for his letter; second, that I welcome your approaching the Dutch; third, that we do not have much time. We are not asking for the Dutch to acknowledge Indo sovereignty over WNG. But we do insist on Indo administration of the territory.”

I adverted to what Subandrio had said December 8 Embtel 1024 about the desirability of bilateral negotiations.3

“Yes,” the President said. “But the Dutch must come to the conference table without reservations, without pre-conditions, such as self-determination. And they must be willing to see administration turned over to Indo. If through borrowing the hand of the UN, all right.” But he made it clear he was thinking of a short period, a year, after which Indo would be the administrator.

We closed our conversation by my asking him which was his favorite Wajang Kulit (shadow play) character.

Without hesitation, Sukarno replied that the Warrior King was his favorite. He never permitted a Wajang Kulit show at the Palace unless this particular character appeared in it. “He’s the one I am interested in,” Sukarno said.

Comment: This extraordinary interview seems to me highly revealing of the kind of man with whom we are dealing. There is no question that when I first saw Sukarno, he was rarin-tearin ready to go. Javanese mysticism which is an important part of his makeup was clearly ascendant. I am satisfied that President Kennedy’s letter has brought him back to reality for the time being. The important thing is that we press vigorously for settlement while this period of relative calm lasts.

I shall endeavor to see Subandrio again tomorrow, review the matter with him in detail and obtain his impressions of the “war or peace” meeting.4

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1161. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, and USUN.

1 In telegram 1025, December 11, Jones reported that Documents 209 and 210 arrived in time for Jones to take when he drove to Bogor Palace after dinner on the night of December 10. At Bogor, Sukarno, who was then in his pyjamas, received Jones. In Jones’ view, “the message saved the day.” Jones promised a detailed report of the discussion. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1161)

2 Document 209.

3 See footnote 4, Document 209.

4 Jones saw Subandrio on December 13 to review the question and his discussion with Sukarno. Subandrio stated that Sukarno’s speech would be in its usual rousing style, but would not precipitate action against West Irian. (Telegram 1047 from Djakarta, December 13; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1361)

212. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 212. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

I think you might want to raise at the planning lunch today the question of the report to the President on West New Guinea.1 This activity last week was caught up in and superseded by the work on Friday on the letter from the President to Sukarno and related instructions.2 Follow-up talks with the Dutch, Australians and British were held yesterday.3 They were told that we took a very serious view of the situation and were invited to offer suggestions as to where we go from here. Replies should be received in the next several days.

I fear that in the absence of a really thorough consideration of the whole problem, the negotiating effort in which we may now become involved will lack a sense of clear direction. There seems to be a considerable reluctance in the government to take any kind of clear-cut decision on the problem. I do not know what views the President has expressed on this problem in connection with work on the draft telegrams last weekend. However, so far as I can tell, the only change that was made in the telegrams was to shift the location of the paragraph referring to the President’s discussions with Sukarno up to an earlier place in the telegram.

Perhaps the President is satisfied that the general approach we are taking is a desirable one. However, I think he ought to be given an opportunity to face the entire question in a more systematic fashion than he has been given an opportunity to do to date.

The differences within State on this subject are so considerable that any paper produced by the normal coordination process is likely to be quite lacking in clarity of purpose or direction of action. I suggest that you explore at the planning lunch today two possible alternative approaches to the preparation of a general paper:

a. A coordinated paper prepared in State which would outline clear-cut alternative approaches. This would give FE, IO and EUR each an opportunity to submit its own alternative approach.

b. A paper prepared by the Policy Planning Council and containing a single set of recommendations submitted after receiving comments from other parts of the State Department but without full coordination.

I would recommend the alternative proposed in a.4

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/11/61–12/15/61. Secret. Also sent to Kaysen, who replaced Rostow as the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs as of December 1. Rostow became Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of its Policy Planning Council.

1 At the apparent instigation of William P. Bundy, an interagency group began to discuss various foreign policy questions informally over lunch on Tuesdays in the summer of 1961. Bundy’s records of some of these meetings are in Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240. Additional accounts are scattered in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330. No complete set has been found nor has a discussion of Indonesia on December 12 been located.

2 See Documents 209 and 210.

3 Reported in telegram 514 to The Hague, December 11; telegram 277 to Canberra, December 11; and telegram 3219 to London, December 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1261 and 656.9813/12–1361)

4 In a December 12 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Komer offered a “hearty amen” to Johnson’s memorandum. “How the devil,” Komer asked, ”do we get President and SecState to focus on problems like these which, though not immediate, are those where intelligent anticipatory action will save us all sorts of later grief?” Komer continued, “West Irian is going to Indonesia. Our problem is how best to accommodate to this trend, and to use it if possible to our advantage. If we can get the President and Secretary to start from this premise, the rest will fall into place.” Komer asked if another planning paper was not the best way to get Kennedy and Rusk to focus on the issue. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/11/61–12/15/61)

213. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Paris 213. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at ParisSource

Washington, December 13, 1961, 9:29 p.m.

Tosec 60. For Secretary. Reports from Embassy Djakarta reinforced by Harriman discussion with Indo Chargé today1 indicate that content of Sukarno speech to WNG rally now scheduled Dec 19 might be influenced in a less aggressive direction if Sukarno, prior speech, can see specific evidence that meaningful movement possible in very near future.

President’s message to Sukarno2 appears to have somewhat allayed imminent crisis but strong tension continues and we believe constructive steps on Dutch part urgent.

We have carefully weighed importance this issue with all other matters you are confronted with and reluctantly conclude that it is desirable take advantage your presence Paris discuss possible future steps to resolve WNG dispute with Luns who plays dominant role Dutch policy.3 Hopefully we could have positive initial Dutch reaction to convey Sukarno prior December 19 mass meeting for purpose convincing him moderate his public stance this problem or, at least, avoid irrevocable aggressive steps.

You may wish to reemphasize our concern over latest development Indonesia (Deptel 3332 to Paris)4 and sound out Luns on possibility of direct talks without preconditions with Indonesians. If he appears unreceptive you might suggest stopgap of both sides designating neutral representatives to act as “seconds” who would be charged with exploring means by which such talks might be arranged.

Luns has previously indicated intent pursue solution within context UN “decolonialism” resolution. This resolution calls for 17 member committee to facilitate disengagement colonial powers and we believe it virtually certain that Soviet will be a member. In our view presence Soviets can only frustrate peaceful solution we and Dutch desire. Accordingly we believe Dutch and Indos should seek solution apart from decolonial resolution although we would envisage UN assistance at some stage after progress has been achieved on bilateral basis.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1361. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Lindquist, Stone, and Beaudry; cleared by Harriman, Tyler, and Wallner; and approved by Ball. Repeated to Djakarta, The Hague, Canberra, London, and USUN. Rusk was attending the Ministerial Session of the North Atlantic Council at Paris December 13–15.

1 See Document 211. A memorandum of Harriman’s conversation with the Indonesian Chargé, December 13, is in Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1361.

2 See Document 210.

3 Rusk and Luns discussed U.S.-Netherlands bilateral relations on December 13 at 3 p.m. at the Hotel George V before this cable was received in Paris. West New Guinea was the main topic of the conversation, but Rusk mostly listened to Luns’ views of the situation. (Memorandum of conversation, December 13; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1361).

4 Telegram 514 to The Hague was repeated to Paris as telegram 3332; see footnote 3, Document 212.

214. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 214. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

UN Consideration of the Problem:

Although the debate on West New Guinea at the current General Assembly has not provided a solution to the issue, it nevertheless has somewhat increased the chances for arriving at a peaceful settlement of the problem. The Dutch realize they have no future in West New Guinea and wish to leave the territory. However, they insist that this can only take place provided that the inhabitants are given a voice in their own future. Their attempt to effectuate a withdrawal by having a UN Commission make recommendations on the disposition of the territory (with the proviso that self-determination of the inhabitants would be assured) failed because the Indonesians were able to obtain a blocking third. Basically, Indonesia, with an eye on indications of domestic dissatisfaction in the Netherlands regarding the Government’s West New Guinea policy and with the calculation that failure to achieve progress in the United Nations would increase these pressures on the Dutch Government, wished to have no resolution on this subject passed. However, Indonesia did support an Indian resolution which called for direct negotiations between the parties. This resolution was not approved by the Assembly. The United States supported a resolution sponsored by the French-African states, which we believed represented a reasonable compromise. It took account of the Dutch willingness to leave by providing for a two phased approach with a UN administration, in the initial phase, replacing that of the Dutch. This would be without prejudice to the ultimate disposition of the territory in the second phase. Indonesia would be given full access to the inhabitants under a UN administration. We regret that Indonesia was not able, by refraining from active opposition, to permit this resolution to succeed.

Dutch Reactions:

Dutch Foreign Minister Luns has, tactlessly, publicly portrayed the developments in the UN as having vindicated his position. United States support of the French-African resolution which contained references to the application of the principle of self-determination in West New Guinea has been interpreted by Luns as demonstrating United States support for his policies. Additionally the Dutch colonial administration in West New Guinea has, in the meantime, implemented plans to change the name of the territory to West Papua, designate a flag and install a constitution in the disputed territory. The Dutch have presumably acted on the basis that a majority of the UN members had voted in favor of self-determination.

Indonesian Reactions:

Indonesians regarded the U.S. support of the French-African resolution and opposition to the Indian resolution as not only a departure from our previous policy of neutrality on this issue but also as a failure to honor an undertaking to them that we would take Indonesian views into full account. Indonesians now appear to be convinced that only extremely strong pressure against the Dutch, including the threat of the use of force and perhaps ultimately the actual use of such force, will solve the problem satisfactorily for them. Sukarno has made a number of extremely menacing statements, has designated a special defense council under his direction to deal with this issue, and has promised to tell the Indonesian people in a speech scheduled for December 9 what he proposes to do.

Deeply aware that an outbreak of hostilities in West New Guinea would be extremely detrimental to U.S. interests in Indonesia and Southeast Asia, the President sent a letter to Sukarno in which it was reiterated that our view of the West New Guinea issue continues to be objective, that we wish to be helpful in finding a solution but that initiation of hostilities by Sukarno would make it very difficult for him to play a helpful role. Our Ambassador in Djakarta reports that this letter appears to have allayed the crisis at least temporarily, although it is probable that Sukarno’s December 19 speech will be contentious and inflammatory.

The Indonesians have been antagonized by Luns’ public gloating over the outcome of the UN debate, especially with respect to the United States role. Further, they have viewed the flag-raising at Hollandia as provocative and as setting in motion events which in the long run would tend to estrange West New Guinea from Indonesia.

At the same time, Foreign Minister Subandrio has told our Ambassador that, assuming Indonesian administration, his Government could acquiesce in some form of eventual “internal” self-determination in West New Guinea in which the Papuans either could reaffirm their association with Indonesia or choose some other course. Meanwhile, however, Indonesia at the very least would expect that any interim arrangement would permit them unlimited access to the territory in order effectively to influence the natives.1 The Dutch Ambassador has informally given it as his opinion that his Government would be prepared to facilitate this.2 (Indonesians demand that they be sole administrators in the interim between the departure of the Dutch and the holding of a referendum. However, it is believed that they might settle for designation of an acceptable third party or parties as interim administrator.)

Positions of Australia and Great Britain:

Australia favors self-determination in the area and would accept any outcome of the application of this principle. At the same time, Australia is committed publicly to accept any solution arrived at by the Dutch and Indonesians. Thus it is believed that Australia will go along with any such negotiated solution, especially if also supported by us.

Also concerned by increased tension following the UN debate, the U.K. has suggested that we both (and possibly Australia) approach Sukarno prior to the 19th with the proposal that if his speech then can be sufficiently moderate to leave a loop-hole for serious negotiations, the U.K. and the U.S. in return will make every effort to urge the Dutch into useful negotiations providing that Indonesia will also continue to be reasonable. We have replied that the President’s letter to Sukarno has been substantially similar to this U.K. proposal and that we do not think it wise to reiterate our position at this time. However, we welcomed U.K. willingness to associate with us in a search for a solution acceptable to both sides and we urged that their Ambassador in Djakarta be instructed to approach Sukarno along the lines of their suggestion.

Present Situation:

Given the state of Sukarno’s emotions and the calculation that only sustained pressure will induce future movement, the speech on the 19th undoubtedly will be extreme in tone. However, we do not think it likely that his speech will (a) initiate immediate hostilities; (b) force him into an irreversible position or (c) close the door to further negotiation.

We have indicated to the Dutch our concern and our belief that further urgent efforts must be exerted to settle this question. We have pointed out to them that the Indonesians are very sensitive to such acts as the flag-raising ceremony in West New Guinea. Recent conversations with the Dutch have been disappointing in that no evidence of fresh thinking on their part has been revealed. Our Ambassador in The Hague believes that only strong pressure will move them to consideration of new ideas at this stage.3

Future Developments and U.S. Role:

It is of paramount importance to us that this question be settled peacefully. This can be done only with the cooperation and acquiescence of Indonesia. At the same time, the continued cooperation and goodwill of the Dutch Government also is an essential element. Basically, we recognize that for historical, geographical and political reasons West New Guinea probably will tend to closer if not complete association with Indonesia and our role in seeking a settlement will be to facilitate this evolution. We are in effect committed by the President’s letter to assist in efforts to find a solution in a framework that would allow the Indonesians every appropriate opportunity to achieve their objective peacefully and without undue delay.

We anticipate continued close consultation with the British and Australian Governments. In the case of the British, however, it is evident that their influence with the Indonesians is limited, whereas we do believe they can be helpful with the Dutch. This would also apply, in general but to a lesser degree, to the Australians.

We believe that the United States Government will have to play an even more active and positive role behind the scenes if there is to be a real prospect of getting the Indonesians and the Dutch to agree to a course of action which will lead to the achievement of the Indonesian aims and yet which will be politically and psychologically acceptable to the Dutch. In so doing, it would be desirable that we make clear to the Dutch that if substantive progress toward a solution has not been achieved within a reasonable time, and if, in the meantime, the danger of hostilities continues to grow, our ability to be of assistance in resolving the issue will be seriously and adversely affected.

George A. Anderson4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/16/61–12/20/61. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum, which is dated December 17, indicates that Lindquist, Stone, and Palmer were the drafters; Cleveland and Emmons cleared; and Harriman and Tyler cleared in draft. According to a December 17 covering memorandum from Harriman to Bundy, this paper was prepared for the President in case he wished to discuss the issue at the Bermuda talks with Prime Minister Macmillan December 21–22. West New Guinea was not a principal topic of discussion at Bermuda. According to Document 215, this memorandum was sent to President Kennedy who was returning from Bogota, Colombia, to Palm Beach, Florida. Documentation on the Bermuda Conference is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2020–2021.

1 Reported in telegram 1047 from Djakarta, December 13; see footnote 4, Document 211.

2 As expressed by van Roijen in a meeting with Steeves, Tyler, and Sisco on December 15. (Memorandum of conversation, December 15; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1561)

3 Reported in telegram 437 from The Hague, December 13. (Ibid., 656.9813/12–1361)

4 Anderson of S/S signed for Battle above Battle’s typed signature.

215. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 215. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 18, 1961.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

Attached is a paper I have prepared on West New Guinea. I have read and taken account of the latest message from Sukarno.1 Though the last paragraph of that message could be read as a veiled justification for authorization of an attack tomorrow, I read it as part of his general effort to pressure us into action and of his particular effort to get us to pressure the Dutch to suspend their program for establishing a Papuan regime.

I propose that my paper be sent, along with State’s memo of yesterday,2 to the President in preparation for a talk this week between the President and Secretary Rusk. Although I think that the State paper is quite good and represents an advance, it would be useful, I believe, if the President could also read my paper which deals with some subjects that are difficult to treat forthrightly in a coordinated State paper and which carries the argument another step further forward—beyond the point which would be accepted by EUR.

I believe very strongly that, if the President is to have a discussion with the Secretary early this week, the discussion would be more fruitful if he had a chance to read the papers in advance. They will provide him with the basis for suggesting alternatives to the relatively conservative line the Secretary is likely to favor.

I have been unable to establish whether the Secretary read the State paper. It was sent into the Secretary’s office to Harlan Cleveland for clearance while the latter was talking with the Secretary Sunday afternoon.3 It seems likely that they discussed it, but whether the Secretary read it, only he and Cleveland seem to know.

I would also hope that the discussion between the President and the Secretary would take place before we dispatch any answer to Sukarno’s new letter.

Carl Kaysen has seen my paper in draft and agrees that it would be desirable to send the paper to the President.

Bob

Attachment4

Washington, December 18, 1961.

SOME FUNDAMENTALS WITH RESPECT TO WEST NEW GUINEA

1. The U.S. Interest. The U.S. has a general interest in eliminating this irritant in international relations involving two free world countries. But its more basic interests are two: (a) to eliminate this issue from Indonesian politics where it has diverted the country from constructive tasks, has been used by Sukarno as a means of frustrating opposition to himself, and has been exploited by the large local Communist party and by the USSR; and (b) to avoid a military clash which would probably place us in direct opposition to Indonesia in the UN and which might drive Indonesia into the arms of the Bloc both because of the Bloc’s military, economic and diplomatic support and because such a clash would probably strengthen Communist forces within Indonesia. The loss of Indonesia could be as significant as the loss of mainland Southeast Asia and would make defense of the latter considerably more difficult.

We also have, of course, an interest in maintaining friendly relations with the Australians and the Dutch. However, the manner in which we handle the issue is not likely to have the same critical impact upon these relations as it is upon the orientation of Indonesia. Our relations with Australia and the Netherlands are based upon a whole network of mutual interests; in the case of Indonesia, West New Guinea is the overwhelmingly important issue. The Dutch have themselves agreed to give up West New Guinea. They can hardly accuse us of forcing them out. The Australians, as the State paper points out, would accept a negotiated solution achieved by the Indonesians and the Dutch.

If the above analysis is correct, we must conclude that it is in our interests that a solution be devised which will lead to accession of West New Guinea to Indonesia. Only in this way can the issue be eliminated from Indonesian politics and a military clash avoided. As the State paper says somewhat more cautiously—“basically, we recognize that for historical, geographical and political reasons West New Guinea probably will tend to closer, if not complete, association with Indonesia and our role in seeking a settlement will be to facilitate this evolution.”

2. The Validity of the Self-Determination Principle for West New Guinea. Luns has employed our general endorsement of the principle of self-determination as a means of pushing us into the Dutch corner. But how valid is the principle when applied to this territory? West New Guinea is one of the most backward areas of the world. The Dutch have heretofore regarded the Papuans as “stone-age” people who can be adjusted to modern political activity only by slow stages. The population is largely illiterate; the educational system has been severely limited and has consisted almost entirely of mission schools. Few Papuans are in the administration and these are almost entirely at the lower levels. The economy is almost wholly undeveloped. Total exports run under $10 million per year and the annual Dutch subsidy is almost $20 million. A significant part of the population has no contact whatsoever with the Dutch administration. It seems unlikely that the Papuans can decide the future of the territory in any meaningful sense for years to come. The problem will not sit still that long.

3. The Current Situation. Whether justified or not, it is clear that both the Dutch and the Indonesians feel that the U.S. has swung over to the Dutch side as a result of the fact that we voted with the Dutch and against the Indonesians on the Indian and Brazzaville (largely U.S.-drafted) resolutions in the UN.5 It is evident from his recent talk with Secretary Rusk and from other evidence that Dutch Foreign Minister Luns is feeling very self-satisfied.6 In the self-determination principle he has found a policy concept that is more generally acceptable than colonialism and that at the same time keeps the territory out of Indonesian hands.

The present situation is one that is moving to a military showdown. The moderates in Indonesia are increasingly hard put to demonstrate that there is any other way out. The Indian attack upon Goa may be a new stimulus to Indonesian military action. While the Dutch have stated in the past that they had no intention of fighting alone over West New Guinea, Luns’ recent discussion with Secretary Rusk suggests that he may possibly hope for some outside support.

4. The Value of Negotiations. Negotiations will serve very little purpose if we approach them in the same spirit that has motivated some of our recent diplomatic activity on the subject; that is, if we view the diplomatic problem solely as a problem of playing a mediatory role in which we seek middle ground between the two disputants. Our role must be grounded in the conclusion that the only solution that will be lasting and that will serve U.S. interests will be one that gives Indonesia a clear prospect of acquiring early control over the territory.

While a way will need to be found in the actual regulations to save Dutch face, we need now to shock the Dutch into a realization that the U.S. is not in their corner and that they must negotiate seriously and in good faith with the Indonesians to find a mutually acceptable solution which will remove this issue from international and domestic Indonesian politics.

In order to accomplish this objective we must make very clear to the Dutch that we are not taken in by the idea that self-determination principle has any reality when applied to West New Guinea. We must also talk very frankly with them (and with the Australians) about the danger of the loss of Indonesia to Communism which is posed by the West New Guinea issue and the damage that much loss would cause to the free world position in Southeast Asia. If we have not done so, we should make unmistakably clear that the Dutch cannot expect U.S. military support in the event of an Indonesian attack. Finally, as the new letter from Sukarno to the President indicates, we must seek to dissuade the Dutch from further moves in the direction of establishing an independent Papuan regime.

Such a U.S. position should shock the Dutch Government (and particularly Luns) out of present complacency and should encourage the important forces within the Netherlands that would like to see a genuine accommodation with Indonesia. It is in a change in the balance of forces in the Netherlands that the hope for a settlement must lie. If negotiations begin to offer real promise to Indonesia, the forces of moderation within that country (primarily the army leadership) will be strengthened and the possibility of a military showdown will recede.

It will not be enough for the U.S. to get the disputants to the conference table. We shall have to continue to apply pressure to both sides if a settlement is to be assured. But if we accept the above analysis we shall have to apply most pressure to the Dutch for it is from them that most concessions will be demanded. Heretofore we have applied very little pressure on the Dutch.

The U.S. Ambassador to The Hague has suggested the possibility of establishing a bilateral “technical” commission charged with exploring solutions to the various outstanding problems between the two countries.7 This approach would bypass the pre-conditions imposed by both sides on negotiations over West New Guinea alone. The Dutch late last week indicated a willingness to engage in discussions with Indonesia at the UN or outside the UN in the presence of a third party.8 This third party might be the Secretary General or some third country or group of countries.

All parts of the State Department are now agreed on the desirability of some kind of negotiations between the Netherlands and Indonesia. All recognize that the U.S. must play an active and positive role. However, the above view with respect to our relationship with the Dutch in these negotiations, while generally acceptable to the Far East Bureau, would be rejected by the European Bureau.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 12/16/61–12/20/61. Secret. Johnson sent copies to Kaysen and Komer. Bundy sent the attached paper and apparently Document 214 to the President in Bogota, Colombia, for “possible plane reading” on the trip back to Palm Beach. Bundy wrote a covering note, also sent to the President in Bogota, that reads: “Mr. President: Here are two papers on New Guinea & West Irian which give the issues clearly. If you agree with Johnson of our staff, a word with Harriman is indicated to say that you want a real push on this one. McGB.” A note on the attached paper indicates that the President saw it and apparently Document 215 on December 19 in Palm Beach.

1 Sukarno’s letter was delivered to Secretary Rusk on December 18 by Ambassador Zain who asked Rusk to deliver it to the President. In the letter, December 17, Sukarno expressed a desire for close cooperation and friendship with the United States, but admitted that Indonesia was at the “boiling point” over the Netherlands’ separatist policy in West Irian. Sukarno suggested that if the Netherlands continued its insistence on creating an independent Papua, there would be no alternative left to Indonesia but the use of force. Sukarno’s letter is attached to a memorandum of conversation between Rusk and Zain, December 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–1861)

2 Document 214.

3 December 17.

4 Secret.

5 The United States and the Netherlands voted for the Brazzaville resolution; Indonesia voted against it. The United States and the Netherlands voted against the Indian resolution; Indonesia voted for it.

6 Apparent reference to the Luns-Rusk conversation in Paris on December 13; see footnote 3, Document 213.

7 In telegram 418 from The Hague, December 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–261)

8 See footnote 2, Document 214.

216. Memorandum of Conversation 216. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, December 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Latest Instructions from Dutch Government Regarding Negotiations with Indonesia over West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

For the Netherlands: Ambassador van Roijen, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. Schiff, Minister, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. Huydecoper, Counselor, Netherlands Emb.

For the United States: Governor Harriman, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

James E. Bell, Director SPA

Joseph J. Sisco, Director UNP

Arthur B. Emmons, Deputy Director SPA

Galen L. Stone, OIC, Swiss Benelux Aff.

Ambassador van Roijen said that he was happy to say that he had received an answer from his government indicating that they have decided they would be prepared to drop the precondition that the talks would be on the basis of providing the inhabitants of West New Guinea with a voice in their own future.1 The Dutch Government would, however, of course, stick to the principle of self-determination in negotiations with the Indonesians. Furthermore, the Government now really felt that they have done the utmost to show reasonableness. The Ambassador felt it was now about time that the Indonesians made some concessions since up to the present they hadn’t budged an inch. He said he had passed on to his government Governor Harriman’s suggestion that the Dutch Government come up with a number of suggestions of countries who might participate in the talks as a third party. This suggested list might then be passed to the Indonesians who would be given the opportunity of selecting from among them. He said the government was at the present time considering this request. At the moment he had not received a reply.

Foreign Minister Luns had just returned to The Hague from the meetings of the Common Market countries in Paris and the first Cabinet meeting following his return would take place today and tomorrow. There was, of course, no question of dropping the Dutch insistence on third party representation at the talks. Governor Harriman inquired if there had been any indication received at all as to who the Dutch would prefer as a third party. Ambassador van Roijen said as yet he had received no indication. The Dutch Government had not expressed any preference for a participating third party. The only thing that was certain was that the Dutch would wish a third party to be present. This could be, as stated earlier to Mr. Tyler, either representatives from the Decolonization Commission of 17, the President of the Assembly Mongi Slim, the Acting Secretary General of the UN, U Thant, or some other country or countries outside the UN context.

Mr. Bell said that he had discussed this matter with Ambassador Subardjo in New York and that he had expressed opposition to any participation from the Commission of 17 since this would mean bringing the United Nations into the negotiations. From the Indonesian viewpoint they felt that the United Nations had not been particularly helpful to them during the recent General Assembly consideration of the problem, and they would prefer, therefore, that any such representation be outside the UN context.

Governor Harriman said he was very grateful to Ambassador van Roijen for this very prompt answer to his request that the Dutch Government agree to talks without preconditions. He felt that it would be very helpful if the Dutch Government were able to indicate several countries that would be acceptable to them as a third party in any negotiations. He reminded the Ambassador that he had asked that the United States use its influence to curb the inflammatory statements that are coming out of Djakarta, and informed the Ambassador that at the time he had made this request he had told him that while we would do our best we could not make a commitment that these efforts would be successful. We were not in a position to exert any particular control over the activities of President Sukarno. He said he was afraid that today’s ticker reports carried further evidence that the Indonesians were continuing their belligerent statements. Ambassador van Roijen noted that the ticker reports indicated the Indonesians appeared to be maintaining their preconditions that talks be on the basis of transfer of administration of the territory.

Governor Harriman said that he fully understood the view of the Dutch Government that if they agreed to enter into talks with the Indonesians without preconditions the Indonesian Government must agree to enter talks on the same basis.

He said he would not pass the Dutch Ambassador additional ticker reports, in order not to increase his blood pressure. He regretted that he had to show him such statements in the first place. He felt that the time had come for us to transmit to Ambassador Jones in Djakarta the very generous position that the Dutch Government had decided to take. Ambassador van Roijen said he hoped that in presenting the Dutch position Ambassador Jones would take the opportunity to point out that it is now up to the Indonesians to take some constructive steps and to emphasize that inflammatory statements such as those that have recently been made in Indonesia are hardly conducive to the start of negotiations.

Governor Harriman said he had been much impressed by the way that Ambassador Jones was handling the situation. He was convinced that he was doing as well as we could possibly expect in the circumstances. Ambassador van Roijen said that in negotiations the question of self-determination would undoubtedly arise and it was, of course, understood that the Dutch would do all they could to adhere to the principle of self-determination. Perhaps, however, rather than addressing themselves to this principle during the initial phase of the negotiations, it would be better to try and reach agreement on the matter of the structure and set up of the interim authority which would assume control over the territory. Governor Harriman said he was glad to hear the Ambassador express this point. He felt that by approaching the negotiations in this matter the Dutch might well achieve what they are after, yet at the same time not have a head-on confrontation with the Indonesians. Ambassador van Roijen said that even Subandrio realized that there would have to be some form of interim administration. He said that the Indonesians should expect very definite resistance on the part of the New Guinea people and he referred to the statements made in the New Guinea Council. Governor Harriman said he hoped that this matter can now go forward and that the Dutch objectives could be achieved. He sincerely hoped that this matter could be resolved peacefully.

Ambassador van Roijen asked whom he should contact in the event he receives further word from his government regarding the particular third party that they would like to have attend any talks. Governor Harriman said he hoped to get away to join his family for the holiday but that the Ambassador could get in touch with Mr. Tyler. He reiterated that we would make clear to Ambassador Jones the importance the Dutch attached to the third party being present at the talks.

Note: Upon his return to the Dutch Embassy van Roijen called Governor Harriman before he departed to advise him that a further telegram had been received from The Hague indicating that the Dutch preference for third party participation in any talks with Indonesia was as follows:

1) United States, 2) Secretary General of the UN, U Thant, 3) President of the General Assembly, Mongi Slim, 4) one or more countries outside of the UN context.

Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch understood the reluctance of the United States to take over the role of the third party, however, the US was the first choice of the Dutch Government. Governor Harriman pointed out that this was a role that the US did not wish to assume. Ambassador van Roijen said he understood this and indicated that with regard to a selection of countries outside of the UN context, that the Dutch Government would gladly accept the formula of three countries, one each to be selected by the Netherlands and Indonesia, and the third to be chosen by the two countries selected.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2261. Secret. Drafted by Stone and initialed by Harriman.

1 Van Roijen and other Dutch Embassy officials met with Harriman, Tyler, and other Department officials on December 19 and 20. In both discussions Harriman and Tyler pressed van Roijen to take advantage of the window of opportunity to solve the issue of West New Guinea. According to the memorandum of the December 20 discussion:

“Governor Harriman said that he had just received a message from the President emphasizing that the role we would like to play is one of assisting in establishing the procedure and framework under which talks would take place. It was hoped that the Dutch would not put any prior conditions on the initiation of such talks, since if they did so we were quite sure that the Indonesians would come up with their own prior conditions. Furthermore, as the Dutch condition was self-determination, he thought the Indonesians would come to ask for it voluntarily. As a friend, therefore, he urged that the Dutch put that pre-condition aside as a principal point.” (Memoranda of conversation; ibid., 656.9813/12–1961 and 656.9813/12–2061)

217. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 217. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 27, 1961.

McGB:

SUBJECT

Next Moves on New Guinea

Now that bilateral talks seem about to begin (a very hopeful development), we can’t rest on our oars. Initial positions of Dutch and Indos are still so far apart that we’ll have to do a lot of behind the scenes maneuvering to force a satisfactory outcome: 1. We’ll still have to lean more on the Dutch. The time to do it is now, before the 2 January debate in Dutch parliament. Only if Dutch know we favor Indo case will they be forthcoming in new talks. Perhaps Harriman ought to talk with Van Roijen again.

2. Harriman’s talk with Beale (to Canberra 300, 23 [20] December)1 shows Aussies still unreconstructed on WNG. True, Sukarno would like to get WNG on the cheap and hopes that current negotiations will move things his way without necessity of shooting. But he is not “bluffing”; he’s already so committed that he’ll have no alternative but to start a fracas of some kind sooner or later if talks fail.

3. On the other hand, Sukarno at long last seems to feel we are moving toward his side. We must build on this impression, bearing in mind that the whole purpose of the WNG exercise is not just to avert a crisis but to use our shift on WNG as a lever to influence Indonesian orientation.

4. If U Thant is to be “third party” at talks, Harriman or someone should go to New York and clue him on where we stand.2

5. Finally, we must find some way to permit Dutch to save face, before the clamor about “self-determination” boxes us all in. Why not urge Indonesians to offer such gestures to Dutch as restoration of diplomatic relations, inviting Dutch to participate in Indo’s economic development, even restoring some Dutch assets, if Dutch will give on WNG? This thought is spurred by Hague 448,3 which points out that offering to restore relations “would surely cause majority public opinion here to press the Government for more action to seek out bilateral accommodation. ..”. If Sukarno could be persuaded to make such noises before 2 January, it would help a lot in Netherlands.

Something like the above, which we would legitimately propose to Indos, might just break the log jam. I’ll feel out State.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 11/61–12/61. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Schlesinger.

1 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2061)

2 On the copy to Schlesinger, Komer wrote at this point: “Arthur, is A[dlai] S[tevenson] clued on this?” (Kennedy Library, Schlesinger Papers, White House Classified, West New Guinea)

3 Dated December 20. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2061)

218. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 218. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, December 27, 1961, noon.

1124. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embassy telegram 1120,1 Department telegrams 652, 653, 656, 660.2 President Sukarno was unable to see me yesterday but received me at 7:30 this morning. Foreign Minister Subandrio was also present. After listening carefully to my comments, President expressed his appreciation for the active efforts of the US in stronger terms than I have heard him previously use in this connection.

“America will have my eternal gratitude if it helps us solve this problem peacefully,” he said, stressing that bonds of friendship would be established between our respective nations that would have great import for future.

Sukarno concurred generally with Subandrio comments in Embassy reftel, making following points: 1. He agreed with suggestion for bilateral talks with third party presence and also endorsed Subandrio’s view that Secretary General U Thant would be most appropriate third party.

2. He not only agreed with idea but thought exploratory secret talks at Ambassadorial level were essential to success of formal negotiations.

3. Although agreeing that talks should be held without preconditions on either side, he said it was vital that there should be advance understanding as to purpose of talks. Indos have learned this lesson well as result of New Guinea dispute itself. Purpose of talks should be to effect transfer of administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia and to discuss manner in which this should be accomplished. He had no objection to “two bite” approach but was not willing to enter formal negotiations which might turn into interminable discussion of what representatives were there for.

4. In commenting on point above paragraph, he noted that he had given up his original demand for Dutch recognition of Indo sovereignty over West New Guinea as precondition to talks.

5. He referred to emotional response to his address in Djogjakarta on 19th and to tremendous build-up of demands from all quarters for action on West New Guinea in again making point that “we haven’t much time.” It is, he said, “like a snow ball rolling down hill, getting bigger and bigger all the time.” To this, I commented that we felt momentum was building up for peaceful solution in this issue. It was important to preserve this momentum and I considered all parties were in agreement that time was of the essence.

I appreciate prompt and helpful Department response to queries raised in reference Embtel. Deptel 660 reached me in time yesterday to have advance discussion with Subandrio last night at his home which I am confident paved way for constructive Sukarno responses today. Subandrio during conversation (this is first time he or anyone else has been present at my talks with President) was most helpful lending support repeatedly to points made.

I opened conversation after usual exchange of courtesies by passing on substance points in Deptel 652 as oral reply to Kennedy/Sukarno exchange letters, then led into review of developing situation which I said I regarded as encouraging from standpoint of possibility bringing about peaceful solution. I stressed efforts being made by us and in reinforcing point of US objectivity and neutrality was able to quote Linc White’s helpful and timely statement on 6:30 VOA broadcast this morning.3 I then led into substantive points reftels. I emphasized apparent increasing flexibility in Dutch position and indicated it behooved Indonesians also to be flexible as they had repeatedly indicated they were prepared to be. Sukarno interjected caution that he was flexible as to method but not as to objective.

Both with Subandrio and President, I of course stressed vital importance of secrecy (with which they agreed) and desirability of tamping down inflammatory statements to which Subandrio readily agreed in last night’s conversation but to which Sukarno made no comment unless paragraph 5 may be taken in that context.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2761, Secret; Niact. Repeated niact to The Hague and to London, Canberra, and CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 1120, December 25, Jones reported that he called on Subandrio to inform him of the Netherlands response to the U.S. démarche. Subandrio suggested that Jones see Sukarno since he had taken the issue “into his own hands.” (Ibid., 656.9813/12–2561)

2 In these telegrams to Djakarta, December 22, 22, 23, 25, respectively, the Department instructed Jones how to respond to Sukarno’s letter of December 18 and how to encourage Indonesia and Sukarno to begin negotiations with the Dutch. (Ibid., 656.9813/12–2061, 656.9813/12–2261, 656.9813/12–2361, and 656.9813/12–2561)

3 Not further identified.

219. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 219. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 4, 1962.

SUBJECT

The Question of Military Support for the Dutch in the Event of a Military Attack on West New Guinea

Since our discussion at the staff meeting yesterday1 I have been able to find out something more of the background of Secretary Rusk’s discussion with Van Roijen2 of the questions Van Roijen raised as to (a) whether we would provide logistic support to the Dutch in the event of an Indonesian attack on West New Guinea; and (b) whether we would be prepared to move the Seventh Fleet at an appropriate time as a deterrent.

You will recall that the Secretary’s response was quite equivocal. He said we could not give bilateral assistance but that help in the context of the UN “was another matter.” He indicated that there would be no question about our attitude in the Security Council. Finally he indicated that we would have to give further consideration to the question before giving a specific answer. Whether our support in the UN would be only political support and whether we were in effect suggesting that any U.S. action would be subject to a Soviet veto in the UN is not clear from the text of the telegram reporting the conversation.

I have obtained two pieces of information that are relevant. However: a. In the view of at least one of the participants (I presume, Governor Harriman), the Dutch were quite clearly told by the Secretary that we would not provide military support. There was no other FE representative present and the telegram reporting the conversation was drafted in IO.

b. This aspect of the West New Guinea question is said to have been the subject of conversation between the Secretary and the President at Bermuda and the President is said to have indicated that we should respond negatively to Dutch requests for such military support.3

Meanwhile, I understand, State has just received a message from Canberra in which the Australians ask us point blank for our attitude toward support of the Dutch in the event of military action.4 The Indonesian Desk Officer plans to use the reply to this message as the vehicle for attempting to get a firm, unequivocal answer to the question. He has promised to keep me informed as to his progress.

This is obviously an important issue which could affect the whole course of negotiations. The embassy in The Hague regularly tells us that the Dutch would not put up a real defense in the absence of outside support. As Ambassador Rice in The Netherlands has pointed out, a U.S. guarantee of support would reduce Dutch flexibility in negotiations. Contrariwise, as Bob Komer argued, a clear indication that our military support would not be forthcoming should increase flexibility.

I will attempt to follow the current effort to clarify our intentions. However, the above does suggest to me the desirability, if it would be possible, of getting down on paper any Presidential decisions that may have been made in Florida or Bermuda on West New Guinea. The issue under immediate discussion is one on which clarification would be desirable. But it would also be useful to record any Presidential judgment that may have been made on such questions as (a) whether we must look to and work for a solution that will provide clear assurance of transfer of WNG to Indonesia, and (b) how we play our relationship with the Dutch. The FE Office Director concerned, Jim Bell, has not been informed of any general Presidential decisions. Possibly there was nothing that could be called a decision and possibly even the information mentioned above with respect to U.S. use of force is inaccurate. I believe that clarification would be desirable and, if appropriate, an NSC Action memo issued.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 1/1/62–1/7/62. Secret. Also sent to Kaysen and a copy was sent to Komer. Komer wrote the following note to Kaysen on the source text: “Carl, FYI in case you hadn’t heard.” McGeorge Bundy wrote: “Harriman tells me he has left the Dutch in no doubt on this point.” Kaysen wrote: “Hold for talk with President.”

1 Not further identified.

2 The discussion, which took place on December 27, 1961, was summarized in telegram 555 to The Hague, December 27:

“In closing, Van Roijen, after recalling Dulles promise to Luns of US logistic support, asked what Dutch could expect from us in event Indonesian aggression against WNG. Secretary said we could not give bilateral assurance; however, UN context was another matter. There is no question as to what our attitude would be in SC in case of aggression. WNG is different militarily from Goa and Dutch position at UN on WNG much stronger than Portuguese. Van Roijen said tactical move of 7th fleet at appropriate time in event of Indonesian move would be real deterrent. Secretary doubted utility such move. Secretary concluded by saying he would wish consider further question of what US would do in event Indonesian aggression before giving specific answer to Van Roijen questions.” (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/12–2761)

3 No Rusk—Kennedy discussion at Bermuda on West New Guinea has been found. In a meeting with Macmillan on December 22 at Bermuda, the President, Rusk, and Lord Home discussed the issue as follows:

“The President said the Dutch would be made aware of the fact that they could not count on US or UK military support, and that we should find out what the Australians intend. It was agreed that the Secretary should speak to the Australian Ambassador on the latter point. The Secretary added that the Australians felt they had assurances from the Indonesians, prior to the Indian take-over of Goa, that they would not attack West New Guinea. Mr. Bohlen commented that the Filipinos were greatly concerned at the prospect of Indonesia going communist. The Secretary said that any notion that the entire island of New Guinea might constitute a Papuan State was pretty remote. Lord Home said that the UK had already sent a telegram asking for the views of Menzies on this whole problem.” (Memorandum of conversation, December 22; ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 366, CF 2021)

4 Not further identified.

220. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy) 220. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Mac:

The attached from Bob Komer on the discussion in the President’s meeting yesterday1 seems to me worth some attention. I found the first item in today’s Daily Staff Summary on the Indonesian situation not very reassuring.2 I suspect that, while FE is perfectly clear on the point that our task is to facilitate the achievement of the inevitable outcome in a way which minimizes the Dutch defeat, the rest of the Department may not be. They are still concerned with the rightness or wrongness of Sukarno’s behavior rather than whether an issue will arise in which we are put into a difficult position in the UN and which we will lose in substance whatever happens in appearance.

CK

Attachment3

Washington, January 12, 1962.

Carl—

I’m worried by drift of Roger Hilsman’s response to JFK question last night about how soon Indos might actually attack West New Guinea. Roger felt Indos wouldn’t be ready for some time to achieve a quick Goa-style take-over, though of course they could mount lesser landings at any time.

Roger’s answer may have been falsely reassuring to JFK in implying that we still have substantial turnaround time before a show-down. I am not at all convinced. Intelligence community has consistently estimated that Indos would not really try for a military conquest (how can you conquer WNG anyway?), but would go for a military demonstration designed to force the issue, and get it to UNGA where they’d hope to win on a straight colonial/anti-colonial vote. Since they could do this any day now, we can’t afford to relax.

Unquestionably, Sukarno is attempting to scare Dutch (and us) into capitulating on his terms. But he is now so committed that I doubt he could call off military action if this gambit fails. I don’t see how he can back down after all his big talk.

President also asked whether Australians would fight in support of Dutch. No one gave a good answer but my hunch is they would follow US lead. It we supported Dutch logistically, they would too; hence it might be wise to tell them pronto that we won’t.

In sum, my hunch is that we must keep up pressure on Dutch or we’ll have a full-blown crisis on our hands. And it is up to WH to keep pushing, since by my reading State is still ambivalent and unlikely to push hard enough on its own.

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/21–3/62. Top Secret. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “Carl, Noted, discussed with Pres & Harriman this A.M. Averell is satisfied heat is adequate for now—so is Pres.”

1 The President met with McGeorge Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Phillips M. Talbot, Hilsman, William Gaud of the NSC Staff, Bowles, Rostow, Ball, and Ambassador to India Kenneth Galbraith. The meeting lasted from 5:05 to 6:45 p.m. and was “off the record.” (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) No other record of the discussion, which probably dealt with India as well as West New Guinea, has been found.

2 The first item of the Daily Staff Summary, January 12, reads:

“1. Indonesia Seeks Talks on West New Guinea—Our Ambassador at Djakarta reports that Foreign Minister Subandrio accepted without argument our refusal to pass the Indonesian proposals on West New Guinea to Dutch Prime Minister de Quay. In response to our suggestion for an approach through U Thant, Subandrio replied: ‘Not yet.’ He would welcome the Secretary General’s participation in formal talks but did not want to involve him in preliminary explorations. For the present, Subandrio thought that secret exploratory talks held in a spirit of good will, with no third party present, could accomplish much to overcome the ‘psychological block’ between the Dutch and Indonesians. Subandrio suggested that we might be willing to ask van Roijen, the Dutch Ambassador here, whether the Dutch would accept a public statement on self-determination by Sukarno, prior to the opening of talks, in exchange for a clear definition of the purpose of the talks as leading to the transfer of the administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia. Subandrio kept reverting to the subject of secret ambassadorial talks during his conversation with our Ambassador. He again mentioned Adam Malik, Indonesian Ambassador at Moscow, as his candidate for secret bilateral talks. Our Ambassador recommends we consider an approach to van Roijen to sound him out on the idea of a public statement by Sukarno. As for Malik, our Embassy knows him well and regards him as a moderate leftist capable of handling any preliminary negotiations.” (Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 65 D 142)

3 Secret.

221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 221. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, January 15, 1962, 8:16 p.m.

753. Deptel 746;1 Embtel 1224.2 If press reports emanating Hollandia that Dutch Navy has encountered and sunk at least one Indo torpedo boat true, seriousness WNG question has increased considerably. Dutch Defense Ministry spokesman has said, according reports, that Indo invasion force appears turned back.

In connection Deptel 7503 you should seek direct confirmation or denial from Sukarno or Subandrio. If reports confirmed by GOI or evidence encounter took place is beyond question, you should tell GOI US devoutly hopes further such clashes be avoided if disaster is not to occur. We fully aware Indo argument that presence cruising patrols both sides likely lead to inadvertent encounter but we on balance persuaded that Indo must bear, in view threatening posture, full share responsibility. We have made strenuous efforts avoid situation in which hostilities would occur and we have in recent days had cause for hope that with sincerity both sides and with cooperation SYG, way out of impasse might be found in terms tolerable to Indonesia. Although Dutch may have been intransigent in past, it has been clear for some time they wish leave WNG. If GOI object is to obtain WNG, peaceful means for accomplishing this clearly available.

You should tell Sukarno, even if this repeats what you have previously told him, that once hostilities, as opposed to an isolated clash, have begun, as result GOI initiative, US Government will have no alternative but to propose Indonesia in UN. Moreover, there can be no question but that US arms shipments will in such case have to be stopped. Sukarno should be given to understand clearly that US public will not tolerate continued arms aid to Indonesia in case of hostilities clearly initiated by GOI.

If on other hand, Sukarno affirms it not his intention expand or continue hostile action, you should use all material Dept has provided you to persuade him advantages and good prospects for peaceful settlement. You should make it especially clear to Sukarno that cooperation with Thant now seems essential to peaceful settlement.

Re final para ref Embtel,4 Indo démarche on self-determination5 not conveyed Dutch (Deptel 746). You should strongly urge GOI bring their position to Thant’s attention.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–1562. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Stone, Sisco, and McGhee; and approved by Rice. Repeated to The Hague, Canberra, London, USUN, CINCPAC/POLAD, Geneva FECON for Harriman, and Manila.

1 In telegram 746, January 12, the Department explained to the Embassy in Djakarta the decision to seek U Thant’s cooperation to bring the two sides together. It believed he could do it more effectively than the United States because he was less vulnerable to charges of partiality and less subject to extreme pressures. As a prominent Asian from a neutral country, his participation would pave the way for future U.N. interest. The Department instructed Jones to counsel Indonesia to accept U Thant. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–1162)

2 In telegram 1224, January 15, Jones told Rusk that secret Ambassadorial talks between the Netherlands and Indonesia “offer most immediate hope of delaying or preventing provocative acts” and he concurred wholly in transferring the initiative to U Thant. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–1562)

3 In telegram 750, January 15, the Department asked for confirmation of wire service reports of clashes between Dutch and Indonesian naval vessels in the West New Guinea coastal waters. (Ibid.)

4 In the final paragraph of telegram 1224, Jones reported that he was seeing Sukarno on January 16 to discuss Robert Kennedy’s upcoming visit. He asked if he could report to the President “some reaction to recent Indonesia démarche on subject of self-determination or some positive indication of Dutch willingness to proceed with Ambassadorial talks.”

5 See footnote 4, Document 222.

222. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Wallner) to Secretary of State Rusk 222. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Wallner) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, January 17, 1962.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea: Ambassador Stevenson’s Call on U Thant

Governor Stevenson called on U Thant this morning pursuant to our instruction No. 1863. (Tab A)1 Failing to get you on the telephone, he reached the President and gave him a full report. He then called me at 11:30 to relate the following:

He had found U Thant less alarmed than we were because he was less well-informed, having no direct reports from Djakarta, but his concern grew after Governor Stevenson read him Ambassador Jones’ reports (particularly the information contained in Djakarta’s 1241) (Tab B)2 and relayed to him the views of the Australians, as conveyed to you yesterday by Ambassador Beale.3 These reports brought home to U Thant the danger of a succession of mutually retaliatory naval actions leading to generalized hostility and set the stage for Ambassador Stevenson’s presenting the specific proposals contained in our telegram sent last night.

U Thant received these proposals with great interest. Governor Stevenson is optimistic that he will adopt them and later today send appeals to both parties to designate representatives to discuss a solution with him (U Thant) and make this action public. Before deciding, however, U Thant felt he should have a talk with Subardjo, the Indonesian Representative in New York, and he is seeing him this morning.

U Thant told Stevenson that he was attempting to involve neighboring Asian countries in the process of preventing hostilities. He had already appealed to Nehru, but Nehru had declined to become involved because of the Goa incident. He planned to talk to the Filipinos, had noted the public appeal of Cambodia, but had discarded the idea of approaching the Tunku after a discussion with the Malayan Representative in New York.

In conclusion Ambassador Stevenson emphasized our responsibility in keeping U Thant promptly informed of the developing situation. He asked that significant reports reaching the Department be telephoned immediately to him so that they could be relayed without delay to U Thant.

We also understand that in the course of the above conversation U Thant was informed of our action yesterday in passing on to Ambassador Van Roijen Subandrio’s proposal that Sukarno make a statement on self-determination in return for Dutch agreement that the purpose of the talks was ways and means of transferring the administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia.4

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–1762. Secret. Drafted by Wallner. Copies were sent to McGhee, Rice, and Tyler.

1 Not attached. In telegram 1863 to USUN, January 17, 12:43 a.m., the Department instructed the Mission to encourage U Thant to use the naval incident as a means of getting the U.N. representatives of the two sides to meet with him. This meeting should be made public. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–1662)

2 Not attached. Telegram 1241 from Djakarta, January 16, reported that Subandrio told Jones that the Dutch attack on Indonesian motorized patrol boats “means war” and that he “could do no more.” (Ibid.)

3 On January 17, Beale gave Rusk an aide-mémoire, January 16, stating that Australia was alarmed at Indonesia’s threats against the Dutch. The Australians did not believe Sukarno’s professions that he had no interest in Australian New Guinea. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–1762)

4 The démarche by Subandrio was reported in telegram 1212 from Djakarta, January 11. (Ibid., 656:9813/1–1162) The Indonesian proposal was passed to van Roijen by Cleveland on January 16. (Telegram 1861 to USUN, January 16; ibid., 656.9813/1–1662)

223. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy) 223. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Special Assistant (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 28, 1962

[Here follows item 1 on Berlin.]

2. Indonesia—The situation continues on the boil. The most important new element results from the President’s conversation with U Thant in New York on January 19th. The substance of this is shown in the Department’s 1890, USUN dated 20 January.1 It is not clear whether U Thant exaggerated with the Dutch on what the President said to him or whether the Dutch delegate in New York misreported to The Hague. In any event, the result was to indicate more clearly to the Dutch what had not previously been done, our view of what must ultimately happen. There has been a great deal back and forth from New York and here which it has been difficult to summarize. At the present moment the Indonesians still seem to be insisting that the Dutch accept transfer of administration as a precondition to discussion in exchange for which they will promise internal “Papuan self-determination.” New York’s 2568 (January 27) to the Department gives a pretty good summary.2 Van Roijen was called home to The Hague last night. There is one open matter. The Department has not yet responded to 1297 in from Djakarta3 (January 5) on holding up some spare parts shipment. Harriman and Rice feel strongly that it should go; Tyler equally strongly that it should not. McGhee is in Texas until Monday,4 and the matter is resting, with Rice’s agreement.

[Here follow items 3–13 on unrelated subjects.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security. Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Kaysen. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/1–2662) Telegram 2615 from USUN, January 31, also contains a summary of the negotiations based on a discussion between Yost and U Thant. (Ibid., 656.9813/1–3162)

3 Dated January 24. (Ibid., 798.56/1–2562)

4 February 5.

224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 224. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, February 1, 1962, 7:48 p.m.

838. Present lull in developments re West New Guinea, moderate tone statements from Djakarta, and increasing indications of Dutch desire to find accommodation with Indonesians lead us to believe there might be some benefit in Ambassador having frank discussion with Subandrio along following lines: 1. Differences separating Dutch and Indonesians on this subject now narrowed practically to continued Indonesian insistence that Dutch agree before entering negotiations that administration will be turned over to Indonesians. It is very difficult for us to see how Dutch or anyone else could give way beforehand to such demand as it in effect amounts to complete surrender by Dutch and leaves no real point of substance for negotiations.

2. We believe Dutch are very close to point where they would negotiate on transfer of administration to Indonesia if negotiations open on “no condition” basis. (Both Subandrio and Sukarno have over considerable period of time stated Indonesia would be ready to engage in “face-saving” arrangement for Dutch if Indonesia assured of getting the territory)

3. We do not see what Indonesians have to lose if they talk now and they certainly have much to gain. If they do not enter negotiations, there is possibility present efforts will fail and there will be no constructive results.

4. In such event Indonesian international moral position would be weak. On other hand, their international position would be greatly strengthened if they enter negotiations in good faith even were negotiations to be unsuccessful.

Would appreciate Djakarta’s assessment of desirability and probable effect such an approach at this time.1

Would appreciate The Hague’s estimate of Dutch willingness to compromise on Indonesian demand for administration of WNG if Indonesia were to agree on negotiations without preconditions.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–162. Secret. Drafted by Bell, cleared by Stone and Buffum, and approved by Rice. Also sent to The Hague and repeated to Canberra and London. Although Komer is not listed as a drafter, he suggested to Kaysen that the actions described in this telegram be undertaken. (Memorandum from Komer to Kaysen, February 1; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/62–3/62)

1 In telegram 1366 from Djakarta, February 4, Jones responded: “If the Department could obtain clear signal from Dutch that they were in fact willing to negotiate subject transfer of administration, GOI could find some way of entering negotiations without appearing to have backed down from its public posture.” Jones considered the two sides “so close” that if the Department could obtain an assurance from the Dutch that they would discuss transfer of administration without a precondition, the “gap might be bridged.” (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–462)

2 According to telegram 572 from The Hague, February 3, Luns informed Ambassador Rice that the Netherlands would not turn over administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia no matter what guarantees there were for eventual exercise of self-determination by the Papuans. (Ibid., 656.9813/2–362)

225. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) 225. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)Source

Washington, February 2, 1962.

Carl—

Djakarta’s powerful 13491 on Jones’ talk with Subandrio makes clear that we are at a critical point in our effort to prevent WNG issue from ascending into full blown crisis. With all due allowances I don’t see how we can ignore Jones’ judgment that now may be our last chance to get a peaceful settlement.

Even if not our last, it is certainly our best chance. This is critical enough a point and important enough an issue to justify another JFK-Rusk confrontation if State unwilling to move.

What is needed is a two-pronged effort: (a) to get Indos to conference table by hinting that we think they’ll make their number; (b) pressing Dutch, who seem at the brink, to take the jump. On the first, we ought to tell Jones to see Subandrio again along lines of 838 to Djakarta (attached).2

Assuming that we can get Indos to U Thant’s conference table, however, latest from The Hague suggests that we still have to convince Dutch to capitulate. Despite my reservations as to accuracy of any Dutch Foreign Office source, I suspect that Dutch have not yet made high policy decision to give up.

If Jones is right, we must give Dutch another push, lest we lose best chance to get a relatively peaceful settlement. After hinting around at it for so long, we must tell Dutch openly that our reading is they have no realistic alternative but to accept basic idea of Indo administration of WNG, with as many qualifiers as they can get to assure reasonable self-determination option later. I can’t blame Dutch for doubting that Indos have any intention of allowing genuine plebiscite five years or so from now. But the important thing is that some such Indo promise is the essential face-saving device Dutch have been seeking. We must get them to take it as best they can expect.

Our line with Dutch should be that U Thant talks offer perhaps last chance at a peaceful settlement before WNG crisis gets blown up to point where neither side can retreat with good grace. Do the Dutch really want to risk an escalating series of military demonstrations, of which torpedo boat incident is a harbinger? They must face up to the fact that current talks may be their last chance to get out with honor and avoid a Goa or Angola-type situation.

We must also press upon the Dutch the importance of retaining a Western presence in Indonesia, where other side is already far better entrenched than we. They keep looking at this as a WNG issue, whereas to us it is Indonesia’s future orientation which is at stake. For example, if all Western powers have to cut off aid to Indo because of mounting WNG crisis, this simply forces them to turn even more to Bloc. Instead, why don’t Dutch use WNG concessions as means of getting back some foothold in Indonesia—by asking Indos to re-establish diplomatic relations, release Dutch investments and permit some Dutch to return?

It will be a flat failure of our foreign policy if, having pushed Dutch this far, we cannot get through a compromise before WNG issue blows up into a major crisis, I’ll be talking to Ed Rice again, but our problem is not with FE and Harriman; it is with EUR and Rusk. This is worth getting President to talk with Rusk again if necessary. In fact, JFK letter to DeQuay may be what’s needed.3

RWK4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 2/62. Secret. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy.

1 In telegram 1349, February 1, Jones reported that Subandrio had told him that Indonesia was at the end of its rope. It had shown restraint after the naval engagement, but if talks did not begin the next week the result would be a policy of military confrontation. Jones did not consider Subandrio’s statement as bluff. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–162)

2 Document 224.

3 At this point Komer wrote the following marginal note: “Rice [of FE, not Ambassador Rice at The Hague] agrees and will try out above line.”

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

226. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Singapore 226. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in SingaporeSource

Washington, February 10, 1962, 8:08 p.m.

239. Attorney General visit.1 Singapore for Attorney General. Subject your consultation with Embassy Djakarta, we recommend that in WNG discussions with GOI you take following line: 1. US remains genuinely objective toward issue. Our basic motivation is help Dutch and Indos find peaceful and mutually agreeable settlement. We have not taken Dutch side as illustrated by our attitude re Dutch overflights2 and by our continued cooperation with Indonesia regarding arms shipments.

2. We believe necessary ingredients for peaceful adjustment WNG problem present and resort to violence would be tragic development serving no beneficial purpose. Dutch clearly wish leave territory as soon as possible with some face-saving in fulfillment obligation toward Papuans. Indonesians not only willing grant measure internal autonomy but also, if we understand position correctly, prepared permit Papuans complete freedom of choice after appropriate period still to be defined; both sides have demonstrated gratifying restraint publicly and it clearly evident both sides striving for peaceful solution. It appears to us only remaining obstacle is find framework for beginning substantive negotiations.

3. In these circumstances US wishes strongly counsel Indonesians agree to negotiate with Dutch under aegis SYG with no pre-conditions. We recognize that GOI agreement to do this may, because of Indo public position, necessarily result in secret negotiations. While we cannot guarantee that successful agreement will emerge and are convinced it will require hard and perhaps protracted bargaining, we believe prospects for settlement are good and that in any event GOI would not wish leave

At the request of Dungan at the White House, the Central Intelligence Agency provided a short-range appraisal of the internal security situation in Indonesia that concluded that Indonesian security would be capable of protecting the Attorney General. (CIA/OCI telegram 092157Z to the White House, February 9; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1 /62–3/62) any stone unturned in search for peaceful solution. If it does not make corresponding efforts, it will deny itself essential international support. You urged impress on Indonesians that world opinion cannot understand GOI demand that Dutch in effect surrender their position in advance and we believe it essential to peaceful settlement and Indonesian international position that GOI re-examine its position and make every effort agree come to negotiating table without prior conditions. FYL Although substantive positions both sides very close, issue of “preconditions” could be obstacle preventing settlement. We believe your visit to Indonesia provides fortuitous and possibly last opportunity to impress on Sukarno US view that cooperation, good faith and recognition political realities necessary if hostilities to be avoided.

Apparent impasse which has prevailed recently continues, at least on surface. Basically, Dutch prepared negotiate in presence third party (preferably SYG or member his staff) but insist that no advance conditions be imposed. Indos on other hand continue insist that advance understanding be reached that purpose of talks will be discuss inter alia modalities transfer WNG administration to them. We agree with Dutch that this is in fact a pre-condition. Dutch at times, however, have implied that discussion administrative transfer expected to be item to be taken up in negotiations and that they would be prepared deal with question constructively. In fact Van Roijen expressed to Dept Feb 8 on return from Hague his personal opinion is that if negotiations are started through U Thant, an agreement can be reached.3 At other times, Dutch (For Min Luns) have insisted that transfer administration directly to Indonesia never will be undertaken by GON.

Indonesians, partially at US urging, have moved encouragingly on issue self-determination. You may be faced with Indo argument to effect that since they have substantially met Dutch demands on self-determination, they unable comprehend why Dutch continuing hold back on transfer administration. Indos may cite Dutch attitude this point as “proof that Dutch fundamentally unwilling transfer WNG to Indos, that demand self-determination only smokescreen.

Recent contact in London between Dutch and Indonesians may have resulted slight advance toward better understanding between two parties. Details this meeting, however, unclear and Embassy Djakarta will have all currently available information.

To best our knowledge, U Thant has not pressed this matter for past two weeks since Dutch Ambassador Van Roijen just returned Feb 7 from week’s consultation Netherlands and Indo special representative from Djakarta has been out of New York for about two weeks. End FYI.

With return DC-8 to Amsterdam and substitution normally used DC-7’s on regular KLM commercial schedule via Tokyo, troop airlift issue appears have subsided somewhat, at least for present. However, it can be anticipated that you may be questioned this subject during visit Indonesia. Believe your response can best be in terms our public pronouncement, i.e., that US not permitting special military charters as hope for negotiated settlement WNG issue now great with Acting UN SYG U Thant making earnest efforts in New York find basis for negotiations. With respect first flight, you may wish take line that plane’s departure Holland based Dutch interpretation of Chicago Convention that only normal technical clearances required. Although we consider such military charters to be “state aircraft” and therefore requiring permission in addition to routine technical clearances, we were unable resolve this legal question prior first plane’s departure.

Our public statement said military charters not being permitted “for time being” while attempts for peaceful solution in progress:4 If Indonesian interrogators take line that this phrase implies that breakdown of talks would result US assistance to Dutch with respect troop movements and, therefore, means Indonesians negotiating under duress, you might say that US intent in this issue is just the opposite, in sense that we wish our actions contribute to peaceful settlement. However, it obvious that change in situation would force US re-evaluate situation. Nevertheless our basic policy goal would in any event continue unchanged: You may wish advise Indonesians that our refusal permit chartered troop flights and our continued shipment military equipment to Indonesia have resulted bitter charges in Netherlands that we in fact not neutral. This reaction also shared by other NATO allies.

Remind importance attached high levels Pope case especially in view Washington conversations with Sukarno and Indo Foreign Minister.

Excellent press here on your trip thus far.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1062. Secret; Niact, Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell and Dungan, in draft by Stone, Harriman, Czyzak, and Bundy, and in substance by Sisco; and approved by Rice. Repeated priority to Djakarta and to The Hague, Canberra, London, and USUN.

1 Robert Kennedy and his wife were visiting Indonesia at the invitation of Indonesian Attorney General Dr. Gunawan, who extended the invitation during his visit to Washington in April 1961, The Kennedys stayed in Indonesia February 12–18 during an extended tour of world capitals.

2 See footnote 2, Document 242.

3 As reported in memorandum of conversation, February 8, (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–862)

4 Not found.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 227. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 12, 1962, 10 p.m.

1424. Eyes only for Rusk and the President. From Robert Kennedy. Sukarno and FonMin intent on discussing WNG so need guidance on approach. For purposes my discussions here would like to have your best estimate answers to following questions: 1) If Indos agree to sit down for discussion on WNG problem without pre-conditions, would the Dutch then be prepared to transfer WNG to Indonesia? If not, how far would they be willing to go? What would be our position at that juncture?

2) If Indos willing to do above, but the Dutch then refuse any meaningful arrangements for transfer WNG, would this strengthen US support for Indo position and if so what form would stronger support take?

I do not at all feel that Deptel 892 to Djakarta1 answers questions posed my telegram from Hong Kong re Dutch attitudes WNG. I would appreciate answer to request for detailed analysis present Dutch position.2 Also analysis of how far they are willing to go and under what conditions.

Guidance on these matters as well as any other suggestions would be most helpful to me particularly over period next six days.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1262. Secret; Niact. Received at 10:45 a.m.

1 Telegram 239 to Singapore (Document 226) was repeated to Djakarta as telegram 892.

2 In telegram 813 from Hong Kong, February 11, Robert Kennedy first requested a detailed current summary of the Netherlands view of West New Guinea and their arguments used to counter Indonesian views. In telegram 607 to Hong Kong, February 11, the Department noted that there was no indication that the Netherlands Government would fall on the West New Guinea issue and Kennedy should dissuade the Indonesians from hoping that a change of government would help their cause. The Netherlands wanted to leave West New Guinea, but no Netherlands Government would accept “humiliation” in the process. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1162) It is unclear if Robert Kennedy by this time had seen telegram 607, but it would not have answered his questions in any case.

228. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Kennedy 228. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President KennedySource

Washington, February 12, 1962, 6 p.m.

President said he had been looking at Jones’ wire and the questions Bobby sent in.1 Ball said they were working on the questions and would try to get out something tonight. President said we had to get something to them before Bobby leaves.

President said he could not understand the Dutch. Ball said one thing we have to do is not to put Bobby in the position where he is caught in the middle and the Dutch take the position that we are responsible for their troubles—that we have sold them out. He is expecting a draft from the FE people with their proposed answers: President asked if Ball had tried to talk to the Dutch himself to ask what they are prepared to do. Do they think they can fight it successfully. Ball said we were getting a new intelligence appreciation of the military situation. The Dutch have always said they would fight to the last drop. They have indicated they are prepared to sit down and agree to a deal to turn over the administration. In looking at the first question, if Indonesia agrees to sit down the Dutch answer would be they would be prepared to negotiate for arrangements and transfer. The difference is very slight.

President mentioned the exchanges in London.2 Ball said they have not been useful. The point is, the Dutch position is they want to negotiate with a third party present and are willing to work with U Thant. The President said he thought the Dutch were on reasonable grounds in saying they can’t have a surrender but if the Indonesians withdrew that condition—Ball said the Dutch would have to save face. The Government is looking for a face saver and they will go along. If they don’t have one the Government will go down the line, even to the point of fighting. The answer is to get Indonesia to give a little bit to save face, and they can. The President asked if Bobby had this. Ball said a wire was going out tonight.

President asked if we could suggest an answer to #2—if they carry on their military activities without going ahead with the SG it would make our position different than if they had gone to the SG and didn’t get a response. Ball said he saw no objection to this. President said we could say US and world opinion. He did not see why this would be difficult for the SG. Ball said Sukarno is strong in his opinion. He has a lot of freedom of action, especially through the UN.

President asked if there would be any use to show this wire to Van Roijen and ask for his comments. Ball said he would like to ask the advice of FE and EUR. President said we don’t want to leave Bobby unprepared. We don’t want him to say more than we can do. Just say this may have a significant effect and it involves you. Jones’ wire is clear, plus Bobby’s questions. Just say we can give them assurances privately if they withdraw their conditions. What would the final deal look like. We should tell the Attorney General so that he can say we can’t answer these questions there. We ought to protect Bobby by saying our Ambassador regards the AG’s trip as the last chance. Jones’ wire plus Bobby’s questions could probably be put to him. President said he would be there all night if Ball wanted to call.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking.

1 Document 227.

2 Secret talks between Dutch and Indonesian representatives.

229. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President Kennedy 229. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and President KennedySource

Washington, February 12, 1962, 10:15 p.m.

Ball said he now has a telegram1 which he would like to read to the President (Ball reads cable). Ball said the cable would be directly from him (Ball) to Bobby.

The President said the only trouble is what the Dutch are saying is that they will permit the Indonesians to present their case and then if they can win a plebiscite they will be all right, but they are never going to go for that Sukarno. Ball said the real difficulty is that van Roijen said “we can’t give them our shirt before we sit down and they are not going to put us in a position of being able to tell the Indonesians before they sit down any particular outcome.” Ball said they are prepared to say “Look, let’s sit down and negotiate”. Ball said he is fairly sure that if they do sit down and negotiate.... The President said he thinks that if Bobby said that they would say “We can’t go for that” and give up. He said he thinks we should try to continue to get them to talk.

The President said he doesn’t think we should have Bobby ever suggest that that would be the solution because they would instantaneously turn that down and then talks would lose any appeal they may have. He said he thinks the suggestion would have to be that there would be more in the package than that because that is going to be obviously unacceptable to the Indonesians. The President said we should leave that out. Ball agreed and said we can simply say we can’t get any commitments, that’s even on an unofficial basis, to satisfy ourselves which would show considerable flexibility once negotiations get started and there is a very good chance that a solution would be reached. The President agreed. Ball said and not put any of the stuff in about the shape it ought to take. The President agreed. He said just leave those two sentences out about what it might take.2 He said he thought we should say that we recognize that this may not give him much but it is unfortunately all the Dutch will agree to.

The President asked Ball in his conversation with van Roijen,3 is he concerned that force is going to be used. Ball said they were concerned, but they are very stubborn people. The President asked if they didn’t seem worried and Ball said he thinks they are afraid, but they have got their pride up and their necks out on this thing and they have considerable contempt for the Indonesians. Ball said each side is pretty close to a settlement here, if we could just get them to sit down.

The President agreed. He said he thinks the telegram is fine if we can take out what the thing might look like.

Ball said there is one other thing. He said we got hold of Ned Kenworthy, who is doing the Times story, and Kenworthy said it will be a very different story from the Voss story.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking.

1 See Document 230 for the telegram as sent after the President’s revisions were made.

2 For the portions that the President and Ball agreed to leave out of the cable, see footnotes 3 and 4, Document 230.

3 Ball had a discussion with van Roijen that day, but no record of it has been found.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, February 12, 1962, 10:30 p.m.

907. Eyes only Attorney General from Ball. Your 1424.1 Since your telegram arrived I have had a further frank talk with the Dutch Ambassador who has reconfirmed our impression of the Dutch position at this point.2 If the Indonesians are willing to drop their demand for preconditions to talks the Dutch will be willing to discuss any aspect of their differences including transfer of West New Guinea administration to Indonesia. However they do not feel that they are faced with “force majeur”, and they feel they are committed to seeing to it that the people of West New Guinea get a fair deal.3

If the Indonesians would drop pre-conditions and they could sit down together with patience the Ambassador believes they could reach agreement, but the Dutch are not prepared to sit down without a third party present. Ambassador van Roijen believes that only the United States possibly can exert pressure on the Indonesians to negotiate without preconditions and he hopes that we will use our influence to this end.

On the basis of this discussion as well as of many previous soundings both in Washington and the Netherlands I am persuaded that we cannot tell the Indonesians that if they agree to talk with the Dutch on the basis of no preconditions, the outcome will be settlement of the question on their terms. The Dutch are not willing to put us in position to say this even on a private and unofficial basis. The only hope is that the Indonesians can be persuaded to agree to drop their demand for preconditions in which case the possibility of an outcome acceptable to the Indos seems good. I hope you can make this the main thrust of your discussions with Sukarno and Subandrio. The Indonesians should realize that they cannot expect the Dutch to surrender before negotiations have begun.4 If talks can get started, we will continue to encourage both sides to come to an agreement.

I regret that this may not give you what you need for useful discussions and I recognize that you will be under great pressure to give more substantial assurances. However, I am convinced that if we can get over the present hurdle and persuade the Indos to sit down quietly and negotiate they can quite likely develop a mutually acceptable solution since I am persuaded that there is a good deal of flexibility in the Dutch negotiating position.

In answer to your second question, if the Indos should agree to discussions without preconditions this would necessarily change the whole picture. It is difficult, however, for us to prejudge the outcome since we could decide what were “meaningful arrangements” only in the light of the discussion as it actually proceeded. The Indo position would certainly be much stronger in our opinion and in the opinion of the world if they actually sat down to negotiate but even so we could not be in position of condoning use of force. It is difficult at this point to see what form our stronger support could take and I think it would be unwise to try to define it in advance with any precision.

In your discussion with GOI officials, believe you will wish bear in mind the following: 1) We have avoided accepting role of mediator in this dispute as we believe our leverage with both parties can best be exercised if we are not directly in the middle. Our recognition that a third party should participate in talks caused us to take the initiative in asking SYG U Thant to undertake the task of mediator. He agreed to do this and has been in contact with representatives of both sides in New York in recent weeks.

2) The substantive positions of both sides are now very close. Both sides suffer from a long history of controversy and bitterness on this question. Price and “face” are major factors in the positions of both sides. We believe that negotiations can be successful if they can be started in a manner that will not be humiliating for either side.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Lindquist and Ball, cleared by Bell and Tyler, and approved by Ball.

1 Document 227.

2 See footnote 3, Document 229.

3 At this point, the following two sentences were crossed out: “This means, according to the Ambassador that while willing to discuss a transfer of Administration they would not be prepared to see such a transfer take place before the population had an opportunity to express their will. However they are prepared to work out arrangements under which the Indos would have access to WNG to put their case before the Papuan people so that the Papuans could make their decision on a fully informed basis.”

4 The following phrase was crossed out at this point: “and they should understand that we cannot ask them to do this.”

231. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 231. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 6 p.m.

1445, In one and one-half hour session with President Sukarno this morning, Attorney General Kennedy made strong plea for GOI to come to conference table without preconditions. Sukarno, who pressed for “greater assurance” that negotiations would not fail, said he would consider matter and advise us further on Sunday. Djuanda, Foreign Minister, and Ambassador were also present at conversation.

Attorney General made clear his understanding pursuant reftel that if Indonesians would drop their demands for preconditions to talks the Dutch would be willing to discuss any aspect of their difference, including transfer of West New Guinea administration to Indonesia. He said he was convinced that dispute could be resolved at conference table, emphasized that we had brought pressure on Dutch to drop their original precondition and that sympathy in US for Indo position which was strong few months ago had recently altered due fact people cannot understand Indos’ unwillingness to negotiate. Kennedy stressed that as a major world statesman Sukarno must appreciate utter absurdity of permitting question of peace or war on so important an issue to turn on procedural rather than substantive point and underlined continuing damage to Indonesian cause resulting therefrom.

GOI must “go last mile” as President Kennedy had said at disarmament negotiations in Geneva. Indos had everything to gain and nothing to lose from negotiations. In our opinion an acceptable solution would result from talks but if this did not happen and GOI felt it must take military action its position before world would be strengthened.

AttyGen also stressed President Kennedy’s personal friendship for President Sukarno and his feeling of confidence that important issues could be resolved through their mutual personal understanding. He pointed out that there was bad feeling in Holland against US as a result of our action on troop transport issue, said Indos must be willing to make procedural concession or we could do little more.

Sukarno asked direct question: “Are Dutch willing to transfer administration over WNG to Indonesia?”

AttyGen replied: “I do not know.” President Sukarno then pressed point that mere listing of topic of transfer of administration to Indonesia on agenda was meaningless unless Dutch were actually willing to do so and queried whether under these circumstances the US would support the Indonesian position at talks. AttyGen Kennedy replied in the negative, pointing out, however, that if talks were underway position of US as helpful friend would be strengthened.

Sukarno turned again and again to point as to whether we considered that if item of transfer of administration on agenda it meant Dutch would in fact transfer. In each case, Kennedy refused to commit himself.

Djuanda strongly disagreed with Kennedy’s statement that even if negotiations failed GOI position would be stronger. His view was that it was vital to enter talks with some assurance of success since only alternative then would be military action.

Kennedy commented that he would agree with Djuanda’s position if we did not think issue could be settled satisfactorily, understanding that satisfactorily meant that WNG should, in some way and in some form and at some date be transferred to Indo. He emphasized that Dutch have not told us they would be willing to turn over transfer of administration to Indo but (1) we were anxious to see a satisfactory solution to this question and (2) we recognized that solution satisfactory to Indos could not be obtained without territory in some way at some time going to GOI. If we did not think talks had chance of success we also would not be urging them.

Sukarno then asked whether US would guarantee that if Indos entered talks with preconditions, US would bring pressure on Dutch to transfer administration of territory to Indo.

In replying to this Kennedy said (1) US is vitally interested in success of talks; (2) if talks are held on the basis of our estimate of Dutch intentions of reaching satisfactory solution and we find we have been misled, obviously our position would change.

Attorney General stressed Indos were playing for big stakes here and had good chance of winning but that they must enter talks without preconditions. He said flatly that we could not get the Dutch to enter talks with preconditions, emphasized this was matter of prestige with Dutch and they could not be moved on this.

President Sukarno asked whether AttyGen could guarantee talks would not fail. Kennedy said he could not; best he could do was to say that in our judgment a satisfactory solution would be reached. If Indos dropped demand for preconditions he considered “possibility of an outcome acceptable to Indos seems good.” Sukarno said, “By satisfactory you mean transfer of administration to Indonesia?” Kennedy replied US is interested in peaceful solution, such solution must be acceptable to both sides; solution acceptable to Indos involves transfer of administration of WNG.

Subandrio queried whether this meant that the US sees that transfer of the territory to Indo is an essential part of any solution to the problem. Kennedy referred question Ambassador who said it was self evident that peaceful solution must be one satisfactory to Indos as well as to Dutch.

After final vigorous plea by Kennedy, Sukarno said he would consider matter and talk further on Sunday.

Subandrio then summarized two major points in talks as he saw it: 1) if Indos would go into talks without preconditions US could assure GOI that WNG would be agenda item, 2) that US considered negotiations had reasonable chance of success and would bend its efforts to that end.

Comment follows.1

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Attached to a copy of this telegram at the Kennedy Library was a note indicating that the President read it “with interest.” (Kennedy Library National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 1/62–3/62)

1 Document 232.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 5 p.m.

1448. For the President and Secretary of State. From the Attorney General. Embtel 1445.1

Comment:

It was our distinct impression that Sukarno would be willing to enter negotiations without preconditions.

I suggest this could be used with Dutch to assure that discussions would achieve a successful solution. It would be unfortunate if two parties sat down at our urging and no solution developed.

It seems clear that Indos are absolutely firm on transfer of administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia but will make concessions on self-determination and other matters to obtain this.

The Ambassador and I both feel Sukarno will concede on preconditions issue if we are willing push in this matter. If the Dutch do not come through we would feel that they had let us down.

We have made it quite clear that no guaranty can be given but we would be misleading Indos if there was not a good chance of success as result of talks.

I am seeing Sukarno again Sunday, February 18. It would help very much if I could have a short message from President Kennedy containing expression of good will for President Sukarno and a statement that together the two Presidents, after this issue has been resolved, can work together to bring about tremendous progress for all free peoples. Sukarno is a great admirer of President and values his feelings highly. A message from President Kennedy at this point might tip the balance and result in getting negotiations underway.2 Any further suggestions would be most welcome.

In discussion today we kept strictly in bounds of Deptel 907.3 I consider we have reasonably good chance of success at this point on very important matter. In my judgment Indos will fight unless this issue is resolved, and this would be full of dire implications for the free world in Asia.

If Sukarno does agree to come to negotiations without preconditions, can we tell him in confidence that the US will bring pressure on the Dutch during the negotiations to ensure that transfer of administration of West New Guinea to Indonesia is incorporated as part of solution?

My appointment with Sukarno is at Bogor Palace at 9:30 Sunday morning, which means I must have message and suggestions not later than Saturday evening Djakarta time February 17.

Request niact reply.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

1 Document 231.

2 Telegram 921 to Djakarta, February 15, contained a personal message from President Kennedy to President Sukarno, approved by Kennedy, to be delivered by Robert Kennedy. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–1562)

3 Document 230.

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 233. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 14, 1962, 6 p.m.

1450. For Secretary. Embtel 1449.1 During conversation on Pope, Sukarno at one point said: “Can I bargain with you”, and then indicated reluctance to put matter on bargaining basis. Pressed by Attorney General, however, he finally indicated he would trade Pope for assurance of US pressure on Dutch.

Attorney General refused any consideration this kind, pointing out two issues were not comparable—one was major world question; other purely humanitarian matter. He said US recognized GOI had every right to execute Pope; that if GOI did so it would make no difference whatever in our position on West New Guinea.

Jones

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Pope Case. Top Secret; Priority; Eyes Only; No Distribution Outside Department.

1 Telegram 1449, February 14, reported on Robert Kennedy’s discussion with Sukarno, on February 14 on the release of Pope. (Department of State, Central Files, 298.1122-Pope, Allen Lawrence/2–1462)

234. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 234. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)Source

Washington, February 15, 1962, 11:35 a.m.

Bundy said the President agrees to the play of the telegram1 but has a few language changes.2 He said instead of saying it is not politically realistic simply say “Dutch cannot be expected to promise”. He said fight them in quite the form of the paragraph that warns that this would not justify use of force—a sign that use of force would serve no one’s good. The President doesn’t want to go back and play the old record. Bundy said “While we think this would improve your position, of course you must understand that our whole object here is to avoid a resort to force”. He said this is just a more substantial matter that we will use our influence if negotiations begin—our influence with both sides in hope that a successful resolution can be achieved. He said in saying this we are, of course, aware of the positions of both sides.

Bundy asked if you bilateralize it does it take some of the sting out of seeming to promise things to him and Ball said no, he thinks that is perfect. Ball said he had no objection to it at all. He added that we had told him that was best. Bundy said of course if you sit down you can count on our good offices because we do not want a solution that is satisfactory and in saying this we are aware of the interests of both sides. He asked Ball if he would put something like that in and Ball said yes.

Bundy said the President thinks the reference to Cuba is a good thing. He said one other thing the President would add is to congratulate the Attorney General for his appeal on Pope but to add that if this does not produce a result the Attorney General should find a way of indicating at the end of his trip that in view of the fact that the matter has now been raised personally by both the President and the Attorney General the United States regards the matter as closed and is disappointed in this and does not propose to discuss it further.

Ball asked Bundy if he had seen 14503 and Bundy said yes. He said this just seeded into the President’s feelings. The President thinks that the Attorney General should point out that this was done as a personal thing, it is not a trading matter, and that he is now reemphasizing his brother’s personal concern and they still hope that this will produce a result, if it does not they don’t expect to raise the matter again. Ball agreed.

Bundy said “the President agrees that we ought to deal with the Dutch after, and he agrees I think, although he doesn’t, he’s not sure he sees the point, but I think he agrees, and anyway I certainly do and he doesn’t disagree, with the notion that this should not be done until Bobby is safely in the air, that we don’t want US pressing Dutch in the context of the Attorney General’s presence. The President does want to bring it home to the Dutch and he wants to bring home his own interest and his suggestion, which I have some diffidence about, because I don’t want to sour the wires, is that at a certain stage I ought to have a talk with van Roijen. I’m quite willing to do this but only on the basis of really getting the marching orders very clear with you and Averell and all concerned ahead of time.” Ball agreed.

Bundy said there may be some advantage in making it clear to them when Bobby gets up to The Hague by telling him this. Bundy told the President “I think George Ball will be against it not because you can’t tell Bobby, because he doesn’t want to tell Jones; doesn’t want Jones to have it in his head at this moment that we are in fact going to twist the Dutch arm because the temptation to say it in the environment out there is very heavy” and the President’s comment on that was “What do you think we can send to Bobby that doesn’t hit Jones?” Bundy told the President he didn’t know and that he wasn’t sure we wanted to do it that way. Bundy said he thinks the thing to do is to explain this point to Bobby when he is safely in the air. Bundy said he doesn’t think it is worth it. Ball said he thinks frankly that it puts Bobby under a kind of difficult strained situation and Bundy agreed.

Bundy said he thinks the Secretary’s cable should have a sentence or two about “After careful discussion with the President we think ...” so that Bobby will be very sure that the President himself has latched on to this problem. Ball agreed and said he thinks that would be very useful. Bundy asked Ball if he would, fix the first paragraph that way and Ball said yes. He asked Bundy if he wanted it right in the very beginning and Bundy said he didn’t see why not.

Bundy turned to the letter.4 He said they think it is a little softer in tone and a little less aware of the sort of urgencies of Sukarno than might be useful. Bundy said next to the last line—the question of New Guinea “which I know troubles you” to “which I know is of such high importance to you” or something like that. He said then they would strengthen the language about “I hope that you and the Dutch can soon arrange to sit down”. Bundy said we would urge him more “and it is for that reason that I am urging that you and the Dutch sit down together” or “that we are urging so strongly”. Ball said he liked that better. Bundy said the sentence before that seems a little longer than it needs to be but he said he didn’t think there is any point in flapping with it very much.

Bundy said it is a persuasive cable and the President thinks it really has to be. Bundy said we are moving along here and after we’ve sort of heard what happens next then we can talk further about exactly how to deal with van Roijen and give the Dutch its own worry.

[Here follows discussion of an unrelated subject.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office.

1 Document 235.

2 Ball and Bundy had an earlier telephone conversation at 8:50 a.m. that day. A transcript prepared in Ball’s office reads as follows:

“Bundy telephoned regarding the telegram done last night. He said he had talked to the President last night and he was fretting as to whether we could say anything. It is flat. We can’t tell them we are going to use influence.

“Ball said we were in a position where we have to be flat or the excitement and pressures, which are considerable, and the atmosphere as it is, which was implicit in their telegram, if we give even a kind of suggestion of something, it is likely to get bigger on the way through translation. We were flat, but he wanted him to get the idea that this was no hero. Bundy said he noticed it was a reminder of Sukarno’s character and endorsement of voting. He is a persuasive fellow, of course.

“Bundy said when he tries this on the boss he may want to call Ball.” (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia)

3 Document 233.

4 See footnote 2, Document 232.

235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 235. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, February 15, 1962, 2:44 p.m.

922. Eyes only for Attorney General from Secretary. Embtel 1448.1 FYI After careful discussion with the President we have concluded that line reported your 14452 is about as far as we can prudently and honorably go prior to Indonesian-Dutch talks under U Thant auspices. I do not believe we should give Indonesians assurances which, if known to Dutch, would cause latter to refuse enter negotiations or withdraw from them. Must anticipate that Indos will leak anything you say to them to their advantage. Apart question our integrity in dealing with many governments involved in similar international disputes, Indos would be in position to exploit such assurances without regard to effect on us and our reputation and in the event negotiations failed they could and probably would maintain we had betrayed them.

Moreover, believe it important that Indonesians be given no basis for attributing any statement to you which might prejudice goodwill effect of your subsequent visit to the Hague.

I am convinced Dutch are ready to enter talks with no preconditions and with readiness accept wide open agenda. I am also convinced that Dutch will make major effort to find peaceful settlement because they know that they will not sustain major or protracted military operation for defense West New Guinea. However, they must have opportunity to adjust their position in the course of negotiations when actually faced with choice between additional compromises or military action. Dutch will not and cannot be asked to promise in advance of negotiations that Indonesian view will prevail. Their formula self-determination is already in part a means for retreating from West New Guinea. It is our view that negotiations will either constitute or present additional face-saving formulas before this question is settled.

If we were to give the Indonesians our assurance that the outcome of negotiations with the Dutch would be the transfer of administration of West New Guinea in a manner satisfactory to the Indonesians, we would be putting ourselves in the position of assuming entire responsibility for the solution of the West New Guinea problem. Solution of problem of administration could occur in a variety of ways employing a number of different methods. It would be impractical for us to commit ourselves to Indonesia that we would support in the course of negotiations what in effect would be their concept of the best way in which a transfer might take place. For example, Indonesia would prefer a direct and unequivocal transfer. However, use of the UN as an interim administrative agency might have many advantages for both sides.

Possibilities now exist for talks to be held between Dutch and Indos without preconditions by either side, and with the assurance that no aspect of the problem, including transfer of administration to Indonesia, will be barred from discussion. Appointment van Roijen as negotiator suggests that Dutch prepared enter negotiations in spirit of flexibility, and looking for possibilities mutually acceptable solution. We believe, as van Roijen has repeatedly told us, that chances for agreement are good once talks have started, and you have conveyed our opinion to the Indos. We should not go further than this. Effect of acceding to Indo request for our assurance as to outcome of talks would be to permit them to say publicly that they are entering negotiations without preconditions, while they would, in fact, have transferred the onus to our shoulders.

Much as we wish to see issue settled peacefully and rapidly, our agreeing to Indo request would only involve us in assuming open-ended obligation in which we might well be unable deliver. At the same time, in urging that talks be begun, it is implicit that our interest also extends to seeing them concluded successfully.

This is a point you made to Sukarno (reported your 1445). In your conversation on Sunday you may therefore wish to say that if negotiations are undertaken we will use our influence with both sides in the hope that a successful resolution can be achieved—and that in making this statement we are of course aware of the views and positions of both sides.

Re third paragraph your 1445, in order avoid any possible misunderstanding or misquotation later, believe you should take view that while we think negotiation would improve Indos position, Sukarno must understand that our whole object is, of course, to avoid resort to force.

Sukarno has long been attempting mobilize maximum pressures on US regarding West New Guinea while making minimum investment on his part in good US-Indonesian relations. There has been lack of reciprocity in his attitude. Pope case only one instance. During most recent UNGA, on 23 votes where we and Soviets differed, Indonesia voted with Soviets 19 times and with US four times. On Monday same day you arrived Djakarta Indonesians made most disagreeable and unhelpful speech at UN on Cuba.

I congratulate you on your able appeal for Pope. If this appeal does not yield a concrete result, I suggest that you say this to Sukarno at the end of your visit: This question has now been discussed with him both by the President and the Attorney General. The President has raised the problem not as a trading matter but on a personal basis with Sukarno and you have reemphasized the President’s personal concern. You and the President still hope that this will produce a positive result, and will be deeply disappointed if it does not. But in any event you regard the matter as closed and the President does not propose to discuss it further with Sukarno.

At this particular stage of difficult relations, it is immensely useful that you are able to visit Sukarno and to make clear in so direct and personal a way that his natural desire squeeze utmost from his bargaining position is approaching diminishing returns and that our helpfulness to Indonesia’s future on broad front depends on his adopting statesmanlike moderation now.

From your 1445 it is clear that you have made real contribution to advancement of West New Guinea problem. If as a result of your efforts the Indonesians can have been brought nearer the conference table this will be a major diplomatic achievement. End FYI.

Text letter from President follows in separate message.3

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–1462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rusk and Ball; cleared by Tyler, Cleveland, Harriman, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Ball who initialed for Rusk. Repeated to The Hague and USUN.

1 Document 232.

2 Document 231.

3 Telegram 921 to Djakarta, February 15; see footnote 2, Document 232.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 236. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, February 20, 1962, 3 p.m.

1496. Rome eyes only Attorney General. Reference: Embassy telegram 1487 to Department.1 In hour and half informal coffee session alone with President Sukarno this morning he said he would “get over” his injured personal feelings (details regarding which are being conveyed by Attorney General) but made it unmistakably clear that he was not prepared to move forward on WNG question in way Kennedy has asked.

On other hand, Sukarno appealed to US Government to be “more assertive” on WNG issue.

“Give me one positive thing I can go back to my people with to show them where America stands” he said. “America says we are friends with both sides. This is not the America I know historically. This is not the America of the revolution or the America of Abraham Lincoln. The WNG question is a question of right or wrong. The America I know has always stood for what it thought was right regardless of consequences”.

President did not commit himself on Pope matter but neither did he back away from previous position. I appealed to him not to let personal pique affect his attitude on questions important to US-Indonesian relations as well as to personal relations between Presidents of the fourth and fifth largest nations in the world. I expressed briefly personal and official regret at what had happened, pointed out that Attorney General Kennedyhad apologized to President Sukarno for moment of temper and that I trusted there was an end to the matter.2

I presented to him handwritten letter from Attorney General thanking him for his hospitality written just before plane takeoff.

Sukarno replied that he had accepted Attorney General’s apology; he had indeed told Kennedy it was okay but that Djuanda was furious. He added some reports regarding incident had already leaked out and his own position might be difficult.

He commented he could not understand why humanitarian considerations should be so important in Pope case when American justice executed people by gas or electric chair without considering feelings of their families. I indicated question had now become question of good faith between two Presidents, that he understood political realities, that if issue got to floor of Congress and on front pages of newspapers it would not only result in embarrassment of administration which not responsible but as case became cause celebre would make it more difficult for us to be helpful in WNG affair. I emphasized that these were two completely separate questions, there was not and could not be any element of trading involved on either side. Practical fact, however, was that US press was already urging administration to take Dutch side in WNG affair as result of demonstrations against Embassy in Djakarta and Consulate in Surabaya. Furor over Pope case could only result in exacerbation this feeling, something I was convinced none of us wanted and which could be injurious to important causes. I urged President to look ahead to future, consider Pope case in this light, think about tremendous possibilities for cooperation between our two countries after WNG issues had been settled as I was confident it would be settled.

As for Sunday’s brief altercation, I said I knew it was too trivial to be taken seriously by Sukarno against background of big picture. I explained close personal relationship of affection, regard and confidence between two Kennedy brothers, related how Bob Kennedy had dedicated his life ever since World War II to political career of his brother, how hardly day went by that brothers were not on direct telephone connection between their offices discussing vital issue of day. Attorney General’s emotion should be understood in this context—he felt his brother was being let down, and he lost his temper for a moment as we all do occasionally—indeed, as Djuanda had on same occasion. Sukarnonodded, said he understood this; as I was aware, he had not taken brief outburst as seriously as others. I said I was glad to hear this, had been confident all along he would take long view, as friend of Indonesia I could say without hesitation this was attitude in interest of his own country.

Sukarno then turned to West Irian question. Indicating he regarded our conversation up to this moment as primarily personal and unofficial, said he had something official to convey.

“I am not satisfied with merely an agenda item on subject transfer of administration to WNG,” he said. “I want to be clear on that.”

I said I assumed he was saying what he had said before that he wanted assurances that Dutch were willing to negotiate in good faith on this issue.

“Not only that” he replied, “I want a clear understanding that the purpose of the meeting is to negotiate the basis of transfer of administration to Indonesia. I will not settle simply for an item on the agenda. The Bob Kennedy proposal is not satisfactory.”

Sukarno made this statement just as aide signalled him other visitors were waiting and he rose, indicating time interview was at end. Consequently I had no opportunity to probe further as to what he meant although statement on its face appeared to be repetition of what Sukarno had said Sunday as reported paragraph 6 reference telegram. As such it would represent slight whittling down of his final position as we understood it at end of conversation.

It may have been just as well this statement was made, perhaps deliberately, at end of interview. Sukarno was not in his best mood, said he had only four hours sleep. Had we discussed point further he might have committed himself in wrong direction to greater extent than we or he would desire.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated niact to Rome.

1 In telegram 1487, February 18, Jones reported on his and Robert Kennedy’s last meeting with Sukarno on the morning of February 18 and their discussion on West New Guinea. Jones summarized the discussion as follows: “Upshot was that Indonesians would drop requirement for preconditions provided agreement could be reached with Dutch on agenda before formal talks commenced. Preparation for formal negotiations should be worked out at secret sessions where both parties could talk freely without embarrassment. In response our objection that Dutch wanted third party present, Indonesians agreed accept third party if they could be assured of secrecy. They would accept US but not U Thant representative, since leaks bound occur in UN atmosphere.” (Ibid., 656.9813/2–1862)

2 According to telegram 1492 from Djakarta, February 19, Robert Kennedy engaged in a heated exchange with Sukarno on February 18 when Sukarno refused to put a date on the release of Pope. According to Jones, Robert Kennedy “expressed himself in forceful terms as dissatisfied.” Jones learned from Foreign Minister Subandrio that Sukarno planned to free Pope in 4 or 5 weeks, but he did not tell Robert Kennedy because he did not wish to appear to be responding to pressure. Sukarno would inform President Kennedy directly of his decision. (Ibid., 298.1122-Pope, Allen Lawrence)

237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 237. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, February 21, 1962, 1:02 p.m.

947. For Ambassador Jones. Rome and Berlin eyes only Attorney General. Your 1496 and 1487.1 You should go back to Sukarno ASAP and inform him that his failure to accept the proposal discussed with the Attorney General, that negotiations for a peaceful settlement with Dutch would be undertaken without preconditions provided agreement was reached on agenda, has pulled the rug out from under the Attorney General. He had planned on his visit to The Hague to urge Dutch to accept reasonable wording agenda item on transfer of administration.2 If Sukarno wishes the Attorney General to use his visit to The Hague to advance the possibilities of negotiations for a peaceful settlement, Sukarno must provide him with some basis for talk with Dutch.

It seems to us much in Sukarno’s interest, if he sincerely wants negotiated settlement, for him to stick to proposal for negotiations without conditions but providing for prior agreement on agenda.3

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2-2062. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Harriman and approved by Rice. Repeated to The Hague, Rome, and Berlin. A typed note on the bottom of the source text indicates that Harriman obtained approval of this telegram in draft from Rusk and the President.

1 See Document 236 and footnote 1 thereto.

2 In a telegram to Jones (via non-Department of State channels) before the controversy over Sukarno’s backtracking was reported, President Kennedy sent the following message to Jones:

“President suggests that when you see Sukarno, if you think it useful you should indicate wisdom of Indonesians waiting for further word from us after Attorney General has visited The Hague. In any event, President would like you to indicate that Attorney General can be expected to speak as frankly in The Hague as he has in Djakarta.” (Telegram CAP 6068–62 from McGeorge Bundy to Jones, February 19; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 2/11/62–2/19/62)

3 In telegram 1525 from Djakarta, February 22, Jones reported that “Attorney General Kennedy is now in a position to tell Dutch that negotiations for a peaceful settlement with Dutch will be undertaken by Indonesians without preconditions provided agreement is reached on agenda in secret talks.” Jones reported that he was unable to see Sukarno, but he received assurances that Subandrio’s statement represented Sukarno’s views. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2262)

238. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and Secretary of State Rusk 238. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and Secretary of State RuskSource

February 22, 1962, 2:05 p.m.

Ball summarized Sukarno’s reply to the letter sent to him by the President via the Attorney General.1 The thought here is there should be an agreement on the form of the agenda confining at least the part of the discussion on the transfer of the administration to some solution which would envisage an independent New Guinea or something of that sort. In other words, let’s be cool to all other possibilities except an ultimate transfer to the Indonesians. We are thinking along the lines of trying to inject the Canadians into this. We might, in effect, advise the Attorney General to say to the Dutch we don’t want to be the intermediary because we don’t want to be in a position where it would turn out to make the Dutch unhappy. If the Dutch still want us to do it, we would consider having someone sit in on the Ambassadorial talks on the assumption the Dutch would be prepared to tell us that they think they could probably work out an agenda item which would meet the Indonesian conditions, assuming the Indonesians would be prepared to tell us that they would be willing to have an agenda item that would pay some attention to the self-determination item. This would be a shift in our position since it might well inject us into this thing, but there is the general feeling here that we are probably in it anyway. Ball wanted the Secretary’s reaction to the above before talking to the President.2 Instructions should go out today.3

The Secretary said he thought, unfortunately, we have to do it.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia. No classification marking. Transcribed in Ball’s office. Rusk was at Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina; Ball was in Washington. Rusk and Ball had an earlier brief conversation, part of which dealt with Indonesia. The transcription reads as follows: “Ball said this related to a message we had in from Sukarno answering the President’s letter. Very briefly he comes out in favor of some kind of secret informal negotiations along the pattern of the Algerian and French in the presence of a third party. It is not explicit that he would like to get us in the middle of some sort of negotiation. On the question of Pope, he says Pope won’t be executed, but that he will be released soon and the timing has to be left to him.” (Ibid., Atomic Testing)

1 The text of the reply from Sukarno was transmitted in telegram 1519 from Djakarta, February 22. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2262) Regarding Kennedy’s letter to Sukarno, see footnote 2, Document 232.

2 Ball and Kennedy had a brief conversation earlier that day at 11:15 a.m. The transcript of the conversation reads as follows: “Ball summarized Sukarno’s reply to the letter which the President had sent with the Attorney General. (Ball was quite inaudible.)

“The President asked why the Indonesians wanted to talk to a third party. Ball said they think they would get nowhere otherwise. There has to be a third party in order to bring pressure.

“President asked what do we tell Bobby. (Ball inaudible.) President asked would we be the third party. Ball said this was what Sukarno was trying to do—to push us into that position. Ball thinks we should resist this. It puts us in an impossible position.

“President said when the instructions were ready, he would like to read them.” (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia)

3 Document 239.

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Germany 239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in GermanySource

Washington, February 23, 1962, 7:27 p.m.

2343. Eyes only for Attorney General from Secretary. We have been giving considerable thought to what you should say to the Dutch re West New Guinea and we feel that the best thing would be for you initially to confine yourself to soliciting their estimate of the situation and eliciting from them any suggestions they might have on next steps leading toward start negotiations with Indonesians. We recognize you are to be in The Hague only briefly and that Foreign Min is coming Washington early in March.

Your discussions will offer good opportunity seek from Dutch their thoughts as to ultimate outcome negotiations. Do the Dutch really believe that WNG could ever be viable as an independent state? Do they really believe that there can be any outcome ultimately other than the transfer of administration to Indonesia? Do they believe that it is wise for them to concentrate on the question of possible future independence of WNG, rather than on the establishment of friendly relations between the Netherlands and Indonesia?

FYI: It is extremely important in context of the NATO alliance and of our relations with the Dutch, that they themselves come to the inevitable decision regarding the transfer of administration to Indonesia, without ever being in the position of ascribing this decision to pressure on them by the US Government. We recognize that this makes your assignment delicate. End FYI.

In broader context world situation, it clearly in interest of West that WNG dispute be resolved peacefully in order provide minimal opportunity for Communist encroachment Indonesia.

As you probably aware, both Dutch and Indos have in past expressed to us their desire that we assume role of moderator as third party in negotiations. We are reluctant to play this role, which might well result, in the event of failure, in our being damned by both sides. However we recognize that, in view of the present stalemate, we are probably the only country which could attempt to play an active role, with any likelihood of moving things off dead center. Therefore, should the Dutch revert to their previously expressed desire and hope that the United States inject themselves directly into this issue, suggest you reply along following lines: 1. We have been very leery assuming this role because: a. Agenda of US Government is very heavy and problem is one we could do without. We regret that it was not possible to settle this problem in the late 1940’s.

b. We fear day might come, if our efforts failed, when we would be blamed by Dutch for loss WNG.

c. We value our alliance with Dutch too highly to incur the risk lightly of jeopardizing it.

d. We are also reluctant to run the risk of having the Indos blame us for thwarting their aspirations in WNG.

2. However, it is now clear that it will be necessary to obtain prior agreement on an agenda, if formal negotiations are to take place.

3. Sukarno has suggested secret informal negotiations at Ambassadorial level for purpose of developing formulation of satisfactory agenda as a preliminary to formal negotiations. We would be prepared to have U.S. representative participate as moderator in the secret talks.

As condition to such participation however we would need prior assurances from Dutch that they would be prepared to accept formulation of an agenda which includes an item relating to transfer of administration of WNG to Indonesia in a form which would preclude alternative solution such as Independent Papuan state, or any solution other than ultimate transfer of administration to Indonesia.1 We would also insist as condition our participation that both Dutch and Indonesians agree to negotiate formulation of question of self-determination in a manner to permit a genuine expression of the will of the people.

4. We would envisage our role as being confined to a period of preliminary talks on the agenda. The fact that such talks were being held would be kept secret as well as the substance of the talks themselves.

5. We would therefore envision that at such time as an agreed agenda has been established, formal negotiations would then take place under the auspices of the Acting Secretary General.

As appropriate and without regard to question U.S. mediation, suggest you use following arguments in pointing out to Dutch why peaceful compromise so urgently in interest of West in general. (We fear Dutch focusing too much on WNG itself rather than on larger problem of where Indonesia goes.)

(1) US efforts achieve peaceful compromise not based on pros or cons of WNG issue or on supposed anti-colonial bias; dependent rather on our acute concern over further undermining of Western position in Indonesia, which in turn could affect whole Free World strategic position in Far East. US, as ally which bears brunt of Free World defense in Far East, is presently fighting to hold on to mainland Southeast Asia. This position would be outflanked if Indonesia brought within Bloc orbit. So we greatly disturbed by drift Indonesia into closer Bloc relations, which actively exploiting WNG issue to that end. Massive nature Bloc aid to Indonesia, plus great strength of Indonesian Communist Party, amply demonstrate Bloc regards Indonesia as prime target. Hence West too must focus on larger problem; we cannot afford to let WNG become an East-West issue, with Bloc backing Indos while (as Moscow and Peking obviously hope), we back Dutch.

(2) We are also fearful that WNG will escalate into another major crisis in Southeast Asia, at a time when we are pre-occupied with Laos and South Vietnam. While US well aware of how Sukarno has blown up WNG issue for his own reasons, we think he may have pushed past point of no return. Some denouement in 1962 seems almost inevitable. We not reassured by any estimates of unreadiness Indonesian forces to mount full-scale attack before end of 1962. Indonesians could take many harassing actions short of this to precipitate shooting incidents. Indeed Indonesian strategy may be aimed primarily in this direction.

(3) Thus we see good chance of further military action and counteraction following torpedo boat incident; risks of escalation high in this situation, even if neither side intends to let things get out of hand. We do not wish run such risks or jeopardize Western position in Asia, particularly as WNG issue already narrowed almost to point of settlement. We do not see wisdom of risking military confrontation over possession Dutch have already decided to give up.

(4) On the other hand, we are under no illusions that peaceful resolution WNG issue will automatically recoup West’s competitive position in Indonesia. What we do fear is that Sukarno has let his momentum carry him to point where failure to reach peaceful compromise will almost inevitably drive him into even closer ties with Bloc. This particularly likely if crisis erupts into military confrontation in which Bloc backs Indonesians.

(5) Moreover, where do Dutch expect to come out eventually on WNG? Is a viable WNG feasible even over time and with continued substantial Dutch aid? Indonesian efforts unlikely to stop, for example, just because WNG became independent; indeed this prospect would only egg them on to forestall it.

(6) We share Dutch view that adequate provision should be made for self-determination, and Indonesians seem agreeable. We convinced that compromise settlement can be reached which will permit Dutch to disengage with honor, while resolving WNG issue in a way which enhances Western position vis-à-vis Communists.

(7) Indeed, it important that Dutch, with their long experience and past ties to Indonesia reassume a major role in maintaining this Western position. Therefore, we anxious to see Dutch use WNG settlement as leverage for re-establishing Dutch presence in Indonesia. Sukarno seems quite willing to re-establish diplomatic relations, and may go further if this made part of bargain. Thus Dutch may have real opportunity here.

Your use of the above arguments should help put US position in perspective. We would hope you could in addition to Luns talk directly to De Quay to make sure US view gets directly to high-level in Netherlands Government.

Please tell Luns we are looking forward very much to his visit in Washington on his way to Japan.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2362. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Tyler, Stone, Komer, and Ball; cleared by Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, and Tyler; and approved by Rusk. Regarding the drafting and clearing process of this telegram, see Document 238. Repeated priority to The Hague and to Djakarta and USUN.

On February 23, McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of the State draft of this telegram to the President in Palm Beach, Florida. Bundy observed that “it is based on premise that Sukarno’s more forthcoming position on willingness negotiate justifies our putting real heat on Dutch. This draft goes further than anything we’ve said yet to Dutch in telling them we believe only satisfactory solution will be one resulting in effective transfer WNG Administration to Indonesia.” Bundy also noted that it expressed U.S. willingness to act as moderator for the secret talks. Harriman, Ball, and the NSC Staff strongly favored this approach, Bundy stated, while Rusk was skeptical. Bundy also noted that he and Komer felt that the State draft needed “more ammo” to convince the Dutch to accept it and provided additional arguments. The telegram as sent combined the State draft with Komer’s and Bundy’s suggestions. (Telegram CAP 5078–62 to, Palm Beach, February 23; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 2/23/62–2/24/62)

1 On February 23, Assistant Secretary of State Cleveland sent Rusk a memorandum dissenting from this cable on the grounds that it “would not serve the national interests of the United States.” Cleveland could see no reason why the President and his brother felt they had to “take on the onus of forcing the Dutch to capitulate completely.” (Department of State, Central Files, 696.9813/2–2362)

240. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler) to Secretary of State Rusk 240. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Tyler) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, February 27, 1962.

SUBJECT

Dutch Request for Transit West New Guinea Reinforcements Via US

Ambassador van Roijen called on me today at his request to inform us that the Netherlands Government may soon be asking permission to fly Dutch Marines to West New Guinea to reinforce the garrison there.1 The Ambassador stated that his government has obtained reliable information from intelligence sources, that the Indonesians intend to launch a large-scale combined operation against the south coast of West New Guinea toward the first of April. The Ambassador said that his government had full confidence in the reliability of this intelligence based on past experience with the source. The Netherlands Government does not intend to withhold action pending further evaluation of the intelligence.

In response to questions, van Roijen indicated that his government had given him no instructions concerning the possibility of reconsidering this policy; however, on a personal basis he thought that his government would only be prepared to drop present plans if specific developments occurred (which could be confirmed by intelligence sources) indicating that Sukarno had called off the April 1 attack. The Ambassador said that the Dutch would, be swayed by actions and not merely by Sukarno’s words. He added that if the Indonesians moved to drop their preconditions and sit down to explore negotiating possibilities, this also might cause the Dutch to refrain from reinforcing West New Guinea.

The Ambassador denied that the timing of this request had any connection with the visit of Foreign Minister Luns on March 1 and 2. He emphasized that his call did not constitute a formal request for transit authorization, but was merely putting us on notice that we would probably receive such a request a fairly short time prior to the intended flights. The Ambassador did not state the number of troops involved but estimated that two companies of marines would be sent via the US, although he intimated that additional reinforcements would go by other means which did not involve the US. The Dutch were not specific with respect to the routes to be followed, mentioning both the polar route via Anchorage, Honolulu and Wake, as well as the continental route via New York, San Francisco and beyond.

In the course of conversation, the Ambassador mentioned invoking the transit rights “agreement” of 1958–1959 covering the emergency flight of these troops to WNG via US military bases, which is described at Tab A.2 As you know, we hold that the US is no longer bound by this “agreement.” The Bureaus concerned, EUR, FE and IO, agree that the decision to be made regarding the transit of Dutch troops to WNG now is essentially a policy question. We believe that a decision on this matter should be reached within forty-eight hours, since it is possible that we may receive a formal Dutch request even before the visit of Foreign Minister Luns.

The Dutch clearly expect us to honor what they view as our commitment. Failure to do so can have serious consequences for US/Dutch relations with repercussions in NATO, the UN and other areas. To deny the Dutch request will also cause serious misgivings among our NATO partners who are already suspicious of our ability to preserve Western positions outside of Europe. The attitude of NATO on the question of withholding arms to Indonesia is clear evidence of this.

On the other hand, if the troops do move, Governor Harriman believes that it will destroy our position with Sukarno and, in all probability, cause him to withdraw his agreement for secret talks regarding an agenda for negotiation of a peaceful settlement.

This is a difficult decision on which the Bureaus concerned are unable to reach an agreed position. I would, therefore, suggest that you may wish to call a meeting with Governor Harriman, Mr. Cleveland and myself to consider the course we should adopt.3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2762. Secret. Drafted by Beau-dry and cleared by Sisco and Harriman.

1 The memorandum of conversation is dated February 26. (Ibid., 656.9813/2–2662)

2 Attached but not printed. The issue was outlined in more detail in a memorandum from Tyler to U. Alexis Johnson, February 21. (Ibid., 656.9813/2–2162)

3 The suggestion that Rusk approve or disapprove a meeting was crossed out. Harriman saw van Roijen alone on March 1 and told him that the United States was not going to give permission for military overflights to reinforce West New Guinea. Although a NATO country, the United States had a responsibility for preventing a war between the Netherlands and Indonesia. (Ibid., 656.9813/6–162)

241. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 241. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of StateSource

Paris, February 27, 1962, 4 p.m.

4044. From Robert F. Kennedy. Luns, now in Paris and at his request, called on me at my hotel for 30 minutes this evening “to discuss an urgent matter.”

1. He said our conversations at The Hague might be subject to misunderstanding and he wished to clarify Dutch position re WNG. Luns stated Dutch were willing and anxious to have conversations with Indonesians in secret, and would prefer these conversations to take place in presence third party. But if necessary, he stressed, conversations could take place bilaterally.

2. Luns said Dutch were anxious to settle WNG problem, despite any contrary impression I might have received during my stay in The Hague, and that he appreciated US efforts this regard.

3. I said I appreciated this change in attitude and the effect I thought a reasonable approach on part of Dutch could have in Indonesia. If this matter is successfully concluded, I said, this might be end of a Communist flanking movement in Southeast Asia.

4. In contrast to his attitude in The Hague, Luns was in an extremely receptive mood. He said he had talked with the Queen and Prime Minister, and it is my impression that in last 24 hours Netherlands Government has had a change of heart.

Lyon

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–2762. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to Djakarta and to The Hague.

242. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 242. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, February 28, 1962.

Meetings with Luns

We have laid on a session for 6 p.m. Thursday afternoon to concert a common strategy for the key meetings with Luns on Friday.1 We are also arranging to give Luns an appointment with you for 10:15 on Friday, before he sees the Secretary and others at State, so that you can set the tone for these subsequent discussions.

Subject to the first-hand views of the Attorney General, I would argue that Luns’ visit is perhaps the crucial moment in our effort to prevent an otherwise almost certain march of the WNG issue toward full-blown crisis.

The Attorney General’s probe in The Hague has clearly rocked the Dutch, witness Luns going to Paris to reassure him on Dutch willingness to negotiate. However, the only real concession Luns has apparently made is that the Dutch would talk bilaterally with the Indos (which the latter have sought for some time). This may be merely another tactical maneuver, designed to show Dutch willingness to negotiate. We still don’t know the answer to the key question—will the Dutch accept some form of Indo administration, which is Sukarno’s rock-bottom price?

New urgency is added by the recent Dutch démarche alleging they have reliable intelligence of a planned Indo attack around 1st April, and notifying us that Dutch may soon ask permission to fly out two companies of reinforcements via US. We have no such data, but the Dutch could be right. In either event, the Dutch “request” is probably (like KLM incident)2 an attempt to force our hand. Two companies would add almost nothing to Dutch capabilities to resist whatever Indos could launch by 1 April, but our letting them through would cause a violent Indo reaction, and might actually precipitate a military incident.

In any case, with the WNG situation sliding toward a crisis, we have to make the most of Luns’ visit. At a minimum we must get talks going, to give us more time to bring the two sides together.

The nub of the matter is to get the Dutch to agree to discuss some form of transfer of WNG administration to Indonesia (recognizing that Dutch agreement even to talk about this would in fact mean that they are prepared to accede). The chief question which you must decide at this point is how far the US should go in pressing Luns in this direction.

I am convinced that the only way to get Luns to buy is if we make unmistakably clear that the US regards this solution as the only sensible one. Both you and the Secretary in effect bought this solution in authorizing the Attorney General to offer US “good offices” to help bring the two parties together on an agenda if the Dutch would agree to including “transfer.” The cables indicate, however, that he decided not to make the offer because the Dutch attitude seemed so stiff.

The Dutch Government will almost certainly go along with whatever Luns will accept. Therefore, our problem is how to convince him that such a compromise is in the best interests of The Netherlands as well as the entire West.

It will do no good to argue the merits of the Dutch vs. Indonesian cases with Luns. He is absolutely immovable on this issue (indeed, Dutch have an excellent case).

Instead we must make him see the larger stakes for which we are playing. Our starting point should be that the Dutch have already agreed to give up WNG; the issue is how to handle its disposal. This issue turns on whether avoiding what otherwise seems likely to be an inevitable Dutch/Indo clash and preventing a further drift of Indonesia toward the Bloc are not more important than denying Indonesian title to WNG.

If the debate with Luns can be conducted on these terms, rather than on those Luns prefers, we have a good chance of moving him. We must get the Dutch to face up to the consequences of their present policy, which we doubt they have thought through. Do they really believe that a military clash can be avoided unless they change their present policy? Even so, do they really contemplate that WNG could ever be viable as an independent state? Would Indonesia give up if WNG became independent? In sum, is there any satisfactory outcome possible other than transfer of administration to Indonesia, with guarantee of later self-determination?

We have two powerful arguments to use with Luns: (1) the importance to our whole Far East position of not letting Indonesia move yet closer to the Bloc, which is skillfully exploiting the WNG issue to this end—the US, fighting to hold on to mainland SEA, cannot permit it to be outflanked in this manner; (2) the resultant necessity of avoiding a full-blown crisis over WNG, with high risk of military escalation, which will convert the issue into an East/West confrontation of benefit only to the Bloc (these arguments are spelled out more fully in State to Bonn 2343 attached).3

There is yet a third argument I would urge using if necessary. The Dutch may still hope that if the Indonesians start shooting, we and the UK will be forced to support our NATO ally. We could knock this prop out from under them by making clear that, if the Dutch pursue their present course, they cannot count on us. One means of underlining this would be to tell Luns regretfully that we can’t let any Dutch reinforcements transit the US, on grounds that it would slam the door on peaceful settlement. We’d reconsider only on clear, unequivocal evidence of an imminent attack beyond Dutch capabilities to handle.

There is a good chance that we could get the UK to make a similar démarche refusing logistic support to the Dutch (who would badly need Singapore).

The above are strong words to use on a close ally. What justifies them, nonetheless, is that the resultant strain on US-Dutch relations seems likely to be minor compared to what might happen if we fail to settle this affair before it blows up. We still have a good chance for preventive diplomacy, if we push hard now. And there is really no way in which we can avoid being put in the middle on WNG; the only question is whether to be dragged in later, or take the plunge now.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 2/62. Secret. In a covering note to Bundy, Komer suggested that, in setting up the meeting at the White House at 6 p.m. on March 1, it was “best to let Rusk talk to AG and others at lunch first, because Rusk won’t be ready to make up his mind until after he has heard from Bobby.” Robert Kennedy had lunch at the Department of State with Rusk and others on February 28. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) Komer also stated that he thought “it important President talk to AG and concert strategy before the latter sees Rusk.” Komer asked if Bundy would give the President this memorandum that evening. There is no indication whether Bundy did so.

1 The meeting, which was held at the White House from 6:15 to 7:30 p.m., on Thursday, March 1, was attended by the President, Robert Kennedy, Rusk, Ball, Harriman, McGhee, Cleveland, Tyler, Ambassador John S. Rice, and Komer. The meeting was described as “off the record,” and no other record of it has been found. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

2 On February 1, the Netherlands Government requested permission for two chartered KLM flights of 100 military personnel each to cross U.S. territory to Biak, West New Guinea. By the time the request was made, the first aircraft was on its way. Although these soldiers were replacements and not reinforcements, the U.S. officials worried that the flight, which was already known to the press, would upset negotiations for a settlement of the West New Guinea issue. They reluctantly agreed to allow the first flight to continue, stopping at U.S. territory to refuel, but insisted that the second flight not take place. Replacements could travel by regular KLM flights. (Memoranda of conversation, February 2, and telegram 662 to The Hague, February 3; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/2–262 and 656.9813/2–3623)

3 Document 239.

243. Editorial Note 243. Editorial Note

On March 2, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk met with Foreign Minister Luns at the Department of State from 10:58 a.m. to 12:35 p.m. Rusk was accompanied by Harriman, Tyler, and Bell; Luns by van Roijen, Schiff, and Huydecoper. During the discussion, Rusk stressed the West New Guinea issue within the context of U.S. international relations. Luns complained about continued delivery of U.S. arms to Indonesia and worried about the military threat to the 18,000 Dutch there. An account of the discussion was transmitted to The Hague in telegram 739, March 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–262)

Luns also met with Harriman to discuss a report that he had just received from The Hague that the Indonesian Ambassador in Bonn had been authorized to discuss the West New Guinea problem with Luns. Luns was confused about Sukarno’s intentions and hoped he was not backing away from having a third party present in secret talks. Harriman remarked that it was the U.S. understanding that while Sukarno preferred bilateral secret talks, he was willing to hold discussions in the presence of a third party. (Memorandum of conversation, March 2; ibid.)

At 4:45 p.m., Luns went to the White House to meet with President Kennedy; see Document 244.

244. Memorandum of Conversation 244. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 2, 1962, 4:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea Problem

PARTICIPANTS

For the Netherlands: Foreign Minister Luns

Ambassador van Roijen

For the United States: The President

William R. Tyler, Acting Assistant

Secretary, European Affairs Ambassador John S. Rice

Robert M. Beaudry, Western European Affairs

The Foreign Minister began by expressing his appreciation for the efforts of the Attorney General in trying to arrange talks between the Netherlands and Indonesia designed to achieve a peaceful solution of the West New Guinea problem. Mr. Luns added that on the basis of these soundings, if the Indonesians are sincere, the Dutch are prepared to sit down for preliminary talks leading ultimately to negotiations for a settlement. In response to a question from the President, the Dutch indicated that they prefer New York for the site of the conversations, since they desire to have some link to the UN even if U Thant himself does not act as a third party.

The Foreign Minister told the President that the Dutch have evidence that the Indonesians are prepared to attack West New Guinea toward the first of April and that the Dutch Government feels obliged to provide at least minimum protection for the 18,000 Dutch nationals, including women and children, in the territory. Mr. Luns said that the Cabinet had decided to send two fleet destroyers and two submarines presently in the Caribbean to West New Guinea. The President expressed concern that movement of ships at this time should not give the Indonesians an excuse to refuse to start talks on the grounds that the Dutch are reinforcing West New Guinea. The President emphasized the necessity to start the talks and give them a chance to succeed. He indicated the belief that if the United States were involved in these talks in any way, the Indonesians would be reluctant to break them off. The President emphasized that in his opinion, publishing the Cabinet decision to send naval vessels to West New Guinea would be most unfortunate.

In response to a question from the President, Mr. Luns said the ships would go through the Panama Canal and that they could arrive in West New Guinea waters by March 25. The President stated that he would have to discuss the matter with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to find out whether these vessels could move through the Canal without coming to public notice.

Mr. Luns agreed with the President’s analysis of the possible adverse effect on getting the Indonesians to start talks if reinforcements are sent through the Canal. However, Mr. Luns said, his Government had the responsibility to protect the Dutch citizens in West New Guinea and that if a massacre occurred, the Dutch Government would be unable to answer public criticism if it had not taken all reasonable measures to protect these people.

The President asked when the Dutch intended to send these ships, and Mr. Luns replied that the time is getting short since the vessels are due to return to the Netherlands. He emphasized the necessity for making a public statement since the crewmen would be writing home, and the Government would be asked questions in Parliament; therefore, the matter could not be kept secret. The President said he saw no sense in making a formal announcement at this time. The Foreign Minister pointed out that he had convinced the Cabinet not to send the aircraft carrier Karel Doorman to West New Guinea, since this would be an extremely dramatic gesture and might have a bad influence on the Indonesians. Ambassador van Roijen noted that the Dutch must keep their defenses up in order not to tempt Sukarno to make an attack. The President indicated that he understood the Dutch Government’s problem but noted that if the talks get underway it would be extremely difficult for Sukarno to make an attack. The President said he would be in touch with the Foreign Minister or the Ambassador later after checking with the Secretary of State. (After talking with the President later on the evening of March 2, the Secretary spoke to Mr. Luns and obtained his agreement to hold up the naval reinforcement pending the outcome of present efforts to get the talks started, Mr. Luns said he would send a telegram in this sense to the Dutch Cabinet prior to its meeting at 10 a.m. March 3.)

The President urged the Foreign Minister to take a broad view of the free world’s position in Asia in attempting to reach a peaceful solution of the West New Guinea dispute. The President said we are not indifferent to the difficulties the Dutch face but that in our opinion the problem is not a basic cold war issue. The President noted the extensive effort the United States is making in Viet Nam to prevent the Communists from taking over and that, while we have no confidence in Sukarno, if Indonesia goes to war the chances of a Communist take over in that country are greatly improved. This would be a disaster for the free-world position in Asia and would force us out of Viet Nam. The President said that the Attorney General believes that the Communists in Indonesia are making a substantial issue out of the West New Guinea question.

The Foreign Minister remarked that there is no difference in principle between maintaining self-determination for the population of West Berlin or West New Guinea, and the Dutch have a moral obligation to make certain that the people of West New Guinea have the chance to exercise self-expression on their political future. The President observed that the most important moral obligation we have is to keep Communists from making any further gains, adding that this task weighs heavily on all free-world countries. When Ambassador van Roijen suggested that the Dutch could not sacrifice the Papuan people and maintain its national honor anymore than the United States could run out on West Berlin, the President pointed out that in addition to the moral obligations involved, West Berlin is considered essential to the defense of Europe and the United States.

After a long description by Foreign Minister Luns of the evolution of the Papuan people and the need to take their desires into account, the President wondered whether there was any chance of an agreement coming out of the talks with the Indonesians. Although the Foreign Minister expressed pessimism, Ambassador van Roijen pointed out that there are aspects of the problem on which an agreement is possible and that some interim arrangement concerning the transfer of administration would be necessary. The President remarked that the Attorney General had reported considerable sympathy for the Netherlands in Indonesia and suggested that the Netherlands could play a most useful role in the Pacific if it could establish a good working relationship with Indonesia, but this could only be done if the West New Guinea matter is settled.

The President emphasized that by concentrating too much on the future of the Papuan population we may be forgetting our other obligations in Asia and free Europe. He urged that these matters be kept in perspective. The President noted that we have all the potential wars we need at the moment, and we do not consider it useful to become involved in this dispute. From the strategic viewpoint, we believe that West New Guinea as such is of little consequence, since if the Communists have Indonesia the additional territory does not alter the strategic situation. The President emphasized that we are not indifferent to the problems facing the Dutch in this matter, but we must balance it against our commitments elsewhere. We do not intend to become directly involved.

Ambassador van Roijen commented that the most important thing to do is to get the talks started. Mr. Tyler pointed out that we are instructing Ambassador Jones to inform the Indonesians of the Dutch willingness to hold secret preliminary talks in the presence of a third party, not necessarily U Thant.1 The Indonesians will be informed that during these talks both sides must avoid any measures political or military designed to exert pressure on the other.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–262. Secret. Drafted by Beau-dry and approved by the White House on March 10. The time of the meeting, which was held at the White House and lasted until 5:50 p.m., is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 In telegram 987 to Djakarta, March 2, 8:34 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–262)

245. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 245. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 3, 1962.

McGB

Next Steps on WNG

As I gather you know, after painful JFK/Luns session last night1 Secretary and others corralled Luns and told him forcefully that any announcement of actual or pending Dutch naval movement would make talks impossible and put us on the spot. Secretary told Luns that JFK was highly disturbed at this unexpected development. Luns agreed to recommend that Dutch cabinet postpone any ship movements or announcements that they pending.

If Dutch buy (as is likely), our next job is to find some kind of formula which Dutch and Indos can buy. Bill Tyler’s view, which I think a shrewd one, is that Dutch are perfectly prepared to see WNG go eventually to Indonesia but are most unwilling to have a straight transfer of administration pronto. There must, in Dutch view, be some form of interim stage between Dutch withdrawal and Indo admin which would save Dutch face by not appearing as flat surrender.

Sukarno’s asking price, on other hand, is clearly a prompt takeover of admin. All he seems willing at present to grant is any kind of assurances of later self-determination Dutch want.

Thus crux of matter is to find some form of interim arrangement which will be less than straight handover to Indos yet provide iron-clad assurance that admin will shortly become totally Indo, plus some Indo voice in interim admin.

Ideal solution would be Dutch-Indo condominium for first two to three years, phasing into total Indo admin for remaining period until plebiscite. Bonus effect of this solution would be to bring Dutch and Indos close together again and help re-establish Western influence (via Dutch) in Indo. But it would require high order of statesmanship for Dutch and Indos to get along this well.

Alternative might be three-power trusteeship—Dutch/Indo/Malaya or Philippines for initial period.

At any rate Luns talks have revealed to us how tough and pinheaded Dutch position really is. To me, this clearly validates my feeling that we have to get very tough with Dutch. Best way is for us and UK to make unmistakably plain that Dutch cannot count on our support in any way if a clash occurs. If they let things go to this point they can reap their own folly. All we would do would be to evacuate non-combatants upon request.

Action. Let’s treat this like crisis situation it has become, and request President to direct setting up Task Force, with Ball or McGhee as chairman (this has become too big and dangerous an issue for business as usual any more). Moreover, we need some way to overcome splits within State (FE vs EUR vs IO) and get a clear policy line. TF to gin up pronto an action program with teeth.2

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/62. Secret.

1 See Document 244.

2 Komer attached a draft NSAM creating a task force; it is not printed. He also handwrote a note as follows: “and I can push more effectively to this end.”

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, March 6, 1962, 8:57 p.m.

998. Ambassador van Roijen called on Secretary today to give response Dutch government to Department’s approach (Deptel 990) made on basis Djakarta’s 15861 and subsequently 1590.2

1) Dutch agree to Indo proposal that third party be asked to serve by U Thant rather than be appointed by U Thant.

2) Dutch will do everything on their part to maintain secrecy of talks.

3) Also agree there is to be no daily reporting by third party to U Thant as long as understood he will report “when anything new comes up.”

4) Dutch do, however, attach importance to fact of talks taking place being publicized. It was pointed out that Indonesian reference to precedent of French-Algerian talks would mean that fact of talks taking place, though of course not substance of talks, would be made public.

5) They would prefer that locale not be London, but rather somewhere in reach of Washington and New York, preferably within US.

6) Dutch lay great stress on necessity of avoiding any further military preparations and inflammatory statements while talks in progress.

Secretary has asked Dutch consider following individuals for third party role: Ellsworth Bunker, Frederic Boland, Ernest Gross, Eugene Black, Walt Rostow, John McCloy, Hamilton Fish Armstrong. In our view Bunker would be particularly outstanding candidate.

Request you see Sukarno or Subandrio soonest and pass on substance this message including list of names suggested to Dutch.3 You should stress Secretary’s view that Bunker would be absolutely first class. Believe with favorable Indo reaction this message we should be able firm up arrangements for secret talks get under way.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–562. Confidential. Drafted by Stone; cleared by Tyler, U. Alexis Johnson, Buffum, and Rice in draft; and approved by Bell. Repeated to The Hague and USUN.

1 In telegram 1586 from Djakarta, March 4, Jones reported that at U.S. instigation Sukarno had agreed to secret preliminary talks with the Dutch in the presence of a third party. There would be no precondition as long as it was understood that transfer of administration of West Irian (West New Guinea) would be the first issue raised by the Indonesians. Sukarno agreed that the mediator could be asked to serve by U Thant, but there could be no reporting to U Thant by the third party. Sukarno preferred an American of stature, an “honest man,” with no affiliation to the United Nations. According to telegram 990 to Djakarta, March 4, when this information was presented to the Netherlands Embassy in Washington, Schiff asked if Jones had also received specific assurances that threats would cease during the talks. Schiff promised to cable this information to The Hague. (Both ibid., 656.9813/3–462)

2 Telegram 1590 from Djakarta, March 5, reported that Subandrio stressed that the Indonesians did not want the secret talks to be publicized in advance of the discussions. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–563)

3 In telegram 1616 from Djakarta, March 10, Jones reported that Subandrio agreed in general to the points in telegram 998, but felt it important that the talks be publicized as “preliminary discussion, preparatory contact, or the like rather than negotiations.” Subandrio’s first choice for the third party was Rostow, because he was the only candidate he knew. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–562)

247. National Intelligence Estimate 247. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, March 7, 1962.

NIE 55–62

THE PROSPECTS FOR INDONESIA

The Problem

To analyze the major trends in Indonesia and to estimate probable developments over the next year or so with special reference to Indonesia’s international orientation and to the West New Guinea dispute.

Conclusions

1. Until a settlement satisfactory to Sukarno is reached with The Netherlands, the West New Guinea dispute will continue to overshadow and strongly influence all other foreign and domestic issues in Indonesia. Sukarno will probably draw even closer to the Bloc position on major international issues as Indonesia continues to rely heavily on Soviet military aid and political support for the prosecution of the West New Guinea campaign. The Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) will continue to exploit the issue and to obstruct a negotiated settlement. The diversion of army energies into the West New Guinea campaign will continue to hamper its efforts to reduce PKI strength and influence. President Sukarno will probably continue to be successful in balancing the army and the Communist Party off against each other while retaining for himself the controlling power position. In the event of Sukarno’s death, it is likely that the successor administration would be headed by top ministers in the present cabinet with Nasution and the army assuming the predominant role in their support. (Paras. 5–8, 12, 16–22)

2. A West New Guinea settlement, although it might initially enhance the prestige of Sukarno and the PKI, would cost both an issue that has proven politically profitable for over a decade. The PKI, especially, would be forced to seek new issues and would probably turn to further “anticolonial” campaigns against such targets as Portuguese Timor or Western economic interests in Indonesia. It is unlikely that any efforts of this nature would be carried very far during the period of this estimate. In the event of a settlement, the army would probably give greater attention to countering PKI influence in the country. (Paras. 19–20)

3. Sukarno almost certainly believes that Indonesia cannot rely solely upon diplomatic pressures for a prompt settlement of the West New Guinea dispute. In any case, he will continue the buildup of Indonesian forces in eastern Indonesia and the frequent use of threats of action. We believe that chances for a negotiated settlement of the dispute are slightly better than even.1 However, as Indonesian military capabilities improve, Sukarno will become increasingly prone to employ military measures short of an all-out invasion in an effort to weaken the Dutch bargaining position and thereby pressure them into meeting his terms for negotiation. We consider an all-out invasion of West New Guinea to be an unlikely course of action for the Indonesians during the period of this estimate. (Paras. 31–36)

4. The economic outlook for Indonesia over the next year or so is definitely unfavorable. The most serious problems will probably be the intensification of inflation and the continued decline of foreign exchange reserves. Sukarno is unlikely, however, to concern himself with remedial measures. On the contrary, continued economic frustrations will probably provide him an additional incentive to raise the pitch of the West New Guinea crisis. (Paras. 23–27)

[Here follow a 7-page Discussion section and a map of the area.]

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 55–62. Secret. Prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force; the Joint Staff; and NSA. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with it on March 7 except the Atomic Energy Representative and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believe that available evidence does not yet warrant the assessment that chances for a negotiated settlement are slightly better than even. They note, however, that changes in the general atmosphere surrounding the parties to the dispute have improved the chances for negotiating a settlement. [Footnote in the source text.]

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the NetherlandsSource

Washington, March 12, 1962, 8:52 p.m.

767. Based on several exchanges with both sides, Department believes we can now proceed effect arrangements for preliminary secret talks. Addressee posts should therefore convey following information at appropriate high level, urging acceptance in most persuasive manner.

1) Place: Private estate one hour from Washington capable of handling twenty people or maximum eight from either side. If asked you may state Department making this facility available at no cost to Indonesians or Dutch.

2) Date: March 20th.

3) Third Party: Ellsworth Bunker, former US Ambassador to Argentina, Italy and India.1

4) We would view any aggressive or hostile moves or statements during talks with utmost seriousness. We feel special responsibility see that negotiations are held in atmosphere free of military threats and one in which existing status quo would remain unchanged.

Addressee posts should cable niact upon obtaining acceptance of above arrangements.2 You may also state that we are informing U Thant of substance this message and, upon acceptance both sides, will request him invite Bunker perform third party role of moderator, and issue formal invitation both sides meet in accordance above arrangements.

For USUN: You should seek appropriate opportunity fill U Thant in on substance this message and request his approval in principle. You should also indicate we expect call on him issue invitations indicated above in near future.3

Every effort should be made for time being maintain absolute secrecy. We envisage no public announcement re preliminary talks although we recognize fact of talks will undoubtedly become known.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–1262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Stone; cleared by Bell, Rice, Tyler, and Sisco; and approved by McGhee. Also sent niact to Djakarta as telegram 1012 and repeated priority to USUN and to Baguio for Harriman, who was attending a conference of U.S. Far Eastern Ambassadors.

1 On March 12, Ball telephoned Bunker and asked him to perform “a delicate and important task.” Ball told Bunker he was one of the few people on which both sides could agree. Bunker agreed. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, March 12; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia)

2 This was done, according to telegrams 1633 from Djakarta and 679 from The Hague, both March 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–1362)

3 This was done, according to telegram 3067 from USUN, March 14. U Thant was surprised to learn he had a role in initiating the talks as both sides gave him to believe that the United Nations was not going to be involved. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–1462)

249. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 249. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, March 14, 1962, 8:41 p.m.

1025. Tokyo for Harriman. Dutch confirmed to us today Cabinet decision had been taken to send two destroyers and two submarines through Panama Canal to visit ports on West Coast North America, possibly Vancouver, and a Mexican port. We are not yet sure whether they will wish visit U.S. ports.

Dutch Cabinet over past four or five days has been considering sending these ships to West New Guinea. We understand there was 12-hour Cabinet session in which lines were sharply drawn. Decision not to send vessels to WNG was obtained by opponents of such move only through compromise of movement to West Coast North America. We are convinced that Luns talks in Washington with President and Secretary1 and later discussion here with Van Roijen played major part in final decision not to send vessels to WNG. While we regret Dutch decision, it must be viewed as compromise much less distasteful to Indonesians than original plan which had strong backing in Cabinet. We have absolutely no doubts as to genuine Dutch desire to negotiate in good faith. Visit of vessels to West Coast North America designed in part to allay growing concern in Netherlands for safety of their people in WNG. Dutch Govt view this as obligation which they could not ignore.

In your conversation with Subandrio reported your 16192 he told you that “No one could give binding assurance his Government would not make necessary preparations for its defense whenever these became necessary. By the same token, he said, he would not ask the Dutch to promise not to reinforce West Irian, although if they did so reaction would be most severe.”

Your 1610 of March 83 states that Subandrio agreed with your point that question of Dutch reinforcement WNG and its antipode, Dutch fear of military buildup, were “offsets” and the two parties should reach understanding during secret talks on maintenance of status quo.

We believe restraint which GOI exercised following January 15 naval incident was most constructive and very strongly urge same constructive attitude this development.

We will exert every effort prevent despatch of these vessels any further in direction of WNG while talks are under way. We are in fact convinced that once talks get started, Dutch will not make move of nature which could be interpreted by Indonesia as provocative.

You should see Subandrio soonest, drawing on foregoing and using all persuasive powers necessary prevent violent or otherwise ill-advised GOI reaction.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–862. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Lindquist, Tyler, and in draft by Rice; and approved by McGhee. Repeated to The Hague, USUN, Geneva for Rusk, and priority to Tokyo.

1 See Documents 244 and 245.

2 Dated March 12. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–1262)

3 Not printed. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–862)

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, March 21, 1962, 8:23 p.m.

1052. Bangkok for Harriman. Secret preliminary talks have gotten off to amiable start in atmosphere remarkably free from tension.

Initial meetings Ambassador Bunker has held with Malik and Van Roijen privately, jointly, and with full staffs have produced initial state ment in which both sides have briefly reviewed background of dispute and stated present positions.1

In early session Indo delegation proposed two points formula for agenda which could form basis subsequent formal talks under aegis U Thant:

1. Transfer WNG administration to Indonesia, including task protecting welfare Papuans.

2. Normalization Dutch-Indo relations.

Indos insist that agreement on this formula will enable initiation early formal negotiations—possibly next week. They hold that proposed agenda states essence of problem and they display unwillingness discuss issues in greater substance. Malik says he is authorized only to discuss agenda items in broad form such as that above, that he has no authority delve into substance such matters as, for example, nature of interim administration. However, it clear Dutch envision need for some sort interim administration and Indos have not excluded this.

Van Roijen has stated GON unwillingness transfer administration to Indos (implication is direct transfer). As reason he cited Dutch “promises” to Papuans, said Papuans oppose such transfer and stated chaos would result. He opened discussions by suggesting exploration of nature intermediate administration might assume. He has protested that his govt cannot be expected to sign “blank check,” by agreeing agenda formula proposed by Malik, while at same time Malik not prepared discuss even informally modalities of interim administration.

As of second day, it appears that Indos have come to talks with above proposed agenda formula and have no authority delve further into issues. It also clear Van Roijen not prepared or not authorized concur in Indo formula without substantial exploration and agreement details.

In circumstances, Ambassador Bunker has approached Malik with suggestion and counsel that he seek broader authority from Djakarta. Malik has agreed and says he will cable Djakarta tonight. Hopefully he would be enabled explore nature interim administration and also enter into some substantive discussion of the differences separating parties and means reaching agreement on them.

Chargé should seek immediate appointment with Subandrio for approach to GOI paralleling Bunker’s to Malik.2 You should express our pleasure that talks have started in harmonious atmosphere out of public gaze. You should make point that what appears to be Malik’s limited authority has seemed so far to preclude discussions of even that degree of substance which seems essential to agenda formulation process in this case. Subandrio should be assured that items discussed in secret preliminary talks would not be precluded from subsequent formal negotiations. Subandrio told you (Deptel [Embtel] 1694)3 that preliminary talks were to save Dutch face but not to deal with substantive dispute. Fact is we see no way to save Dutch face without discussion at this stage of substantive matters especially as they pertain to nature of interim arrangement and protection Papuan interests, leading to their inclusion in agenda. You should reiterate that present secret talks present unique opportunity for peaceful resolution of thorny problem, that eyes of world focused on these talks and that it our desire and hope that agreement can be reached through unrestricted discussion.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2162. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Rice, in draft by Tyler and Wallner, shown in draft to Bunker, and McGhee was informed of the substance; and approved by Bell. Repeated to The Hague, USUN, Bangkok, and Geneva for Rusk.

1 The initial meetings were covered in detail in memoranda of conversation of the full group meetings on March 20 and 21 and one-on-one meetings between Bunker and Malik and Bunker and van Roijen, March 21. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2062 and 656.9813/3–2162)

2 In telegram 1702 from Djakarta, March 22, the Chargé reported that he had made the approach, “but without much detectable effect.” Subandrio had agreed to spell out in more detail instructions to Malik, but was not prepared to allow Malik to discuss substantive questions such as interim administration. That type of issue would be negotiated by Subandrio himself, the Foreign Minister stated. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2261)

3 Dated March 21. (Ibid.)

251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 251. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, March 24, 1962, 12:28 p.m.

1073. Vientiane for Harriman. For Ambassador Jones from McGhee. I am glad you have been able to return Djakarta as I believe your presence and your unique relationship with Sukarno will be invaluable in helping us through tight situation.

As you know talks got off to good start in extremely harmonious atmosphere. However it very early became clear that Indo delegation had no authority engage in discussions which would probe into substance of differences between them and the Dutch. On first day Malikproposed two-point agenda which they said if agreed by Dutch would form adequate basis for subsequent formal negotiations in which all other questions and details could be discussed. Van Roijen protested that he could not agree to Indo agenda which he described as “blank check”. Instead he suggested that the negotiators should probe into substantive issues such as nature interim administration, in sufficient detail at least to provide some outline of direction problem would move. However Indos continued insist that their mandate did not permit such discussions.

It seemed evident to Bunker and we agree that it is unrealistic to expect agreement on agenda to emerge from such limited discussion as appeared available to Malik and for this reason Bunker suggested to Malik that he seek broader authority. You will know from previous messages the basis of Malik’s decision return Djakarta.1 You also have been informed of subsequent Zain and Nugroho discussions with Attorney General and in Department.2

In these circumstances I think it is essential for you to see Sukarno to give him our assessment and to urge him to provide Malik with greater authority as well as to make every effort possible to bring talks off successfully. I think you can best decide timing for approach to Sukarno which should be designed to back up in most effective way possible what we believe will be constructive Malik report to President as basis for requesting better negotiating authority.

Believe démarche to Sukarno should be constructed around following major points: (1) Talks have gotten off to excellent start in friendly and cooperative atmosphere. It clear to us that both sides have made major efforts to achieve situation free from tension and suspicion. We believe both sides making sincere effort. FYI only. Van Roijen told Bunker that Dutch not opposed to Indo participation in interim administration. He also made clear that Dutch would not wish participate. End FYI. Ambassador Bunker is pleased by cooperative attitudes displayed and wishes this conveyed to Sukarno.

(2) Substantial areas of basic agreement already have emerged. The Dutch have made clear their desire to leave the territory and the Indonesian delegation recognized the need for special provisions with respect to Dutch promises to the inhabitants of the territory. Both sides have indicated they could agree that some sort of interim administration or authority would be advantageous in facilitating the withdrawal of the Dutch. The Dutch have stated their willingness to continue financial support during a transition period. In final session van Roijen said that if things go in WNG as Indos expect (meaning that Papuans will opt for Indo if GOI had adequate opportunity present case), Indo will have gained objective and Dutch would not object. Added he did not think this assessment too optimistic. In private talk with Bunker van Roijen went even farther and said he believe WNG would eventually go to Indo because “there is no other place for it to go.” Finally both sides have expressed a desire to normalization of relations between their countries.

(3) With these broad areas of general agreement already established it is essential that every effort be made to find a suitable formula for resolving the differences that remain. Any other course would be incomprehensible. It is not realistic to even consider that war could be waged over an issue in which substantial agreement already exists and in which talks have begun satisfactorily on the remaining problems.

(4) We think that the next most useful step is to provide Ambassador Malik with authority to discuss these remaining differences in greater detail and we are convinced that problems can be worked out in such circumstances.

FYI. We believe it would be useful for you to weave in some discussion of the purpose of diplomacy, i.e., that the object of such activity is to achieve objectives, not necessarily to focus exclusively on immediate symbols. End FYI. Remind Sukarno of Subandrio’s statement to you that the GOI does not wish to humiliate the Dutch and explain to him that substantive agenda talks seem essential to finding a formula that will be face-saving and satisfactory to both sides. The Dutch are interested in achieving face-saving formula. Such a device should and can be found in arrangements for interim administration. We believe it extremely unlikely that Dutch can agree to transfer until such device agreed on. Therefore it essential that Indos be prepared to discuss the substance of this fundamental problem.

(5) Finally, you should again stress to him the importance of avoiding statements or actions which might be considered provocative and therefore prejudicial to successful negotiations. As you know this point was also made in Bunker’s final talk with Malik.

(6) Ambassador Bunker has seen this message and you may associate him with above assessment.

FYI only. While we consider it extremely important that Malik be successful in obtaining greater powers we consider it absolutely essential that in any event he return Washington to resume discussions. Circumstances preceding and surrounding his departure were such that Dutch as well as Department considers that he is making sincere effort to negotiate solution. Failure return would be serious breach of faith and would have very unfortunate effect on future prospects for diplomatic settlement. You should not make this argument to Sukarno unless and until it unmistakably clear that Malik will not be given broader instructions but in such event you should use this as last resort argument. End FYI.3

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2462. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Sisco, Rice, Tyler, and Bunker; and approved by McGhee. Repeated priority to The Hague, to USUN, niact to Geneva for Rusk, and niact to Vientiane.

1 Telegrams 1058, 1059, and 1066 to Djakarta, all March 22. (All ibid., 656.9813/3–2262)

2 Telegram 1067 to Djakarta, March 23, reported that Indonesian Ambassador Zain told Robert Kennedy on March 22, immediately after the recess of the talks, that Indonesia was disappointed with the results so far. Indonesian Minister Nugroho was called to the Department to clarify those remarks since the Department had concluded that the talks were proceeding well. Nugroho stated that the Dutch did not seem to realize that Indonesia’s primary concern was liquidation of the Dutch colonial empire and the fulfillment of Indonesian independence. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2362)

3 Jones saw Subandrio on March 26 and made these points. Subandrio was prepared to admit that the atmosphere of the talks had been harmonious and the Dutch showed understanding. The situation was not “hopeless,” but Subandrio could not quite admit it was “hopeful.” Subandrio stated Malik would return to Washington to resume the talks in a few days if a formula could be found to resolve the deadlock. (Telegram 1717 from Djakarta, March 26; ibid., 656.9813/3–2662) Jones saw Sukarno on March 30; see Document 255.

252. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 252. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 28, 1962.

McGB

Where Next on WNG?

With both sides engaging in brinkmanship, WNG crisis has moved into new phase of escalation.1 At least a chance, however, that this will make both nervous enough to want to resume negotiations.

But, as Jones puts it, we face chicken or egg proposition in getting talks restarted.2 Indos say Dutch have shown no willingness to negotiate transfer of administration; until Dutch make this clear Indos won’t come back. Dutch on other hand say in effect we can’t make such promises until we see more clearly what Indos have in mind.

Thus once again next step is up to US. We are already so involved as middleman, and risk to US strategic interests so great, that we can’t afford not to apply whatever pressures are necessary to bring parties back together (and keep them there until this painful issue resolved).

The two immediate essentials are to get Indos to express willingness to talk again (this may be tough in light Dutch reinforcements), and then get some sign of give from Dutch which we can use to get Indos back to table. I really see no alternative to engaging President at this stage (unless we could use AG again):

(1) State sending over JFK letter they propose Jones give Sukarno Friday (McGhee sent it back last night as too bland) in effort prevent Sukarno from going off deep end. I’ve told them speed it up.3

(2) State drafting JFK letter to Dutch asking in effect where latter expect all this to end, and I hope suggesting agenda formula.4 Van Roijen wouldn’t even transmit last US formula to Hague, so this letter must tell Dutch to fish or cut bait!

(3)We need a follow-through to above; I’ve suggested JFK letter tell De Quay we sending Bunker to Hague in order settle on formula, which he’ll then go and try sell to Indos. If mountain won’t come to Mahomet, let’s try reverse.

(4) As kicker we tell both parties that if they won’t buy our formula, we’ll have no choice but to withdraw and let them fight.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 3/62. Secret.

1 Indonesian air forces and Dutch naval forces clashed in waters around West New Guinea in the vicinity of the island of Gag on March 25. Earlier there was sporadic fighting between the two sides. (Telegram 707 from The Hague, March 26; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2662) In telegram 1075 to Djakarta, March 25, Ball asked Jones to urge restraint upon Sukarno. Sukarno should realize that infiltration, attacks, and threats only strengthened the hands of those in the Netherlands Government who wanted to take a hard line. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2562)

2 Jones made this observation in telegram 1726 from Djakarta, March 27. He saw “the chicken or egg conundrum” as follows: “Indos will not talk about substantive matters until they have clear indication that Dutch are willing to think seriously in terms of territory ultimately going to Indo and to help bring about this result. Dutch, on other hand, want to know the details before they agree to the end-result.” (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2762)

3 The letter was revised by McGeorge Bundy and sent in telegram 1086 to Djakarta, March 28. In it, the President encouraged Sukarno to renew the talks and to give a proposal from Bunker serious consideration. (Draft letter, March 28; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 3/26/62–3/29/63, and Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2862) Bunker also sent Sukarno a letter with similar exhortations. (Telegram 1079 to Djakarta, March 27; ibid., 656.9813/3–3762) The Bunker-proposed formula is in Document 254.

4 Two letters were sent to the Netherlands: one from the President to Prime Minister de Quay and one from Rusk to Luns. The letter to Luns, sent in telegram 856 to The Hague, March 31, alerted Luns to Bunker’s formula and to the Kennedy letter to de Quay. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–3162) In Kennedy’s letter to de Quay, sent in telegram 857, March 31, the President warned of dire consequences of a Netherlands-Indonesia war in the Pacific that neither the Netherlands nor the West could win. Kennedy’s letter also described Bunker’s formula. (Ibid.)

253. Editorial Note 253. Editorial Note

At the 498th meeting of the National Security Council on March 28, 1962, during which the Geneva negotiations on nuclear testing were the major topic, there was a brief discussion of Indonesia. That portion of Director of Central Intelligence John McCone’s memorandum of the meeting reads as follows:

“3. Indonesia

“Brief discussion brought out facts that as a matter of policy we would wish to do all we can to discourage both Sukarno and the Dutch from getting mixed up in a war. Mr. Bunker has written Sukarno a letter, drafted but not sent, from the President to Sukarno. The Dutch are actively moving destroyers and other ships into the area. They asked permission to fly two bombers manufactured by Lockheed (or Douglas) from the West Coast to Indonesia, however this was refused by State who insisted that the delivery of these bombers must follow the regular course which apparently is to deliver them via the East Coast to the Netherlands, otherwise it felt our position of neutrality would be lost.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files)

Regarding the President’s letter to Sukarno, see footnote 3, Document 252.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Netherlands 254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the NetherlandsSource

Washington, March 29, 1962, 3:59 p.m.

841. In effort to get talks started again Ambassador Bunker contemplates putting forward simultaneously to both parties following formula which assures GOI it will receive administration of WNG and Dutch that UN will be involved in freedom of choice. Formula would be substantive solution on which agenda for subsequent negotiations under U Thant could be based. Request your comments niact.

Begin Verbatim Text.

AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVTS OF INDONESIA AND THE NETHERLANDS

1. The Govts of Indonesia and the Netherlands would each sign separate agreements or a single agreement which would be presented to the SYG.

2. The Govt of the Netherlands would stipulate the transfer of administrative authority over WNG to a temporary executive authority under the SYG at a specified date. The SYG would appoint a mutually-acceptable, non-Indonesian administrator who would undertake to administer the territory for a period of not less than one year but not more than two. This administrator would arrange for the termination of Netherlands administration under circumstances that will provide the inhabitants of the territory the opportunity to exercise freedom of choice in accordance with para 4 below. This administrator would replace top Dutch officials with short-term, one year non-Indonesian and non-Dutch officials hired on a contract basis.

3. The temporary executive authority under the SYG would administer WNG during the first year with the assistance of non-Indonesian and non-Dutch personnel. Beginning the second year the SYG would replace UN officials with Indonesian officials, it being understood that by the end of the second year full administrative control would be transferred to Indonesia. UN technical assistance personnel will remain in an advisory capacity and to assist in preparation for carrying out the provisions of para 4.

4. Indonesia agrees to make arrangements, with the assistance and participation of the SYG and UN personnel, to give the people of the territory the opportunity to exercise freedom of choice not later than——— (period of time to be negotiated) after Indonesia has assumed full administrative responsibility for WNG.

5. Indonesia and the Netherlands agree to share the costs of the foregoing.

6. Once this agreement has been signed, the Govts of Indonesia and the Netherlands will resume normal diplomatic relations. End Verbatim Text.1

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–2962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Bunker, Cleveland, Tyler, Rice, and Bell; and approved by McGhee. Also sent niact to Djakarta as telegram 1089 and priority to USUN as telegram 2505.

1 In telegram 1747 from Djakarta, March 30, Jones stated that the “formula might be sold to Sukarno” despite the fact that it did not square with his public promise to return West Irian to Indonesian control in 1962. In telegram 731 from The Hague, March 30, Rice “anticipated that the Dutch can be brought to buy this plan,” although it was not consistent with their position that self-determination must precede assumption of administrative control by Indonesia. (Both ibid.)

255. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 255. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, March 30, 1962, 6 p.m.

1749. Deptels 1088,1 1073,2 1075,3 1086.4 After careful perusal of Pres Kennedy’s letter which I presented to him this morning, Pres Sukarno nodded vigorously and said “yes” he would send delegation back to Washington but before he did so he must have US assurance that Dutch would in fact be willing to transfer admin over WNG to Indo as opposed to discussion of whether they would do so. He said further that the sooner formal negots under U Thant could be started, the better. He did not rule out further secret talks but gave impression he was desirous of moving immediately into formal negots—“tomorrow”, he said, if possible.

As I had expected, discussion this morning focussed primarily on negative reply of van Roijen to question asked him twice by Malik and Deptel 1088 was most helpful in enabling me to give Sukarno some indication of Department’s thinking on this point.

President had been thoroughly briefed by Subandrio on points in Deptel 1073; nevertheless, I reviewed with him basic elements stressing particularly importance of avoiding provocative statements and actions at this stage and desirability of coming as close to a military moratorium as possible in this highly explosive atmosphere.

For first time, Pres neither resented nor took issue with my comments but instead indicated his understanding of delicate point that had been reached and importance of exercising restraint.

When Pres asked for US assurance, I countered that he would have to understand, as we had previously explained, great difficulty of one govt giving assurance of this kind affecting actions of another govt. Pres thought if we exerted some pressure on Dutch that this would be possible. I retorted that as he knew, there was point beyond which pressure became counterproductive. Nevertheless, I said I would present his request to Washington, although I could not be optimistic that my govt would assume this responsibility.

I pointed out that Dutch view was that commitment to this effect gave away their whole position by predetermining result of negot in advance. My own view of Dutch attitude was that they were not unwilling to discuss ways and means of transfer of admin over WNG to Indo but were unwilling to commit themselves in advance to such transfer.

Sukarno replied simply that Indo would not go into any negot which involved discussion of “whether” WNG should be transferred to Indo but only question of “how”. He said he was not asking Dutch to give away their position—negots would still have to be held on terms pending transfer. He made much of van Roijen’s statement that Papuans would have to be consulted before Dutch could commit themselves on transfer of admin over WNG to Indo. He said that if this were meant as internal consultation between Papuans and Dutch, this was none of his business but that if Dutch were asking Indos to agree to Papuan veto over such transfer before it took place, GOI obviously could not agree since it regarded WNG as a part of its territory.

In expressing appreciation for President Kennedy’s letter, Sukarno noted with interest statement that “Amb Bunker will shortly be sending you and the Dutch some further suggestions.” He said he had not yet received these and would look forward to their receipt.

When I stressed that positions of both sides were now so close that I personally was confident that negots would have successful outcome, President leaned over and said, “are you sure?” He then went on to say he wanted America to get credit for settling the WNG dispute; that this would mean much not only to our relations but was in interest of entire area.

Sukarno was in good mood but seemed to have genuine doubt that Dutch were in fact ready to negotiate on basis acceptable to Indo. He asked me what I knew about split in Dutch Cabinet, where I thought Luns now stood. I drew upon Deptel 1075 expressing view that I thought Luns was much more moderate in his view than he had been and that I believed his talks with Attorney-General Kennedy and subsequent talks in Washington had resulted in much more flexible attitude. At this point, I took occasion to refer to function of diplomacy and said that although I did not know Luns personally, I assumed his competence as diplomat would enable him to make necessary adjustments to new situation. This was part of job of FonMin as well as Amb. Sukarno seemed quite interested and did not argue point.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/3–3062. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

1 In telegram 1088, March 29, the Department authorized Jones to tell Sukarno that “patient continuation of negotiations” would produce a satisfactory conclusion. The Department did not believe that van Roijen meant to imply that the Netherlands refused to discuss arrangements which would result in ultimate transfer to Indonesia. (Ibid., 656.9813/3–2962)

2 Document 251.

3 See footnote 1, Document 252.

4 See footnote 3, Document 252.

256. Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of State 256. Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of StateSource

The Hague, April 3, 1962, 8 p.m.

749. Eyes only Secretary from Ambassador. Embtel 743.1

1. At his request Foreign Minister Luns received me 5:45 p.m. today and read to me from notes following message for transmission to you. Luns said he had read this message to Prime Minister De Quay.

Verbatim Text.

2. “Dutch Government is shocked and dismayed at contents of proposal made by Bunker at suggestion of US. I am deeply hurt that, after Van Roijen had been acquainted with Bunker’s suggestions, the State Department did not repudiate these views as not being those of American Government. This is a sudden, complete and unexpected reversal of attitude of US. Ever since April of last year we have been led to believe that the President and government fully endorsed our position when these same suggestions were considered by us to be unacceptable. We are greatly hurt and dismayed that, without prior consultation with us, you have seen fit to give these proposals to Indonesians. The stand taken by US Government is that of appeasement in flat contradiction to what you and I stand for. It has not been a fair deal we have had from you. At any time within last 12 years we could have had this formula accepted by Indonesians. We bitterly regret that the US consented to this procedure. I reserve right at an appropriate time to make appropriate comments on attitude of American Government”. End Verbatim Text.

3. Comment: Luns left no doubt in my mind that “appropriate comments” would not be private.

4. In half hour discussion I vigorously countered his argument but he remained implacable.2

Rice

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–362. Secret; Niact.

1 In telegram 743, April 2, Rice reported that he handed President Kennedy’s letter to de Quay and Luns. Regarding the President’s letter, see footnote 4, Document 252. After reading the letter, Luns stated: “I am extremely disappointed.” If the Bunker formula meant handing West New Guinea over to Indonesia before Papuans exercised free choice, “we will have none of it.” (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–262) In telegram 747 from The Hague, April 3, Rice reported that Prime Minister de Quay joined in rejecting the idea of a plebiscite after Indonesia took over. (Ibid., 656.9813/4–362)

2 In telegram 1766 from Djakarta, April 3, Jones reported that Subandrio informed him that Sukarno agreed in principle with the Bunker formula. (Ibid.)

257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 257. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, April 5, 1962.

McGB

Future WNG Gambits

A confrontation with the Dutch was in the cards at some point if we stuck to our basic decision that Indo administration with “face-saving” for Dutch was the only reasonable solution. Better to face it now than later, after we’d lost Indos too.

If anything, our tactical error was that we pussy-footed around so much (until AG gave a prod) as to leave Dutch in at least some legitimate doubt as to where we stood. Even so, Luns and Van Roijen must have seen clearly from all the hints where we were heading—unless they were deliberately blind. Note Rice’s recent talks with Luns, for example.1 We as well as Indos made clear that very basis for Bunker talks was willingness to discuss Indo administration.

At any rate, now that we have given formula to both parties, there is no turning back. Indos have bought it, so to renege now will just propel them into armed action with Bloc support. So problem is how to bring Dutch around: 1. Luns flatly told Rice and UK Ambassador that Dutch would never let Indos take over before a plebiscite so long as he was FonMin.

2. So less than 50–50 chance Dutch will buy our formula, though we should give them full chance for reflection.

3. Thus Dutch cabinet change may have to occur before negotiations can be resumed (Luns said government would fall if it bought our formula).

4. When Sukarno finds out Dutch won’t buy, he is almost certain to leak our formula as evidence of US support, and then step up infiltration, etc. arguing it now proven that Dutch won’t buy peaceful settlement.

5. Hopefully another step toward escalation might force Dutch to face up to facts of life. On other hand, it might harden Dutch stand (reason simply take a back seat in these decolonization exercises).

6. SYG Dutch FonOff says Dutch might take WNG to SC as threat to peace, then to GA after Soviet SC veto.2 Aim would be to force us to come out on Dutch side against resort to force. But UN will almost certainly have to include in any such resolution a mediatory effort; if our formula becomes public knowledge Dutch will be hard put to avoid a landslide vote in favor. This may deter them.

My thought would be that if Dutch reply leaves any room for it, we make one more effort to sell them, even if it is largely speaking for the record. Options would be: (1) send Bunker to Hague; (2) send Acheson if Bunker persona non grata, or regarded as too weak. We could back him up with another letter from Secretary or President or both, rehearsing our arguments.

Themes would be: (1) we made a real effort (consciously paying price of getting ourselves in middle) to devise a way for Dutch to get out with honor, while avoiding a major crisis; (2) we can’t accept Dutch view we’ve suddenly switched sides; we made very clear where we thought road to solution lay—we only put out formula ourselves when it clear Dutch wouldn’t; (3) indeed, we thought we had every reason to believe Dutch would accept Indo administration; (4) we see no other peaceful outcome to dispute which will serve Dutch interests—where else do they expect to come out? (5) if Dutch reject our formula we have no choice but to withdraw from mediatory effort and let situation deteriorate; (6) however, Dutch cannot expect us to support them in what we regard as a futile effort to ignore logical consequences of their own decolonizing action.

We could also get UK to weigh in more heavily, possibly a Macmillan letter (doesn’t he owe us one?).

R.W.K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Forrestal.

1 See Document 256 and footnote 1 thereto.

2 Reported in telegram 754 from The Hague, April 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–462)

258. Memorandum of Conversation 258. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 17, 1962, 2:34 p.m.

SUBJECT

Dutch Cabinet Consideration of West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Governor Harriman, Assistant Secretary, FE

Mr. William R. Tyler, Act. Asst. Secty., EUR

Mr. Galen L. Stone, WE

Netherlands Ambassador van Roijen

Mr. E.L.C. Schiff, Minister

Jonhkeer Huydecoper, Counselor

Ambassador van Roijen called at his request following his return from more than a week’s consultation in The Hague. The Secretary said that we were very much encouraged by the determined effort of the Dutch Government to be as responsive as possible to Ambassador Bunker’s proposals. Ambassador van Roijen said that it had been very difficult for his Government to reach a decision on this matter. The main trouble had been that the interests of the Papuans were not adequately safeguarded. This was a very real concern to the Dutch Government. It was a matter of conscience to them. They would not agree to a mere face-saving device which was merely a facade. To do so would in the Dutch view be something dishonest. The second Cabinet meeting had taken place on Friday, April 13. The Ambassador said he was not present at that meeting, but he had spoken to the various ministers beforehand. At that meeting the decision was taken to draft the various letters.1 The main point was that the Dutch Government did not feel it could accept the Bunker plan unless certain modifications and clarifications were made regarding the interests of the Papuans. The Government did not feel that it was up against force majeure either in the political or military sense.

The Secretary asked what the latest Dutch information was regarding developments in the West New Guinea area. He wondered if our impression was correct that things had been relatively quiet over the past week. Ambassador van Roijen replied that things had been relatively quiet recently. Prior to the past week, infiltrations had taken place, but by and large the individuals involved were rather a pathetic lot. Once they ran out of ammunition or food, they either surrendered voluntarily or were brought in by the natives. They were really no problem whatsoever.

The Secretary said he wanted to get a feel of the situation to know whether the very strong representations that we had made in Djakarta had had any effect.2 He added that we noted that Nasution had made a further broadcast that day which indicated that the Indonesians were still keeping the heat on. Ambassador van Roijen said that there had been no let up in Indonesian psychological warfare. On the contrary, this has been kept at a very high level and would probably continue until the Indonesians knew that the territory would be transferred to them.

The Secretary said that on the basis of his reading of the various letters, it appeared to him that the Dutch did not reject the time-sequence contained in the Bunker proposals, but that they were concerned regarding adequate safeguards for the interests of the native population. Ambassador van Roijen confirmed that the time-sequence was no longer a problem to them. However, he stressed that automatic transfer of the territory to Indonesia did not hold any safeguards for the population. Under the Bunker plan it was left to the Dutch to prevent any outbreak by the Papuans against the Indonesians. Thus, the automatic transfer was something very dangerous. The Ambassador said that he, of course, could see that the Indonesians wanted to be sure that they would be given administration over the territory by a fixed date. In the Bunker proposals, no provision was made regarding safeguards for the population.

In response to the Secretary’s question as to the type of safeguard that the Ambassador envisaged, Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch wanted a provision in the proposal that transfer of the territory would take place only provided the condition of the population permitted such transfer. The Secretary asked if this judgment would be made by the United Nations. Ambassador van Roijen replied that the judgment would have to be made by an impartial authority. There would be a period of Indonesian administration before the plebiscite was envisaged. From the Dutch standpoint, however, they would prefer to see the United Nations administration continue up until the Papuans were given the opportunity to express freedom of choice. The Ambassador said that he had told the Cabinet such an extended United Nations administration was unobtainable and that in the view of the State Department, there must be a period of pure Indonesian administration before the plebiscite took place. The Ambassador said that the role of the United Nations should be specified to show that the United Nations had real authority. The United Nations plebiscite authority must have real control with respect to the plebiscite. This had been the main concession to the Bunker plan.

The Secretary said he had tried to distill out of the several letters the key points involved, and he had noticed that the first of these was a need of safeguards for the population at the time of transfer. Ambassador van Roijen interjected that this would have to be provided for in conjunction with both transfers; i.e., the transfer to the United Nations and, secondly, the transfer to Indonesia.

The Secretary said it was clear that the activity of the United Nations plebiscite administration would have to be gone into thoroughly and would have to be spelled out. As he had understood from the various points which the Ambassador had raised in his letter to Ambassador Bunker, they seemed essentially to be a spelling out of paragraph four of the Bunker proposal. He asked if this was correct that it was mainly paragraph four that the Dutch were concerned with. The Ambassador replied affirmatively, but added that this should not be taken to mean that the other matters were not important, also. At the time of transfer of administration to the United Nations the attitude of the Papuans would have to be taken into account since they might turn against the Dutch at that point, if they felt they had been betrayed by them. Thus, the problem of a security force arose chronologically even before the question of self-determination which was covered by paragraph four.

The Secretary asked if The Hague considered the timing envisaged in the Bunker proposal satisfactory. Ambassador van Roijen said that the matter of timing had met with no objection so long as the interests of the Papuans could be safeguarded. No specific objections had been raised as regards the timing. The Secretary said that he supposed that in a situation where Dutch administrators had been working intimately with the Papuans, and these Papuans were the most articulate ones, it was almost inevitable that they would tend to express opinions which were in accord with the Dutch. He wondered how the Dutch might be able to defuse this situation and obtain a genuinely unbiased Papuan expression of opinion. Ambassador van Roijen pointed out that it was not only the Dutch who had influenced the attitudes of the Papuans, but this matter went back to the 16th Century when the Sultan of Tidore used to go to the territory to recruit slaves. During the last war there had been the Japanese occupation, and now there were Indonesian broadcasts which had been counter-productive in terms of influencing the Papuans to be favorably disposed to Indonesia. He was sure, however, that an effort in this direction would start as soon as the United Nations administration took over. The Secretary said he understood that the plan that Foreign Minister Luns had submitted to the United Nations last fall did not call for expression of choice by the Papuans. He presumed this had been because the duration of the United Nations control had been an indefinite one. Ambassador van Roijen said that provisions had been made for free Indonesian access to the people, but the Indonesians had said that this was not sufficient and they wanted administration of the area for a period before any plebiscite.

The Secretary asked how the Dutch assessed their influence with the Papuans and wondered if the Dutch were to say to the Papuans that the United Nations would be present in West New Guinea to assure their self-interest, and if the Dutch further were to inform them that they should agree to this arrangement, he wondered what the effect on the Papuans would be. The Ambassador said that the Papuans were a highly intelligent people so that it would be impossible to deceive them. It would be necessary for the Dutch to say there would be a period of Indonesian administration before they were given an opportunity for the expression of free choice. The Secretary commented that again this came back to the realities of the arrangements of paragraph four of the Bunker proposal. Ambassador van Roijen added that there would be some inclination on the part of the Papuans to say that the Dutch were selling them down the river.

The Secretary said that to the extent that this involved building on paragraph four of the Bunker proposals, he supposed we should try and get Malik back here and resume talks about it. Ambassador van Roijen said there was also the matter of United Nations security forces. Ambassador Schurman had raised this subject with U Thant the day before, and U Thant had seemed to think it would be possible for the United Nations to recruit such forces. Not only the Dutch troops, but also the Dutch police force would have to be phased out. The Secretary asked what percentage of the police force was composed of local Papuans. Ambassador van Roijen replied that he did not know the number in the police force, but he did know that something like 60 percent of the people in the local administration were Papuans. The Ambassador said he was much concerned about the continued availability of the lower-level Dutch administrators. He understood that the Bunker proposal envisaged that these people would remain on for a time. He was afraid, however, as soon as it became known that there was to be a transfer of administration, these people would rush back to Holland in order to get such jobs as were available. They would feel that those returning first would get the best jobs. This was only human nature.

The Secretary said that the situation by and large turned on what was not said in the Bunker proposals. He wondered if the time had not come to get Malik back here and endeavor to spell out in greater detail what was involved. Ambassador van Roijen said that Malik would only return if the Dutch agreed to the principle of transfer, and they would only agree to transfer if there were sufficient safeguards for the interests of the Papuans. Mr. Tyler said that this was precisely the object of the talks. The Secretary pointed out that the Bunker proposals could not be much more than a statement of principle. Ambassador van Roijen commented that the Bunker proposals spelled out in great detail the manner in which transfer of the territory would be made, but left very vague the manner in which the Papuans would be given a choice in their future. The Dutch wanted to know what arrangements were going to be made to safeguard the interests of the Papuans before they agreed to the transfer of administration to Indonesia. The Secretary said that there were differences in the stages and pointed out that there would be no agreement until agreement had first been reached on an agenda. If the principle of transfer to Indonesia was in itself not a basic obstacle, then there ought to be a disposition on Sukarno’s part to give the Dutch the assurance they wanted regarding the interests of the Papuans. The Secretary pointed out that the Dutch would not have reached real agreement until formal negotiations had been concluded.

Ambassador van Roijen wondered why paragraphs one and two of the Bunker proposal had been so clear and paragraph four had been so vague. The Secretary said that he did not see how the five or six important points which the Ambassador had raised could be worked out except in actual discussion with the Indonesians. Ambassador van Roijen said that there was also the question of a United Nations resolution which would be involved and added that it would seem that the Dutch would not have to wait for a United Nations resolution if they could get certain assurances on safeguarding the rights of the Papuans. The Secretary referred to the Ambassador’s earlier reference to impartial judgment of the timing of transfer. Such impartial judgment could range all the way from the General Assembly itself to the Acting Secretary General himself. He wondered what the Dutch had in mind. Ambassador van Roijen said he had no instructions on this point, but that his idea was it would be the Secretary General, based on recommendations of his representative in West New Guinea whether that representative were High Commissioner or something else.

Mr. Schiff said that he presumed that a United Nations resolution would authorize the Secretary General to cosign the Dutch-Indonesian agreement so he could commit funds, etc., and would require that the Secretary General report back to the General Assembly. Ambassador van Roijen said that he was not sure that that language would be strong enough.

The Secretary said that he understood Ambassador Bunker would be talking with him later in the afternoon.3 He did not see how the Bunker proposals could be revised without further discussion between the parties. Ambassador van Roijen said that it might be possible to add a covering letter to the agreement which would spell out these points. The Dutch would agree to resume the talks on such a basis but without signing the Bunker agreement. The Secretary pointed out that at no time was it envisaged that the Dutch would have to sign the Bunker agreement. The Bunker proposals contained a skeleton only on which the flesh would have to be added by further negotiations. As we saw the matter, the Dutch were not bound to anything until they had obtained an agreement at the end of the road.

Ambassador van Roijen said this was true with the exception of the Indonesian insistence on transfer of administration. The Secretary pointed out that this, however, was not the only issue in the Bunker proposals. In such an event, Ambassador Bunker would say to the Indonesians that there remained this further aspect of the matter. Ambassador van Roijen commented this was like signing a blank check. Governor Harriman pointed out that such a check could not be cashed, however, until the name of the bank had been filled in. Certain objectives had been set down in the Bunker proposals, but they all had to be spelled out.

Ambassador van Roijen said that the Indonesians wanted the Dutch to commit themselves to transfer. The Dutch say that if they agree, then the Indonesians have got to commit themselves to safeguard the interests of the Papuans. He asked that such guarantees be obtained.

Governor Harriman summarized the conversation by saying that on the one hand the Indonesians knew that they were to get the area. The Dutch, on the other hand, knew that freedom of choice on the part of the Papuans must include the option for the Papuans to vote themselves out of Indonesia. Ambassador van Roijen said that on this basis and the talks at Middleburg he did feel that Malik (though he did not know if this could be taken as the definitive position of the Indonesian Government) envisaged that the Papuans would be given the opportunity to opt out of Indonesia.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1762. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on May 11. The meeting lasted until 3:34 p.m.; van Roijen remained alone with the Secretary for a few minutes after the meeting. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

1 Reference is to letters from Prime Minister de Quay to President Kennedy, Luns to Rusk, and Luns to Bunker, all April 14. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Country Series, West New Guinea, 4/12/62–4/17/62, and Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1462)

2 Telegram 1132 to Djakarta, April 6, instructed Jones to tell Sukarno or Subandrio that the West New Guinea/West Irian issue was at a critical juncture. Indonesian military actions, reports of fighting, and attempts to humiliate the Netherlands would cause the United States to reconsider its role in helping to settle the problem. Jones reported in telegram 1800 from Djakarta, April 8, that Subandrio promised to “do everything possible” to control both acts and belligerent statements. Subandrio expressed no desire to humiliate the Netherlands, but stated that the Netherlands would never yield unless pressure was applied. (Both ibid., 656.9813/4–662 and 656.9813/4–862)

3 According to telegram 1187 to Djakarta, April 18, Bunker met with van Roijen and showed him revised language for the agenda of potential discussions based on the Bunker formula. Van Roijen was first critical but then saw some merit in the suggestions. He was pleased to learn that the agenda had not yet been shown to the Indonesians. (Ibid., 656.9813/4–1862)

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, April 19, 1962, 8:56 p.m.

1192. Deptel 1189.1 FYI. We have carefully studied Dutch letters delivered earlier in week. These letters and the various follow-up conversations which Department officers and Bunker have had with Dutch clearly reveal new Dutch position which, while not including full acceptance Bunker formula, is major departure from previous line.

Of central importance is Dutch willingness relinquish administrative authority to Indonesia via an interim UN phase prior to exercise self-determination by the Papuans.

While agreeing this transfer, Dutch, as you aware, protest that para 4 of formula contains insufficient assurance that genuine Papuan expression, including right of contracting out, will be carried out or enforced. They insist that very strong self-determination clause is necessary to sell transfer to Papuans and to rest Dutch conscience. By latter they probably mean that GON needs such provision to fend off domestic political criticism of transfer prior self-determination exercise. Further, they are deeply suspicious of Indo intention carry out true self-determination.

Dutch would have formula provide for continuing UN responsibility for preparation and execution self-determination after interim period when Indos would have assumed otherwise full administrative control. They specifically dissatisfied with present wording para 4 according which Indos, by agreeing arrange for Papuan free choice, have prime responsibility with UN role limited to advice and assistance.

Also bearing heavily on our thinking is our expectation that an appropriate and completely valid exercise of Papuan free choice will be accomplished and that the outcome will be honored by Indonesia. Indonesia should understand that we have taken Indo assurances to us on this score at full value and that the US Government, in helping find a solution, expects nothing less if our relations are to continue be based on mutual confidence and respect. End FYI.

In these circumstances and on basis your assessment Embtel 1882,2 you should put to Indos immediately supplementary understanding set forth para 3 Deptel 1189. Should Sukarno or Subandrio ask you whether Ambassador Bunker making this suggestion at Dutch request, you should say that language is Ambassador Bunker’s but tell Indos it is designed to meet point raised by Dutch.

We leave choice of persuasive argumentation to your discretion but suggest emphasis be given Dutch preparedness see Indo obtain administrative control prior self-determination if Indos, in return, willing strengthen para 4. Best way for GOI demonstrate sincerity would be to agree that, after interim period, UN shall retain basic responsibility for preparation, execution and implementation Papuan free choice and that GOI will cooperate fully with UN measures to carry out this responsibility. We believe Dutch can be expected interpret “adequate guarantees” in these terms and you may wish suggest this likelihood to Indos. Indos repeatedly have said Dutch willingness transfer admin would be greeted warmly and responsively by GOI. Ambassador Bunker as impartial third party believes he should have GOI assurances on above point before he can get Dutch back to conference table. USG fully supports Bunker’s analysis of situation and necessity for obtaining supplementary understanding.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–1962. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Lindquist; cleared by Bell, Cleveland, and Bunker, and in draft by Tyler; and approved by Harriman. Repeated priority to The Hague and to USUN.

1 Telegram 1189 to Djakarta, April 18, contained a new version of the Bunker formula that included supplemental language for paragraph 4 that reads as follows: “Indonesia would agree to make arrangements, with the assistance and participation of the Acting Secretary General of the United Nations and United Nations personnel, to give the people of the territory the opportunity to exercise freedom of choice not later than _____ years after Indonesia has assumed full administrative responsibility for West New Guinea. The Government of the Netherlands would agree to transfer administration in accordance with this proposal on condition that the Government of the Netherlands receives, as a result of formal negotiations, adequate guarantees for safeguarding the interests, including the right of self-determination, of the Papuans.” (Ibid., 656.9813/4–1862)

2 In telegram 1882, April 19, Jones noted that he believed the supplemental language suggested by van Roijen would be acceptable to the Indonesians who thought this was what they had already agreed upon. (Ibid., 656.9813/4–1962) When Jones submitted this language, Subandrio accepted it without argument. (Telegram 1894 from Djakarta, April 23; ibid., 656.9813/4–2362)

260. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 260. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, April 24, 1962.

McGB:

Theme for a pleasant cruise with Van Roijen—while recognizing how painful it is to concede to Indos, US cannot see why, having taken painful decision to concede the basic principle, the Dutch are playing with fire in procrastinating about renewed negotiations. When Rusk saw Van Roijen this morning1 latter repeated all the old arguments about taping down in advance those details about UN presence; etc. which we feel should be held for negotiation. He will submit formula to his government but said he was not optimistic. Rusk apparently did not take the strong line recommended to him, but State is now proposing another JFK letter to De Quay. It will be over tonight or tomorrow. Time has come for another push, and you can fire the opening gun.

Dutch are clearly trying to spin out this painful process as long as possible, because of sheer distaste at giving in to Sukarno and partly to salve their new-found consciences over Papuans. The trouble with the way Dutch are playing it is that, while the end result will be the same, if they keep throwing up so many road blocks they (and we) risk losing the capital with the Indos that the concession on basic principle will otherwise have earned. After a further long and painful process of negotiations, with several ups and downs, the Dutch will end up having let go of WNG under the worst possible circumstances, making it doubly difficult for them to recover a position of influence in Indonesia itself. We too would have lost the capital we expect to gain by a negotiated instead of a “Russian” solution to WNG dispute.

For example, one of the Dutch psywar tricks is to build up an ersatz Papuan independence movement. The proposed visit of five Papuans to UN is their latest trick. This sort of thing will merely arouse Indonesian fury, risk collapse of the negotiations, and eliminate any possibility of good Dutch relations with Indos—without any compensatory advantages. It is a silly way to play the game.

Dutch also keep feeding us “intelligence items” indicating that Sukarno is using US by playing on our fears of communist takeover. It might be well to chide Van Roijen about “naive Americans” theme; strength of PKI and massive Soviet military aid are facts with which we must contend. Dutch can hardly argue that their policies toward Indo in last fifteen years have done so much to help create obstacles to growth of communist influence. It is Dutch policy, not US, which seems a bit naive in perspective.

It might be well to suggest that we think we’re actually doing Dutch a service by providing a means for them to disengage with honor from what otherwise is becoming a violent dispute involving military action and counter-action of unpredictable dimension—and one they can’t win. What worries us and UK is that not only will Indos get WNG but if they get it with Bloc help, the result may be a crucial blow to the whole Western position in SEA. Instead the Dutch can blame us for having forced a settlement. A period of strained relations may ensue, but over time we think Dutch will recognize favor we did them.

Finally, why not remind Van of President’s personal interest in this problem, that he is kept fully abreast of it, that he fully endorses Bunker formula, and that he hopes Dutch will not pull a Portugal on us, painful as these problems of colonial disengagement may be.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret.

1 A record of the meeting is in a memorandum of conversation, April 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–2462)

261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 261. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, April 27, 1962.

McGB:

After noting the pallid diplomatese of Rusk’s talk with Van Roijen and his letter to Luns,1 and now hearing that Luns wants to discuss WNG with Rusk in Athens May 5, I conclude Dutch are stalling. There are two possible explanations: (1) the Dutch, having met us on basic point, first want to get us committed to back them on as many face-saving gestures as possible in direction of protecting Papuan rights; (2) they want to spin out the agenda formulation phase in the hope that Sukarno will do something silly to take them off the hook. While Van Roijen seemed most reasonable in his talk with you, we’re agreed that he’s several laps ahead of his government.

In any event it is almost a month since we fired off 2 April JFK letter to DeQuay (With Bunker formula).2 DeQuay replied on the 14th with what most of us took to be a conditional acceptance of the basic principle of Indo administration.3 Since then, however, the Dutch emphasis has been on the conditional rather than the acceptance. First we accepted Van Roijen’s “personal” amendment to Para. 4 of Bunker formula in order to spell out a little more “adequate guarantees, including self-determination.” Next Van Roijen has come in (doubtless on instructions) asking for additional assurances about Papuan “economic, social, educational and political development.” Now Luns will probably try to talk Rusk into some such commitments.

Our problem is how to get things moving again. We have to get the Dutch to the conference table before Sukarno goes off the reservation. He’s now given Dutch practically a month, mostly on the strength of our implied assurances that Dutch were coming around.

But I doubt that State’s current soft-sell is going to succeed. Bear in mind that the only way we got Dutch to “concede” on Indo administration in the first place was through a very tough letter from the President himself, which got Dutch mad as hops but forced them to face up to the fact that we weren’t with them. To allow the Dutch to stall us further now will be to lose the forward movement which JFK démarche produced.

Therefore, if we don’t hear from Luns by this weekend, President might write DeQuay along following line (in reply to DeQuay’s letter of 14 April): (1) President was gratified to hear from DeQuay along such statesmanlike lines. Painful as we know it was to our Dutch allies, their reply seemed to us to accept the principle of Indonesian administration provided there were adequate guarantees of Papuan right to self-determination.

(2) However, we are discouraged by the long delays in even getting negotiations begun. It has now been a month since Bunker formula was presented and parties are still not back at the table. Meanwhile, the war of words goes on, military preparations have mounted on both sides, actual fighting has begun although still on a small scale, and the risks of a military confrontation have appreciably increased.

(3) Therefore, we believe it imperative that formal negotiations begin promptly on the basis of the Bunker formula. We have tried out the Indos on amending this formula on the basis suggested by Van Roijen and they have agreed. We urge Dutch to come to the table so that we can take the road of negotiation rather than the road to war, which we understand Soviets still urging on Sukarno.

(4) We recognize that Dutch have many unanswered questions as to the nature of the guarantees of Papuan rights and the type of UN presence desirable to assure these. We regard all of these points as suitable for discussion in the negotiations, but believe that if Dutch attempt to make them conditions precedent we will be unable to get Indos to the table.

(5) Moreover, time is not on our side. We fear that if the period of indecision is spun out much longer we and the Dutch will lose the opportunities created by their statesmanlike approach to the Bunker formula to achieve a successful compromise settlement on the WNG issue. Even if one is eventually achieved, the longer it takes the less it will contribute to the strengthening of Western influence in Indo, particularly through restoration of cordial Dutch-Indo relations. The more this issue continues to poison relations between the two countries, the harder it will be for the Dutch to exact such concessions in return for conceding the principle of Indo administration.

(6) The US did not lightly undertake to offer its informal good offices under the UN umbrella and realizes that it will bear the onus for any aspects of a settlement which are unsatisfactory to elements on either side. But President wonders whether US should continue to expose itself to pressures and recriminations from both sides if its efforts are unlikely to be successful. Therefore, unless negotiations seem likely to get underway shortly, the President believes that it might be better if the US withdrew Bunker from the unenviable middle position in which he finds himself.

I have no doubt that Dutch would again react violently to such strong medicine, even when toned down. Nonetheless, the odds are in favor of the Dutch, having already conceded the basic principle, again grudgingly backing down. If not, all it will have cost is some further Dutch irritation. We need not carry out our threat to withdraw US good offices. Moreover, we would once again register with the Dutch where we really stand.4

I further suggest that the President get Macmillan’s views and urge him to put parallel pressure on our hardheaded allies.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62. Secret.

1 Regarding the conversation with van Roijen on April 24, see footnote 1, Document 260. On April 25, the Department sent Luns a letter in Rusk’s name, which the Secretary approved. In it, Rusk noted that he considered the revised Bunker formula constituted a “working paper providing a suitable framework for the resumption of preliminary talks which in turn could lead to a peaceful and mutually acceptable solution.” Rusk noted that neither side was committed to any course of action until the final agreement was reached and that the United States would support “an arrangement for the expression of self-determination by the Papuan people which would be a reality and not a mockery.” (Telegram 943 to The Hague, April 25; Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/4–2562)

2 See footnote 4, Document 252.

3 See footnote 1, Document 258.

4 In an April 28 memorandum to Bundy, Komer again argued for sending a Presidential letter to de Quay, but he suspected the Department of State would oppose it. Komer stated:

“In any event, Rusk/Luns meeting will be critical. Left to his own devices Rusk may not take a strong enough stand (if past experience on this issue is any guide). I believe President should stiffen his spine beforehand by instructing him to tell Dutch to fish or cut bait. Our line should be that if they won’t buy amended Bunker formula even as basis of negotiation, we see no further utility in Bunker gambit. We would further propose to make public Bunker formula on occasion of our withdrawing his good offices.

“As we knew when we got into this exercise in the first place, US has to shoulder the burden of forcing the Dutch to a reasonable solution. Having gone this far already can we afford not to take the next painful step?” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 4/62)

262. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at Athens 262. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk, at AthensSource

Washington, May 2, 1962, 10:25 p.m.

Tosec 46. Eyes only from President for Secretary Having reviewed the latest developments in the New Guinea dispute, it seems to me that your meeting with Luns on Saturday will mark a critical juncture. It has been a full month since we endorsed the Bunker formula, which the Indonesians have since approved in principle, even after the modifications made to meet Van Roijen’s objections.

Of course if Luns is coming to tell you, however ungraciously, that the Dutch will resume talks on this basis, we have no problem. I am worried, however, that Van Roijen’s last talk with you may imply a renewed effort by Luns to commit the US to supporting Dutch on several additional particulars as the price for coming to the table. I do not see how we can do so at this point, and still keep our influence with the Indonesians. Moreover, I am satisfied that the questions raised by the Dutch with respect to guarantees of Papuan rights and the nature of the UN presence are obviously subjects for negotiations but cannot be prejudged.

Therefore, if Luns is still trying to pose unreasonable conditions I hope you will take a very firm line. Our mediation is only going to succeed if the Dutch accept Bunker’s basic position and go on from there. I think we should leave Luns in no doubt on this point but tell him plainly that if our mediation is to continue, it is imperative that the Dutch return promptly to the table without further haggling on preconditions that can as well be discussed directly with Indonesians. Otherwise it is hard to see any further useful purpose to be served by Bunker’s good offices.

In your discretion, you may want to indicate that these views have my full support.

To buttress the above, I would have no objection to your saying that we only can be available to lean against unreasonable Indonesian resistance to safeguards after negotiations are resumed. We cannot make any flat commitments on our views but we can assure Luns that Bunker’s general view is also ours. You can also say that you and I well realize that the US will be blamed for those aspects of a compromise settlement which will inevitably be unsatisfactory in some degree to both sides (indeed we have deliberately let ourselves be put in this exposed position to give both sides someone else to blame). But I do not know how much longer the US should continue to expose itself to pressures and recriminations if its efforts are unlikely to be successful.

Finally, you might point out that Bunker would naturally have to explain publicly why he was withdrawing (i.e. because he could not bring the two parties together) and to indicate the nature of his proposals. FYI, instead of actually withdrawing Bunker at this time, it might be preferable simply to publish appropriate details of his mediatory effort as a means of pressure on the Dutch. End FYI.

I realize that this line of action would smack of an ultimatum to Luns, and might evoke another violent reaction. But it took just such pressure to get the Dutch to consider Indonesian administration in the first place. Subandrio’s trip to Moscow is an ominous sign that the Indonesians might not wait much longer to heat matters up again. If talks do not begin shortly, I think we will find it very hard to prevent a spiral of deterioration. Indeed, you should warn Luns that, if it comes to a military confrontation, Dutch can hardly expect us to support them after they have in effect rejected our effort to provide them with an honorable way out.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–262. Secret; Priority. Rusk was in Athens for the North Atlantic Council Ministerial Meeting May 4–6. Although the source text lists McGeorge Bundy as the drafter, the telegram was drafted by Komer, On May 2, Komer sent a copy to President under cover of a memorandum stating that Robert Kennedy, Harriman, Bunker, and Tyler concurred with the draft. Komer noted that the “Dutch had stalled on the Bunker formula for a month, and Subandrio’s trip to Moscow is an ominous sign that Sukarno may be giving up hope.” Komer told the President that the best way to “lean on” the Dutch was to threaten to withdraw Bunker and to publish the details of his efforts, which Luns had carefully kept from the Dutch public and Parliament. Such a move would cause a “ruckus” and might lead to Luns’ fall, so he would be anxious to forestall it. Without Presidential instructions, Rusk would not put such pressure on Luns. Komer’s draft was identical to this telegram. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62)

263. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 263. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

Athens, May 6, 1962, 9 p.m.

Secto 78. Eyes only President and Acting Secretary. Separate telegram contains results two conversations with Luns about West New Guinea.1 We are on very thin margins with Luns on this matter but I believe it is worth pursuing in attempt to get discussions going again.

There is no question but that further conversations will be extremely difficult, at least in the beginning, and that we would have to press Indonesians to go long way in “adequate guarantees for Papuan interests” in exchange for Dutch acceptance of transfer administration. Although Luns spoke of possible termination of matter in face of force majeure by Indonesians, I have clearly the impression that what he really meant was that responsibility for a settlement disagreeable to Dutch would be placed solidly upon force majeure in the form of irresistible pressure from the U.S.

Luns invited us to be “a Greek and a half in coaxing the Indonesians into a further round of talk. Nevertheless, he did offer a formulation which seemed to me to be workable for purposes convening talks unless Indonesians insist upon gold-plated commitments before talks even begin. There is no question, however, but that resumed talks would be extremely difficult and could be thrown off by injudicious public statements in The Hague or Djakarta.

At no point has Luns or Van Roijen raised subjects for discussion that could not be encompassed within framework present draft Bunker formulation. Hence I believe we can honestly say to Indonesians that they should now resume talks in order to find out whether agreement cannot now be reached within Bunker formula. My guess is that considerations of prestige and political maneuver make it difficult for Dutch to say quite simply “accept Bunker proposals as basis for discussion”, but Luns said that he and I knew that in fact this is what would be discussed and he was unable or unwilling to mention any points which were clearly irrelevant.

Luns arrived Athens high state of tension but personal attitude toward me and colleagues improved considerably. He responded warmly when I told him that we deeply regretted that wretched WNG affair existed as a painful exception to otherwise close and friendly relationship.

If you believe Luns reply as given separate telegram2 cannot be put to Indonesians, it seems to me that there are three main alternatives:

(A) President to go back to The Hague through PM;

(B) Accept further delay to see whether military build-up both sides would open up further opportunities explore peaceful settlement;

(C) Get another third party.

For obvious reasons I prefer to try Luns reply on Indonesians before going to The Hague, would be considerable danger in delay during military build-up and see no likelihood that another third party could move situation toward solution of problem, consequences of which we ourselves cannot avoid. On last point, for example, Luns told me that had Bunker proposals been presented to them by anyone else such as Schroeder or even his good friend Lord Home, his reply would have been “let’s go look at the tulips.”

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–662. Secret; Niact.

1 Secto 79, May 6. There is also a single memorandum of conversation of these May 5–6 meetings. (Both ibid., 656.9813/5–662 and 656.9813/5–562)

2 Luns handed Rusk a statement that reads as follows: “The Netherlands Government have informed the United States Government that the Netherlands are prepared fully to discuss with Indonesia all the aspects of the so-called Bunker plan, it being understood that both parties will be free to bring up on the agenda all items for discussion they deem relevant.” The statement originally used the term “additional items,” but Rusk convinced Luns to delete it. Luns asked Rusk to transmit this statement to Indonesia. (Secto 90, May 7; ibid., 656.9813/5–762)

264. Editorial Note 264. Editorial Note

Under Secretary Ball and McGeorge Bundy discussed Luns’ statement (see footnote 2, Document 263) in a telephone call at 6:40 p.m. on May 7, 1962. The transcript of the discussion reads as follows:

“Ball told Bundy McGhee had been working on the Dutch thing all day. We are proposing to put it to them in a straightforward way; to have Jones treat this with Sukarno or whoever is there as in effect a Dutch acceptance and not raise the issue of a couple weeks to crank it up. Bundy said he thought we should take it to the Indonesians since the Secretary had told Luns we would. Ball repeated, we put it to the Indonesians on the basis it is in effect an acceptance. Bundy agreed and said the Dutch will be sticky, but we will have to hit them hard. Ball said we were getting out a message tonight.” (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Indonesia)

In telegram 1893 from Djakarta, May 8, Jones reported that he passed the Luns statement to Chief Minister Djuanda on the evening of May 8. Djuanda asked for any additional information the United States might have, and promised to bring the statement to the attention of Sukarno who was in Bali. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–862)

265. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 265. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 12, 1962.

McGB:

Sukarno’s representative or no, I am utterly convinced that the crux of getting a WNG settlement before we have another peanut war on our hands is to force the Dutch to buy Indonesian administration. We’re all agreed on this strategy, but our tactics are often wavering and inconsistent.

Next round of talks will be crucial; if they fail I see no alternative to stepped up fighting before mediation will be feasible again. And once emotions on both sides have been inflamed to this point, bringing both parties together again will require us to be infinitely tougher than at present. Strong talk now is cheap compared to this alternative. Therefore, I urge the following scenario: 1. Send JFK letter to DeQuay1 as soon as Indos indicate readiness to resume talks. It must be tough—only clear Dutch understanding we won’t back them will force their hand.

2. Further force Dutch hand as soon as talks resume by leaking outline of Bunker formula. Announcement of resumption will naturally lead to press queries. We then background in terms of great optimism, saying both sides have agreed to consider compromise formula combining Indo administration with adequate guarantees of Papuan rights. We’ve been toying with this idea for some time; let’s get things ready and all hands in line (I’ve pressed Rice on this).

3. Dutch stalling is based largely on hopes that economic stresses, kidney ailment or something will remove their bete noir, Sukarno. One means of damping these hopes would be for US to make forthcoming noises now about new economic aid. Dutch would be outraged, but read us loud and clear.2

4. If Dutch will genuinely commit themselves to Bunker formula, I’m confident we can get through concessions from Indos to save Dutch face (using, prospective US aid as leverage).

Let me end as I began. To be tough now may prevent the spiral of deterioration which will face us with infinitely greater headaches later. This is statesmanship to me.3

Bob K

* Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer 5/62. Secret.

1 Komer drafted a Presidential letter to de Quay at Bundy’s request and sent it to Bundy under cover of a May 7 memorandum. In that memorandum, Komer also lobbied strenuously for pressure on the Dutch. (Ibid.)

2 Next to this paragraph, Komer wrote “P.L. 480”.

3 At the end of the memorandum, Komer wrote the following note: “Note scary Hague 860 about far-reaching Soviet deal with Sukarno. This almost unbelievable (except as Indo psywar), but no doubt Soviets will gain if we can’t settle WNG on our terms.” Telegram 860 from The Hague, May 12, is in Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–1262.

266. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 266. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, May 17, 1962.

Attached are cables illustrating the current impasse over West New Guinea.1 In a nutshell, the Indos refuse to return to the table until they have better assurance than Luns’ grudging statement that the Dutch are really willing to accept Indonesian administration. Their impression, like ours (see cables on Rusk/Luns talks)2 is that Dutch are not yet in fact willing to buy such an idea.

Our next step turns on what our strategic objective is. If we really stand by Bunker conclusion that Indo administration is the only road to a peaceful settlement, then clearly the weight of our effort must be forcing the Dutch to face this fact.

Mac Bundy and I propose a strong message from you to DeQuay saying that before we can go back and tell the Indos that Dutch are sincere, US itself is entitled to ask this question. We feel that nothing short of this will jar Dutch loose.

State on the other hand favors a double-barreled approach: (1) we should go ahead and tell the Indos that, while we can’t guarantee Dutch performances, we expect them to come through; (2) simultaneously, we should tell the Dutch we were doing so and urge them to play ball.

What is at issue is less the tactics of our next move than a basic decision on our part. Do our larger interests in Southeast Asia demand a peaceful settlement (even if this forces us to lean toward Indo side to get one), or should we preserve a more even-handed approach, based on the merits of the issue, as Secretary Rusk seems to favor? With the crisis already well along toward a collision, we must decide this now.

R.W. Komer3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that this is McGeorge Bundy’s copy, but no indication whether the President saw it.

1 No telegrams were attached, but probably Komer is referring to those cited in footnote 1, Document 267.

2 See Document 263 and footnote 1 thereto.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

267. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 267. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, May 17, 1962, 2:45 p.m.

1292. Embtels 2019 and 2015.1 In order prevent further dangerous drift toward hostilities most important that we bring about early resumption talks. We cannot hope convince either Dutch or Indos of other side’s good faith which can only be revealed in course of negotiations.

Ambassador should use occasion his meeting Sukarno (Embtel 2019). to tell him that while we obviously not in position guarantee negotiations will succeed we do believe sincerely that there is reasonable chance that talks, once resumed, will reach successful conclusion.2

We base this on the fact that we have not had from Dutch any indication of any points with regard to such matters as adequate guarantees for the interest of the Papuans that we think are irrelevant to the Bunker proposals, within which a considerable number of details would have to be worked out. Further, you can tell Indonesians that we have strongly pressed the Dutch to tell us quite frankly whether they saw no chances of success within the four corners of the Bunker proposals; had they done so we would not be urging resumption of talks and would withdraw as third party. Dutch did not take such point of view. You can tell Sukarno my personal judgment is that Indonesian interests would be served by resuming talks, purpose of which would be to prepare agreed agenda for formal negotiations.

If Sukarno refers again to speeches made by Luns which seem to cut across reply which Luns authorized us to present to Indonesians, you should point out that Luns has a political problem, that public speeches both in Netherlands and in Indonesia are not always consistent with what is said privately, and that both governments are obviously skeptical of each other’s attitudes.

The net result of my talks with Luns and the exchanges we have had with both governments reveal no fundamental obstacle to the conclusion of a successful agreement within the framework of the Bunker proposals.

You should add that we are under no illusion that total solution can be reached in matter couple of days. Negotiations will doubtless be protracted and difficult requiring patience and goodwill. However, if GOI prepared accept our estimate this matter, there is no further obstacle talks being resumed and we would appreciate knowing date when Indos could meet again with Dutch.

Ambassador can inform Sukarno that if Indos are prepared make public announcement willingness resume talks on basis Bunker proposals we would welcome such statement publicly. In our view if talks resumed pressure Dutch public opinion would tend prevent break up.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–1662. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Tyler, Beaudry, and Rusk; cleared by Rice and McGhee; and approved by Rusk. Repeated priority to The Hague and to USUN.

1 In telegram 2019 from Djakarta, May 16, Jones reported that he planned to use an invitation to have morning coffee with Sukarno to press for Indonesia to resume negotiations over West New Guinea/West Irian. Jones needed some evidence that the Netherlands was prepared to make the talks work. In telegram 2015 from Djakarta, May 15, Jones reported a discussion with Subandrio in which Subandrio was adamant that Indonesia would not resume negotiations without evidence of Netherlands willingness to negotiate in good faith. (Ibid., 656.9813/5–1562 and 656.98/5–1662)

2 This telegram did not arrive in Djakarta in time for Jones to use in the May 18 morning meeting with Sukarno, but Jones did make the points to Subandrio on May 19. In both meetings, Sukarno and Subandrio expressed great skepticism of Netherlands intentions. (Telegrams 2036 and 2040 from Djakarta, May 18 and 19; ibid., 656.9813/5–1862 and 656.9813/5–1962)

268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) 268. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen)Source

Washington, May 22, 1962.

Carl—

At Governor Harriman’s meeting at State this morning1 it was agreed that another appeal to the Dutch at this point would be almost” useless. As Bunker put it, with no dissenters, “Luns is playing us for suckers”; he would merely stall some more.

The consensus was that instead we should recommend public surfacing of the Bunker formula, as the most effective means of pressure on Dutch.2 Rather than leaking it, Bunker could write a letter to U Thant saying he was stymied; U Thant would publish letter (containing formula) as part of an appeal to bothsides to stop fighting and return to the table on this basis.

We would simultaneously tell Van Roijen that Indos had refused to resume talks on basis of Luns’ Athens statement; ergo, this is dead.

Letter to DeQuay would be held in reserve until after formula’s publication had had a chance to sink in, thus using President’s influence at right time.

Above tactics make sense. At this point, having tried every which way to cajole and persuade Dutch, we’re forced to conclude that nothing short of generating domestic political pressure on Luns via publication of Bunker formula will suffice. Dutch will react violently, but if our aim is to force a peaceful settlement, it’s cheap at this price.3

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. There is an “OK” written on the source text, apparently by Kaysen.

1 No other record of this meeting has been found.

2 In two memoranda to Bundy, May 21, Komer suggested publicizing the Bunker formula or using friendly journalists to pressure the Dutch indirectly. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62)

3 McGhee and Harriman also discussed the problem by telephone in a short conversation on May 22. The transcript reads: “1. If we are going back to DeQuay (which Secy accepts) he would like to consider injection of concept of military standstill.” (Could be applied only to Indonesians, you can’t stop the Dutch, they are en route.) (Harriman: you can turn ships around, it must be applied to both.)

“2. Explain to the Dutch why this thing worked out with Luns was not acceptable. That we tell DeQuay we did the best we could. We thought this was adequate. That the Indonesians made their own assessment. And they concluded the Dutch have no serious interest in negotiations.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Memoranda of Telephone Conversations)

269. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence’s Assistant (Knoche) to Director of Central Intelligence McCone 269. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence’s Assistant (Knoche) to Director of Central Intelligence McConeSource

Washington, May 22, 1962.

[1 line of source text not declassified] a number of recent indications that the Indonesians may be planning large scale attacks in the West New Guinea area in the near future. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] include such things as the apparent movement of military units to eastern Indonesia, rumors that a “big decision” is to be made in early June, and crash efforts by the Indonesian military to purchase from Japan 5,000 military compasses.

[1 paragraph 1-1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Indonesians would like hit Dutch hard one, perhaps by sinking troop ship and or taking and holding some Dutch real estate, in order make up for Aru Sea debacle and get Dutch interested in negotiating seriously. We not sure hitting Dutch hard will achieve second aim, but believe Indonesians convinced Dutch not serious about negotiations to date and such move may force them change position.

[1 line of source text not declassified] Dutch complete acceptance of Bunker proposal principle, with public announcement, could not only pull rug out from under Indonesian plans, but possibly strike serious and lasting blow to presently successful Soviet policy vis-à-vis Indonesia. As situation now stands, whatever equity U.S. has built up over last number of years may be lost [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for foreseeable future if Dutch hold to erroneous policy of “Let Sukarno Perish.” Indonesia is not going to crumble from economic erosion or impending chaos. Indonesian military strength will eventually overwhelm Dutch forces in West Irian (if no foreign intervention occurs), and military might of Indonesia, whose prime importance to U.S. policy in Asia may be during next ten to twenty years, may for latter period be alienated from us over this forthcoming incident. We have some friends left in Indonesia in influential positions, but if we finally lose friendship of military forces, we can expect our star to fall and star of Soviets to shine ever brighter in this area. With present indications of impending trouble in Thailand over Laos, we would hope country to rear of such action could be kept on friendly terms with U.S.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we do not wish to leave impression that solution of West Irian problem would leave door open for love feast between U.S. and Indonesia. Far from that, but solution would, in our opinion, open door for dealing frankly with Indonesians without irritant so long hindering our relations with this country People who wish to work with U.S. and its agencies would be less shackled by fear of being seen dealing with Americans. [4 lines of source text not declassified]

H. Knoche1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 270. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, May 23, 1962.

[Here follows discussion of the Azores base negotiations with Portugal.]

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

I agree with your comment, in paragraph three of your memorandum of May 21, that the Warren Unna article in the Washington Post of that date appears to have been inspired by a Dutch source.1 While we have now reached the critical point with the Dutch over West New Guinea, I do believe we have made some progress in the last six months. I think the Bunker proposals can provide the basis for an agreement.

At Athens, Dr. Luns expressed skepticism that Indonesia would agree to any guarantees for the Papuans that would satisfy Dutch requirements. However, on being pressed, Luns did admit that agreement might be possible. He handed me a statement which expressed Dutch willingness to discuss all aspects of the Bunker plan with the understanding that either side would be able to raise any item it deemed relevant. This statement was passed by us to the Indonesians with our interpretation that it constituted acceptance in substance of the Bunker formula.

Sukarno has neither accepted nor rejected the Luns statement but, stressing that he is not concerned with specific wording, points out that the statement leaves Dutch intentions unclear. He is unwilling to resume talks therefore until the Dutch either have clearly stated or have given some other tangible evidence that it is their intention to negotiate on the basis of the Bunker proposal. Meanwhile, he appears to have made a decision that only further military pressures on the Dutch will bring them to acceptance of the formula.

Yesterday we pressed the Dutch to accept a reformulation of Luns’ statement to make clear its acceptance in principle of the Bunker Plan.2 We are awaiting the response from The Hague. If the Dutch response is affirmative, we will go to Djakarta and urge immediate resumption of talks.

If, however, as is likely, the Dutch refuse to resume talks unless the Indonesians also accept the statement Luns gave me at Athens, we can only conclude that Mr. Luns is not prepared to move decisively on this issue unless subjected to greater domestic political pressure. Luns has withheld the text of the Bunker proposals from the Parliament, reportedly because he feels Parliament would accept them overwhelmingly (he has admitted they would receive 120 out of 150 votes). Accordingly, we believe it would now be useful for the text to be made public.

Mr. Bunker agrees that it would be useful for the “Bunker proposals” to be made public and is prepared to take the risk that their publication would make it necessary to find another “moderator” for the later stages of this exercise. Mr. Bunker is talking today with Secretary General U Thant about the possibility of the proposals being published as a part of a short interim report Mr. Bunker would make to the Secretary General, at whose request, he undertook his mission of conciliation.3

We would anticipate that publication of this plan would cause a political uproar in The Hague.

At the appropriate moment after the Bunker Plan is known, we will probably recommend that you send a letter to Prime Minister de Quay urging the Dutch to resume talks with the Indonesians on the basis of the Bunker formula, without reservations. We may then have to make our efforts in this matter public at that time; we believe there is sufficient opposition to Luns within the Netherlands to justify our approach.

For the next few days, while we see how our latest approach to the Dutch and Mr. Bunker’s discussion with the Secretary General come out, we do not think it would be useful for the U.S. hand to show in public any more than it already does.

Dean Rusk4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Portugal, Azores Base. Secret.

1 In this memorandum, the President asked Rusk three questions of which the third was on West New Guinea. He asked for the reason for the lack of progress toward a settlement of the issue, as well as making the observation about Unna’s source. (Ibid.)

2 Recorded in a memorandum of conversation, May 22. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2262)

3 The formula was released as U.N. Note No. 2600, May 25, 1962. It is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1120–1121.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

271. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 271. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 28, 1962.

McGB:

Now that Luns has at last grudgingly agreed to accept Bunker formula as basis for talks,1 the problem is to get Indos back to table. Subandrio couldn’t quite believe above, so now we are waiting for reaction from the Bung himself. We’ve asked Indos to come back to Middleburg 4 June.

If Indos still balk, next moves should be (1) public call by Bunker for both sides to reconvene on 4 June or so on grounds that both apparently buy his plan; (2) public statements by US, UK, Australia endorsing formula and call for meeting and calling for cessation of military moves; (3) U Thant appeal for same; and (4) possible JFK letters to DeQuay and Sukarno urging both to return to table.

To me, next phase must be to build up pressure for an early negotiated solution as the only alternative to dangerous crisis. All of above gambits aimed at putting steam behind Bunker solution; we have to get it nailed down as outline of settlement before crisis gets out of hand. Am plugging this line with State, though Tyler seems to think US should not itself endorse Bunker plan, because it derogates from UN role (faugh).

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 5/62. Secret. Copies were sent to Kaysen and Forrestal.

1 Reported in telegram 918 from The Hague, May 26. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/5–2662)

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 272. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, June 8, 1962, 2 p.m.

2138. Deliver at Opening of Business. Department telegram 1366.1 Sukarno is almost at point of being willing to resume talks with Dutch but insisted this morning that Dutch position was not yet completely clear and that he was not sure despite US and U Thant assurances that Dutch were on record as being willing to transfer administration over WNG to Indonesia prior to plebiscite.

President who was in good mood put it this way. “The light is dawning but the sun has not yet come up over the horizon. It is not yet absolutely clear to me that Dutch are willing to do this.” He said further, “I am ready to resume negotiations the very moment I am satisfied on this point.”

I reviewed situation with him carefully and thoroughly, going back to Netherlands parliamentary discussion. When I stated (paragraph one reference telegram) that Dutch Government has committed itself publicly to negotiations on basis of Bunker formula, he stopped me, demanded, “Why can’t Dutch come out and say they agree in principle with the Bunker plan? What does this mean ‘on the basis of?”

We considered, I replied, that the Dutch had gone at least as far as the Indonesians. “What does acceptance in principle mean that agreement on the basis of negotiation doesn’t mean?” I asked, emphasizing that we considered latter as strong if not stronger commitment.

He asked me to repeat statement I had made. I read him paragraph one reference telegram word for word to underline point that I was giving him considered Department view.2 He then asked to see statement which I handed him. He studied it carefully. Then he said, “You say the Dutch Government has committed itself publicly. When and where? I have searched and searched but find no clear public statement by the Dutch Government. If I have this, I am satisfied.”

I referred to statements in Parliament, plus assurances Dutch had given us as well as U Thant, called his attention to fact U Thant only two days ago had in effect made public assurances Dutch had given him, said I considered this at least equivalent to public statement by Dutch. I pointed out Dutch had internal political problems as did GOI What more did Sukarno want? I said I found it difficult to understand why he was unwilling to accept Dutch assurances through US and U Thant.

“Because,” Sukarno said simply, “I know the Dutch. I think they may be cheating you as well as U Thant.” He then reverted to statement he has made repeatedly over past months. That if US would give him assurance that Dutch would do this, he would accept it.

“I will give you my government’s assurance that Dutch have said so to us,” I replied, emphasizing again (because of presence of others) why it was impossible for one government to give unqualified assurances as to what another government would do.

Sukarno shook his head. “I have to be sure,” he said. “If you will tell me when or where the Dutch Government has said it would transfer administration to Indonesia prior to this self-determination business, I will authorize my representatives to re-enter talks tomorrow.”

Patiently I went back over same old ground. I pointed out that the Dutch had committed themselves to negotiation on the basis of the Bunker plan, that the Bunker plan clearly provided for what he was asking.

During course of discussion which lasted almost an hour, albeit punctuated by interruptions and considerable bantering, I made most points in reference telegram timely receipt of which was most helpful.

At one juncture, Sukarno quoted from paragraph 1 reference telegram the phrase “if satisfactory agreement can be found with respect Papuan self-determination.” What does this mean?, he demanded. This “if”, does this mean Dutch will insist on negotiating self-determination provisions before agreeing to discuss ways and means of transfer of administration to Indonesia?

In any negotiation, I pointed out, there were “ifs” on both sides. Bunker plan was no guarantee to Dutch that Indonesians would do what they wished. Similarly plan was no guarantee to Indonesians that Dutch would come to agreement. But in our view, although negotiations would undoubtedly be difficult, sincere and patient efforts by GOI could have no result other than one acceptable to Indonesia. I stressed that we considered time element would be on Indonesian side, provided talks were resumed in near future, making point re Dutch public opinion and diplomatic pressures building up on behalf peaceful settlement as talks proceeded.

One point in reference telegram I deliberately did not make at this time—paragraph 4—believing it wise to save argument of US prestige. There was no implication whatever in conversation that Sukarno was either rejecting idea resumption of talks or failing to appreciate US efforts. He is still suspicious, still fears that Dutch have something up their sleeves. And Sukarno is not alone in this—every Indonesian with whom I have recently talked, including such pro-American Indonesians as Minister of National Research (former dean medical college) Sudjono Posponegoro, has reflected same suspicion and uncertainty. There is general recognition that this is the last chance, that if misunderstanding should develop in early stage of talks and negotiations break down, war then becomes inevitable. This no one in Indonesia wants. At same time, there is increasing attitude of resignation so typical of Moslems—“If Allah wills it,” a shrug of the shoulders, “we will have to go through with it.”

Sultan Jogjakarta, Governor Sumarno, and four others were present during conversation. Comment follows immediately.3

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–862. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

1 Telegram 1366 to Djakarta, June 7, instructed Jones to “give the Indos final push necessary to bring them back to the negotiating table.” Jones should stress that the Netherlands had publicly committed to transfer before Papuan self-determination, that time was on Indonesia’s side, and that continued diplomatic impasse accompanied by military pressure would be contrary to Indonesian interest. (Ibid., 798.11/6–762)

2 Paragraph 1 of telegram 1366 reads: “Dutch Government has committed itself publicly to negotiations on basis of Bunker formula which provides, if satisfactory agreement can be found with respect Papuan self-determination, transfer administrative authority prior to actual self-determination exercise.”

3 Document 273.

273. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 273. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, June 8, 1962, 5 p.m.

2144. Embassy telegram 2138.1 Deliver at opening of business.

Comment:

Sukarno appears to have point that there is no valid obvious reason why Dutch should not state publicly, as Indos have done, their willingness to accept Bunker formula.

There seem in sum to be three reasons why Indos hesitate now to resume negotiations: 1. They want to be sure that if they undertake negotiations these will result in transfer of WNG to Indo under some set of conditions. While they have lately avoided calling this a precondition, I doubt that they will negotiate until Dutch have been committed to a “how” rather than “whether” position. They feel a new failure of negotiations would make war inevitable.

2. The Indos consider that unless this is understood in advance, Dutch can and would walk out on some pretext, particularly if psychological and military pressures are relaxed as a means of providing helpful atmosphere for negotiations. We have done about all we can to persuade them that they are wrong about this.

3. Sukarno has taken firm public position he will not negotiate so long as Dutch continue sending reinforcements to WNG. To get back from this limb he needs some help. I, of course, recognize difficulties this presents to Dutch, but Indos think Dutch public would be willing go further than Luns. They do not buy idea that Luns is held back from more moderate course for fear of hostile public reaction.

In my opinion President Sukarno is not stalling and would like to resume negotiations if given a peg on which to hang his hat in rationalizing a new posture before his people.

Therefore I doubt whether we can safely apply much more pressure on Indos without considerable risk to our future prestige. Should we press them to negotiations while they still have doubts as to Dutch sincerity, doubts overridden on the basis of our discounting them; we would have taken on responsibility which I doubt if we are prepared to carry out—namely to keep Dutch negotiating in good faith until settlement reached. No more could we guarantee Dutch that GOI in fact desires peaceful settlement, although I am convinced this is case.

My understanding of what Sukarno wants before coming to conference table is Dutch public statement which, however worded, would do three things:

1. Provide rationale for Sukarno with own people in agreeing to further talks.

2. Provide justification for whatever action Sukarno might want to take should talks fail.

3. Commit Dutch Government in eyes of own people, making it more difficult to arbitrarily break off negotiations once they have begun.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/6–862. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to The Hague and USUN.

1 Document 272.

274. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 274. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, July 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

West New Guinea

Dutch-Indonesian talks on West New Guinea in the presence of Ambassador Bunker are expected to resume July 12. Both the Dutch and Indonesians have agreed in principle to the Bunker proposal, i.e., the transfer of administration of the territory to the United Nations and then to Indonesia with the subsequent act of self-determination by the Papuans under circumstances which would assure a really free choice.

In a discussion on July 10, President Sukarno told our Ambassador that if progress is achieved in the early sessions of the resumed talks, Foreign Minister Subandrio will come to Washington to join in the talks.1 Subandrio has said that before and during the talks, it is the intention of the Indonesian Government to limit military activity in West New Guinea to resupply and support of Indonesian units already in the field, However, he would not give an unconditional undertaking that Indonesian military activity otherwise would cease, claiming that the Indonesian military is difficult to control in the present circumstances.2

Ambassador van Roijen, who will head the Dutch delegation, has stated that he has been granted broad negotiating authority from the Netherlands Government. He has urged that maximum progress be achieved in the preliminary sessions prior to formal negotiations under U Thant. Van Roijen has also told me that his Government would most likely appoint a Cabinet minister who would head a large delegation to formal talks. In our view, Mr. Luns would be the probable choice. Van Roijen suggests that much more rapid progress will be possible in the restricted preliminary sessions, which will be free from the trappings and publicity that will be inevitable in the more formal New York atmosphere.3

Ambassador van Roijen has made such a strenuous effort to insure that the negotiations are virtually concluded by him within the framework of his present instructions that we are convinced he is worried lest this matter be opened up again within the Dutch Cabinet. Luns resents having been forced to accept the Bunker proposals as a basis for negotiation and if he takes over negotiations at the formal stage with considerable work left to be done, there is a distinct possibility that he will seize upon some negotiating point as a pretext for suspending negotiations. Under these circumstances, the Indonesians probably will resort to further, and probably large-scale, military action. The Dutch would likely throw the matter into the United Nations Security Council where the U.S.S.R. could be expected to veto any proposals unacceptable to Indonesia, including a simple appeal for a cease-fire and negotiations. The Indonesians now appear to recognize the desirability of accomplishing as much as possible in the preliminary sessions under Ambassador Bunker.

We have no rigid views on a solution and would be prepared to accept any arrangement agreed to by both parties. We will undoubtedly be called upon to exert pressure one way or another to help the participants reach compromise solutions to the difficulties we anticipate.

We can foresee a number of items on which differences in points of view are likely to arise in the course of negotiations. For example, the Bunker formula provides that the administration shall be transferred to the United Nations and thence to Indonesia within a two-year period. In accepting this formula, Sukarno has reserved his position on this time element and he may be expected to press for a shortening of the period. The Dutch, on the other hand, doubtless will consider the two-year time period as specified in the plan as a fixed minimum. The plan also calls for an exercise of self-determination by the Papuans at a time to be negotiated, but after assumption of administration by Indonesia. It is probable that the Dutch will wish a plebiscite or other form of expression to be conducted as soon as possible. Indonesians, who desire a maximum period in which to present their case to the Papuans, will press for the plebiscite to be held at a later time—probably some years after the transfer of the administration. The Dutch have exhibited concern for the human and political rights of the Papuans under Indonesian administration and their delegation doubtless will seek to obtain agreement on safeguards and guarantees for these rights.

We anticipate that the most major problem will center on the nature and scope of the mechanism for self-determination by the Papuans. The Bunker formula specifies that Indonesia, with United Nations assistance and participation, will make the necessary arrangements. The Dutch will endeavor to define the United Nations role in the strongest possible terms.

The Indonesian tendency to continue military pressure on the Dutch may cause serious difficulties. If a substantial attack is launched against West New Guinea, the talks may well collapse with the Dutch withdrawing in protest. In any event, we can expect continuing problems if the Indonesians undertake “resupply and support” missions.

In his role of moderator, Ambassador Bunker will seek to compose the different viewpoints and I believe that the United States should continue to assist him in this effort.

Dean Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, General, 7/1 /62–7/10/62. Secret. A note on a transmittal sheet to this memorandum indicates that it was part of the President’s weekend reading, July 13. According to the Department of State copy of the memorandum, it was drafted by Lindquist and Beaudry and cleared by Wallner and by Rice and Burdett in draft. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–1062)

1 Reported in telegram 54 from Dkajarta, July 10. (Ibid.)

2 Reported in telegram 36 from Dkajarta, July 9. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–962)

3 In a discussion with Rusk on July 6, reported in telegram 26 to Djakarta, July 7. (Ibid., 656.9813/7–662)

275. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to Attorney General Kennedy 275. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to Attorney General KennedySource

Washington, July 16, 1962.

At the moment we’re rather optimistic over the revived New Guinea talks. The reports from Middleburg are that Van Roijen and Malik are making progress.1

More important, the Indos seem to have pulled back from their recent demand for a direct transfer of WNG, instead of the two-year transition period in the Bunker Plan. Subandrio still wants, however, to talk about “accelerating” this transition and there may be some possibilities here if Indos are forthcoming on other issues.

The other potential fly in the ointment is that Sukarno will pull some new WNG landings in order to push the Dutch along. The Dutch were most reasonable about renewing talks without insisting on a cease fire, but it might not take much to start Luns off again on his “can’t do business with Sukarno” line. We intend to keep leaning on the Indos not to upset the applecart. One thing is, certain, however; if the talks break down again, Sukarno will move to military action. Our reports indicate that he’s poised to do so, even if he has to use subs and planes with Soviet crews.

Our job now is to move the talks along to a compromise agreement. We’ll have at least a few more ticklish moments before we get one. But we can’t afford to let the talks break down again, or we’ll have another Far East war on our hands. Therefore, we’ve go to do whatever is necessary, including Presidential intervention, to forestall it.

I’m attaching a selection of the latest cables to give you the current flavor of the problem.2

R.W. Komer3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 7/62. Secret.

1 The complete memoranda of conversation prepared by Lindquist, who was assisting Bunker, for each session of the discussions in Middleburg, Virginia, are in Department of State, Central File 656.9813.

2 The cables were not attached, but they were telegram 54 from Djakarta, July 10 (see footnote 1, Document 274); telegram 87 from Djakarta, July 13, in which Jones reported that Subandrio claimed that Indonesia was poised on the verge of a major attack and the negotiations represented the last chance for a peaceful settlement; telegram 92 from Djakarta, July 14, in which Jones reported Subandrio was considering joining the negotiations in a day or two; telegram 94 from Djakarta, July 16, confirming Subandrio’s departure on July 18; telegram 59 to Djakarta, July 13, reporting on the first day of the van Roijen-Malik discussions; and telegram 60 to Djakarta, July 14, reporting on additional discussions July 13–15. (All ibid., 656.9813/7–1362 to 656.9813/7–1662)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

276. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 276. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, July 20, 1962.

The renewed Dutch-Indonesian talks are going well so far. Subandrio talked to Van Roijen last night, and latter reports the atmosphere was most amiable. Though nothing was settled, Van Roijen feels somewhat more encouraged than at any previous time. The talks at Middleburg have resulted in a preliminary understanding on many of the major points necessary to flesh out the Bunker formula (see attached).1

There has been no meeting of minds, however, on the gut issue—timing of transfer to Indonesian administration. The Indos may still insist on short-circuiting the whole UN transition phase in favor of direct transfer, but more likely they will concentrate their fire on shortening the two-year transition period. The Dutch are adamant on the first year (when the Dutch phase out and the UN in), but may agree to shorten the second year (when the UN phases out and the Indos phase in).

Subandrio took a rather strong line on accelerating transfer with Rusk,2 arguing that with 2–3000 paratroopers already in WNG, the Indos could hardly allow a return to the status quo ante. Rusk urged that, with victory within their grasp, the Indonesians not flub the glittering opportunity for a peaceful settlement. He emphasized that we’d already gotten major concessions from the Dutch, and that world opinion would turn against the Indos if they now began insisting on more than the Bunker plan.

Subandrio is trying out his wares on the Attorney General, who is primed to make the same rebuttal.3 But if the Indos keep pushing on accelerated transfer, it may be important for you to weigh in personally with Subandrio, or if necessary write Bung Sukarno.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, General, 7/11/62–7/20/62. Secret. A note on the source text indicates the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading, July 20.

1 Nothing was attached, but apparent reference to “Proposals Concerning Indonesia and the Netherlands,” July 19. (Ibid.)

2 An account of Rusk’s and Subandrio’s conversation, July 19, is in a memorandum of conversation, July 19. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–1962)

3 See Document 277.

277. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 277. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 24, 1962.

I met with Dr. Subandrio on July 20, 1962.1 I opened the conversation by telling him I understood the negotiations were very close to a successful termination; that some points had recently been raised by the Indonesians but I strongly hoped that nothing would be done to prevent a peaceful solution of the West New Guinea problem. I said it seemed to me that the Indonesians had gained almost everything that they had wanted; that tremendous progress had been made since I last saw him in Djakarta; that they were going to gain control of West New Guinea and that the points and differences between them and the Dutch were now very, very minor.

I said that what concerned me were reports that not only did they want to gain their point from the Dutch but that they want to rub the nose of the Dutch in the dirt at the same time. Subandrio said this was not true at all. He said they were anxious to reach a peaceful settlement and restore amicable relations with the Dutch.

He said the one problem was the 2,000 or 3,000 Indonesian paratroopers who had landed in West New Guinea. He said that the Indonesians could not abandon them. The point seemed to be, although he did not say it, that the area which these paratroopers presently controlled should be turned over to the Indonesians at an early date while the rest of the territory could wait for a longer period under United Nations control.

I said that this seemed to be a relatively minor point; that they certainly could provide for the feeding and survival of these paratroopers and if appropriate, assist in their withdrawal and that certainly no one was attempting to force them to abandon the paratroopers. I said I felt that this did not really make a great deal of sense.

I made the point that when I went to Holland I was asked again and again if the Indonesians really wished to have a peaceful solution to the West New Guinea problem. I told them repeatedly that based on my conversations with Sukarno, Subandrio and others that I was sure that they were interested in resolving this whole matter without armed conflict. However, I said that in the last few days since I had heard these points raised by the Indonesians, I had no doubts as to whether I was correct or not. Further, because I had always been completely frank with him, that I was going to tell him that the friends that the Indonesians had at the State Department were for the first time raising questions whether Sukarno and others felt it would help their prestige and worldwide position if they gained control of West New Guinea by war rather than through peaceful means. Subandrio protested this conclusion.

He said that they were all very anxious for a peaceful solution; that a peaceful solution was required so that they could develop their country economically. Further, if they became involved in an armed conflict it meant the use of Russian personnel and weapons and they knew that such a conflict could not be restricted just to the local scene. Further, he said he believed that the prestige of Sukarno and the other Indonesian leaders would go down in world opinion if they could not resolve this matter peacefully. He said he was very anxious to work out a peaceful solution.

I made the point that they obviously had friends in the Communist bloc; that if this matter was resolved peacefully they would also have close friends in the Western bloc including the United States. Over the period of the next decade, as they were developing their country, this could be very helpful. The alternative was to alienate a large part of the world and where they were so close to a peaceful solution it seemed to be senseless.

Afterwards, I called Subandrio aside and thanked him for the other matter which has been of interest to us.2 He once again repeated to me that they were very anxious to have a peaceful solution over West New Guinea and that he was optimistic on the result.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. Drafted and initialed by Robert Kennedy who sent a copy to Bell.

1 In a July 20 memorandum with no recipient, but perhaps meant for Bundy or the President, Komer reported that Robert Kennedy told him that this talk went “pretty well.” Komer then summarized Robert Kennedy’s memorandum. (Ibid., West New Guinea, General, 7/11/62–7/20/62)

2 Reference is to the release of Allen L. Pope, which took place on August 22.

278. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 278. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource

Washington, July 26, 1962.

Secretary Rusk is seeing van Roijen on Indonesia at 11:30 this morning,1 and I think it would be wise for you to have two words with the Secretary before he leaves.

Subandrio and van Roijen had a long private talk last night and while there is no agreement, there is no impasse. Subandrio, van Roijen and Bunker are having another session this afternoon. The discussion is turning on ways and means of giving Subandrio some more to wave while not moving from the essentials of the Bunker plan in any way that will humiliate the Dutch.

The reason for you to have a word with the Secretary is simply to be sure that you and he have the same basic feel of the matter. One of his messages from Geneva showed a considerable eagerness to be tough with Sukarno.2 The time for that may be coming but it might be dangerous if he were to show this move to van Roijen at this stage. Our interest is still to have a peaceful settlement with as much face-saving for both sides as possible. The Dutch have made it clear that they will not fight if it comes to war, and we really do not want Sukarno to have a military victory with massive Soviet backing.

McG.B.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. No classification marking.

1 See Document 279.

2 In Secto 52 from Geneva, July 25, Rusk commented: “It seems absurd to me that Sukarno insists on transfer during 1962 simply because he has made a speech or two promising that this will happen. We don’t let Khrushchev get away with such tactics. I feel strongly that US cannot press Dutch to yield on this point without surrender our own integrity and self respect. Sukarno can announce in 1962 that his object has been achieved. Most politicians have to settle for less. Unless matter cannot be held for my return tonight suggest you discuss with President possibility of direct message to Sukarno pointing out that world would be indignant if fighting should break out over this point of no substance and that such fighting would not be just a simple matter between Indonesians and Dutch.” (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2562)

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials:

279. Memorandum of Conversation 279. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 26, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Status of Negotiations with Ambassador Bunker over West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary Governor Harriman, FE

Mr. Tyler, EUR

Mr. Bell, FE

Mr. Stone, WE

Dutch Ambassador van Roijen

Minister Schiff

Jonkheer Huydecoper

The Secretary told the Ambassador that he understood that he had had a conversation the previous evening with Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio. Ambassador van Roijen said that this had been his second talk with Subandrio. On the surface the talks were not going badly since the Dutch had made concessions as they wanted to convince the Indonesians of Dutch good faith in the negotiations. The Dutch had come to the negotiations on the assumption they were going to talk about the Bunker proposals. It now appeared that the Indonesians had tried to change the proposals on almost every point. The question had arisen as to what this all meant. Yesterday evening Subandrio had said that the Indonesians had wanted to end any Dutch or UN administration of West New Guinea by the end of 1962. However, they were not going to fight a war over two months but they could not agree to a UN administration over the territory which would last a year.

On the matter of self-determination Subandrio had repeated much more stringently than before that all the points which Stavropoulos of the UN had put forward regarding the referendum were intervening too far and had constituted a manner of control which was humiliating to the Indonesian people. On two essential elements of the Bunker proposals this marked a step backward. Subandrio was much more sticky regarding self-determination and he was obdurate on the matter of timing. He ended the conversation by stating that he was leaving Saturday1 to return to Djakarta. When asked if that would not constitute a breaking up of the talks, he had shrugged his shoulders.

Ambassador van Roijen said that the talks were not unfriendly but that it was made clear that the Indonesians would not give on one point, namely that of timing. He had stressed to Subandrio the difficulties involved in any transfer of administration and pointed out that a full year would be needed if such transfer were to be carried out in orderly fashion. A hasty transfer would run the grave risk of developing into a situation similar to that which had existed in the Congo. Ambassador van Roijen said that this talk looked very much as though it were an ultimatum. The Indonesians were saying either take a five month period for UN administration and less guarantees regarding self-determination or else they were going to move militarily. The Indonesians had pointed out that they were building up their military force and that they were not going to stop this build up, even though they realized that it was expensive and might even mean the economic collapse of Indonesia. It was partly for this reason that they could not stretch out the length of UN administration for a year.

The Secretary asked if the Bunker proposals had been made public in Indonesia. Mr. Tyler replied that they had been made public in New York by U Thant. The Secretary asked if the text of the proposals had been publicized within Indonesia. No one present knew. Ambassador van Roijen said that the Indonesians had made a great point of indicating that they had expressed reservations regarding the matter of timing when they agreed to negotiate on the basis of the Bunker plan. He said that the Dutch had never been informed of any such reservations by the United States and since their only contact with Indonesia was through United States representatives the Ambassador felt that if this was the case and the Dutch had not been informed of any such Indonesian reservations then they had agreed to meet under false circumstances. The Secretary inquired what the Ambassador’s schedule was for the rest of the day. The Ambassador said he was meeting with Ambassador Bunker and Subandrio at 2 p.m. at the Indonesian Ambassador’s residence. Ambassador Bunker had informed him that he was trying to arrange an appointment for the President to see Subandrio and if this could be arranged it might alter their appointment.

Governor Harriman said that he understood that Ambassador Bunker had made a suggestion to the Dutch Ambassador which would involve agreement that the transfer of administration to the UN would take place as soon as possible after an Indonesian-Dutch agreement was signed and that it might additionally be possible to give the Acting Secretary General the authority to begin the transfer of administration from the UN to Indonesia under a year if the transfer of administration appeared to be running smoothly. Ambassador van Roijen replied that Ambassador Bunker had shown him some pencilled suggestions which he had put down in draft along these lines but he had informed Ambassador Bunker that these proposals would not be acceptable to his Government. He understood that the Ambassador had not made these proposals to Ambassador Malik. Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch had met the Indonesians more than half way, in fact they had gone ninety percent of the way. He had in fact demonstrated flexibility regarding the transfer of administration to Indonesia during the second year and he had stuck his neck out with his own Government in doing so. The Dutch had not asked for even one change in the Bunker proposals. Another point that had been brought up in his talks with Subandrio had been the question of Indonesian guerrillas who had been dropped by parachute. On that one point Subandrio had seemed to be reasonable. He had said that the Indonesian paratroops could be confined to barracks and could be placed under the command of UN officers. They could then constitute a part of the UN security force.

Mr. Bell joined the meeting at this point and indicated that the Indonesians had made no specific reservations regarding the transfer of administration to Indonesia during the first phase at the time they agreed to resume negotiations on the basis of the Bunker proposals. Sukarno had, however, made many public statements calling for the transfer of the territory to Indonesia before the end of 1962. Ambassador van Roijen said that when the Dutch had accepted the Bunker proposals they knew nothing about any reservations. The Secretary commented that possibly the Indonesians themselves had transformed their stated negotiating objective into a reservation. Ambassador van Roijen said that Subandrio had told him that the Indonesians had made reservations all along and that he could ask Secretary Rusk if this were not the case. Subandrio then laid great emphasis on the fact that many things had now changed in the picture since the Indonesians had agreed to negotiate on the basis of the Bunker plan. Of course, all these changes had been brought about by the Indonesians themselves, such as the fact that they had dropped paratroopers into the territory.

The Secretary asked the Ambassador what his information was regarding the military situation in West New Guinea. Ambassador van Roijen replied that the Indonesian military buildup was serious. The Indonesians had stated that they were going to continue the military buildup and continue to spend money on it because they had no confidence in the good faith of the Dutch and they had to be prepared for Dutch “booby traps”. Ambassador van Roijen said that he could assure Subandrio that the Dutch would start immediately to withdraw their troops if an agreement was reached and that the Dutch could complete their military withdrawal from the territory within six months.

Militarily the Ambassador could not see what more the Indonesians could do than to occupy a beachhead in the area of Sorong on the Vogelkop. The question was what they expected to do then. He supposed that they could say that then they had accomplished their objectives militarily. In response to the Secretary’s question whether he had been alone during his talk with Subandrio the Ambassador replied in the affirmative. He said that Ambassador Zain had been present during his first conversation but that last night he had been alone.

The Ambassador said that he had had a telephone conversation with the Prime Minister that morning. There was to be a meeting of the Dutch cabinet tomorrow morning at 10 o’clock. The Prime Minister had said that the Dutch must know where the United States stood. They wanted to know if the U.S. would stand by the Bunker proposals or leave the Dutch in the lurch. The Secretary restated the present situation by saying it was the Ambassador’s definite impression that Subandrio had been called back and was to leave on Saturday. Moreover the two basic points at issue were the matter of timing of the transfer of administration and guarantees for self-determination for the Papuan people. Ambassador van Roijen confirmed that this was the case and said that undoubtedly the Russians were pressing the Indonesians to use the matériel that they had given them.

The Secretary said that the President did want to see Subandrio and that he would get in touch with the Ambassador by the end of the day2 He asked if the Dutch had any way of sensing whether the Indonesian position was merely tactical or serious. Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch had no way of knowing this.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2762. Secret. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on August 2. The meeting ended at noon. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

1 July 28.

2 See Document 281.

280. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 280. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, July 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Talking Paper for your Meeting with Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio

There is attached a talking paper for your meeting with Subandrio1 which includes a brief statement of the present status of negotiations between the Dutch and Indonesian representatives on the West New Guinea dispute. I am convinced of the importance of your receiving Subandrio to express strongly the need for the Indonesians to adopt the degree of flexibility necessary for achieving a negotiated solution to this dispute and also to make clear to Subandrio that the United States cannot be indifferent to the outbreak of major hostilities in the area.

It is intended that Ambassador Bunker will supplement this paper by an oral briefing prior to your session with the Indonesian Foreign Minister.

Dean Rusk

Attachment

TALKING PAPER

for your Meeting with Foreign Minister Subandrio

The Dutch-Indonesian talks on West New Guinea on the basis of Ambassador Bunker’s formula (Tab A)2 are currently at an impasse over three main problems:

(a) Indonesian insistence on shortening the minimum one year period of interim UN administration prior to transfer of administration to Indonesia;

(b) Indonesian efforts to minimize the role of the United Nations at the time of self-determination; and

(c) The status of the Indonesian paratroopers in the territory during the period of interim UN administration.

The Dutch delegation has sought to adhere strictly to the provisions of the Bunker formula, while exhibiting flexibility on relatively minor points. Indonesia, on the other hand, has sought to modify the Bunker formula, both in respect to the length of interim UN administration and in interpreting UN participation in the act of self-determination to mean observation only.

In regard to Problem (a) Ambassador Bunker on July 23 suggested a compromise formulation (Tab B) to Ambassador van Roijen which would give the Secretary General discretionary authority to begin the transfer of administration to Indonesia prior to the end of the one year minimum period if, in his opinion, the phasing out of the Dutch has progressed smoothly and earlier transfer of administrative control was in the interest of the inhabitants of the territory. Ambassador van Roijen maintained his Government’s position that it could not accept a shortening of the one year period contained in the Bunker formula. Nevertheless, if Indonesia were to be forthcoming on guarantees and safeguards for self-determination, in the interest of a peaceful settlement the Netherlands Government might agree to Ambassador Bunker’s compromise.

As for Problem (b) Indonesia has consistently sought to minimize the United Nations role in the act of self-determination. At Ambassador Bunker’s suggestion, and with the agreement of both sides, the UN Legal Counsel presented suggested principles and procedures on self-determination which would have provided for regular UN plebiscite machinery. (Tab C) The Netherlands delegation accepted the Legal Counselor’s proposals. The Indonesian delegation rejected them on the grounds that they derogated from the Bunker formula’s provision that Indonesia make arrangements, with the assistance and participation of the United Nations, for the act of self-determination. At the suggestion of the Indonesian delegation, and with the Netherlands delegation’s concurrence, Ambassador Bunker, on July 25, presented a compromise on self-determination (Tab D) to both sides which, while providing for UN participation, circumscribes the UN role. Ambassador van Roijen has indicated that this compromise might be acceptable to the Netherlands. No official reaction has been received from the Indonesian delegation as yet.

On Problem (c), in a conversation with Ambassador van Roijen on July 25, Foreign Minister Subandrio indicated that Indonesia might be prepared to have the Indonesian paratroopers in the territory assembled in barracks under the authority of UN officers. We believe that some such arrangement will be satisfactory to the Netherlands and to the Secretary General.

You may wish to make the following points to Foreign Minister Subandrio: 1. The United States continues to believe that the Bunker plan offers a framework for a peaceful solution honorable to both sides.

2. The Netherlands Government has made the principal concession in agreeing to transfer all administrative control of the territory to Indonesia prior to the act of self-determination.

3. If agreement is reached within the framework of the Bunker proposals, Indonesia will have achieved through diplomacy its primary objective of control of the territory.

4. President Sukarno will then be able to say to the Indonesian people that the transfer of the territory to Indonesia has begun. Through skill, patience, statesmanship, and magnanimity, President Sukarno and Minister Subandrio will have brought to a brilliant conclusion the Indonesian revolution.

5. The United States Government is firmly convinced that the Dutch Government, having accepted the Bunker proposals in principle, will faithfully implement an agreement reached with the Indonesian Government within the framework of the Bunker plan.

6. Indonesia should not insist on an alteration of the Bunker proposals which might jeopardize the attainment of an agreement.

7. Ratification of the agreement and its subsequent execution will be facilitated to the extent that the agreement adheres to the Bunker proposals.

8. A peaceful and honorable settlement of this dispute will benefit Indonesia in the following ways: (a) By enhancing the stature and reputation of Indonesia, President Sukarno, and Minister Subandrio in world opinion;

(b) Economic progress will be stimulated whereas hostilities would impose a tragic drain on Indonesia’s resources;

(c) The restoration of economic and diplomatic relations with the Dutch which, in the long run, will benefit Indonesia as well as the Netherlands.

9. We are convinced that a peaceful and honorable settlement is in sight. There is no justification for further sacrifice of human life. The alternative to a negotiated solution would be tragic.

10. Sincere friendship for the Indonesian people and respect for President Sukarno

11. The United States has made a great effort to assist in bringing about a peaceful settlement of this dispute. We have committed our prestige to this effort. A sudden attack on West New Guinea when a peaceful solution seems possible would raise grave problems for the United States at a time when we have assumed major responsibilities in Southeast Asia.

12. It is easy to start a war but very difficult to control its course, limit its scope or stop it. I wish solemnly to state that if a major attack is mounted against West New Guinea the United States would be faced with very grave decisions with respect to our own attitude and course of action. We can not be indifferent to the safety of lives in West New Guinea if fighting occurs at a moment when a peaceful solution is clearly in sight.3

13. If Subandrio indicates his intention to return to Djakarta this weekend, he should be urged to remain here to continue the negotiations. If Subandrio must depart then, at least, Malik should stay to continue the talks with Ambassador Bunker. On his departure Subandrio should be asked to make a public announcement that he was going home for consultations and that he would be returning to the negotiations.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. II, 7/62–8/62. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates Beaudry drafted it and Harriman, Tyler, and Wallner cleared it. (Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2662)

1 See footnote 1, Document 281.

2 The tabs are attached to the Department of State copy; none is printed.

3 In a handwritten note, Rusk revised the language beginning with “would be faced” through the end of the paragraph. He crossed out the typed language: “could not stand aloof. We are already committed to assist in the evacuation of Dutch civilians in the event this becomes necessary.”

281. Memorandum of Conversation 281. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 26, 1962, 7:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Possible Breakdown in Dutch-Indonesian Negotiations Over West New Guinea

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador van Roijen, Netherlands Embassy

Mr. Emil Schiff, Minister, Netherlands Embassy

The Secretary

Governor Harriman

Mr. William R. Tyler, EUR

Mr. Woodruff Wallner, IO

Mr. Galen L. Stone, WE

The Secretary asked the Ambassador what he saw as the question that would be coming before the Dutch Cabinet meeting tomorrow (Friday, July 27 at 10:00 a.m.). Ambassador van Roijen said that the question before the Cabinet would be what could the Dutch expect from the U.S. in the present situation and on the answer would depend what action the Dutch Cabinet would take. The Secretary said that we wanted to know what the U.S. could expect from the Netherlands. Ambassador van Roijen said that in the event of an Indonesian attack the answer was obvious. The Dutch would meet force with force. It was clear that the Australians were not going to assist them. Therefore, the Dutch needed to know what the Americans were going to do.

The Secretary said he had just returned from a meeting alone with the President and Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio.1 Subandrio had confirmed that he was returning to Djakarta on Saturday. When he was asked if that meant that the Indonesians were breaking off the talks, he said it did not mean that. The President had pointed out that if that did mean breaking off the talks he should clarify it publicly. The President told him that he should stay to continue the negotiations or if he could not remain that at least Ambassador Malik should stay on. The President had also pointed out that it would be insane for the Indonesians to start shooting about something that was already in hand. Such actions would not be understood by anyone. While the use of force might look appealing and glamorous on the first day or two, such a course of action was utterly unpredictable. The majority of the U.N. would not understand it if the Indonesians started shooting when the possibility of a settlement was at hand. The United States would be asked to take part and there would be a general feeling of revulsion in this country. Subandrio had said that he had urged Sukarno not to make any decisions with regard to major military moves until he returned. The Secretary commented that Subandrio did not say, however, that he had had any reply from Sukarno on this point.

The Secretary asked the Ambassador if the Dutch had been considering under what circumstances they would throw the dispute into the U.N. Ambassador van Roijen said that this had not previously been considered but he thought the Cabinet might consider this at its meeting tomorrow. The Secretary said that if U Thant got no satisfaction out of Subandrio when he met with him tomorrow and Subandrio and Malik went home early thus breaking off the negotiations, it would be inconceivable to him that two-thirds of the General Assembly would not support a “don’t shoot but talk” policy. Ambassador van Roijen said that it would be necessary first to go to the Security Council where there would be a Soviet veto and then go on to the Assembly. But before going to the General Assembly it would be necessary to have seven votes in the Security Council for action under the Uniting for Peace procedure. Mr. Wallner was confident that we could get seven votes from the four Permanent Representatives, Ireland, and the two Latin American nations. The Secretary asked if he was correct that there were no resolutions presently outstanding regarding West New Guinea. Mr. Wallner confirmed that this was the case. He said that if this matter were brought to the Security Council the preference would be to have it raised by U Thant, Australia, a friendly member of the Council, ourselves or the Dutch, in that order. The Secretary commented that the one who thought that he was under threat had the clearest interest in bringing the matter to the Security Council. Mr. Wallner pointed out that there was a dear advantage to U Thant’s raising the matter under Article 99. However, he might decide not to do this. Then we should weigh carefully to whom the initiative should fall. If we were able to get the Indians to abstain in the General Assembly then it would be easy for us to get a two-thirds vote. Ambassador van Roijen said he was not sure that we would be able to get a two-thirds vote and there were a lot of ifs involved. He was afraid that by that time military operations would have long since been underway. The General Assembly action would amount to a post mortem. Mr. Wallner said he thought that we could get an emergency session together fast

Ambassador van Roijen asked if there was no other way to prevent the Indonesians from starting something. The Dutch had done everything on their part to come to an agreement. The Ambassador said that what he understood was that the United States was unwilling to bring sufficient pressure on the Indonesians to deter them from military action and make an agreement possible The Secretary said that he had not said that. Ambassador van Roijen asked if the Secretary could deny it. The Secretary said the first thing to decide was what the Dutch Government would do. Ambassador van Roijen said that the Dutch were going to fight and asked if the U.S. was going to fight with them. The Secretary asked if the Dutch were going to fight at the present stage of the negotiations. Ambassador van Roijen said that he thought that the Dutch were negotiating on the basis of the Bunker proposals. The Secretary said that he was asking if the Dutch had said their last word. Ambassador van Roijen said that Subandrio had said in reply to his question that if he was implying that the Indonesians were trying to alter the Bunker proposals he was correct. He asked what the U.S. expected the Dutch to do. The Secretary said he was not expecting anything. Ambassador van Roijen said it was obvious that if the talks were broken off it would be on Indonesian responsibility. He wondered in this circumstance if the Dutch could count on the full support of the United States in the U.N. The Secretary said there was no question of that. Ambassador van Roijen said that you can break off and be right and you can break off and be wrong. He thought the least the U.S. could do would be to make it clear to the world where responsibility for the breakup of the talks would lie. The Secretary said he would like first to prevent the breaking off of the talks. Ambassador van Roijen agreed.

Note: The Secretary then asked to see the Ambassador alone.2 Before the others present departed, however, Ambassador van Roijen said that he wanted to make it clear to everyone that anything he said was in no way directed against Ambassador Bunker, whom he felt had carried out his task in exemplary fashion.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/7–2662. Secret. Drafted by Stone and approved in S on August 2.

1 The President and Rusk met with Subandrio from 6 to 6:32 p.m. but no memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) Writing to Bundy on July 27, Komer reported that “Bunker’s sense is that JFK scared the living daylights out of Subandrio.” (Memorandum from Komer to Bundy, July 27; ibid., National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 7/62) Rusk gave Jones an account of the meeting with Subandrio in Document 284.

2 Rusk met with van Roijen alone from 7:50 to 8:20. Then he met with Harriman, Tyler, Bunker, Wallner, and Stone until 9:25 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

282. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security. Affairs (Bundy) 282. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security. Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 30, 1962.

McGB:

As you may know, Subandrio has urged the President personally write Sukarno asking that, as a great leader for peace, Sukarno accept the new compromise WNG package. Subandrio is apparently nervous that he may be in the doghouse; Ed Rice feels that he exceeded his instructions, and wants something to help him justify doing so.

Painful as it may be, I think we should send this reinforcing plea. Anything which would increase the chances of Sukarno’s buying is worth the effort.

State has a draft which should be over shortly (if Rusk approves).1 It is a flowery appeal to Sukarno’s ego, designed to put him in a good mood. If we send him a stiff letter, he may beat up Subandrio instead.

Meanwhile, the talks in Middleburg went well today. We may be on the verge of an agreed package. Though this isn’t the end, it would be another major hurdle to overcome, and worth the price.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 7/62. Secret.

1 The letter was approved by Rusk and sent in telegram 121 to Djakarta, July 30, 9:17 p.m. (Ibid., Countries Series, West New Guinea, General, 7/27/62–7/31 /62)

283. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 283. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, August 1, 1962.

McGB:

Here is a copy of the “Preliminary Understanding” between Indonesia and The Netherlands.1 Salient points are:

(a) As soon as UNGA Resolution passed, Dutch will transfer administration to UN Temporary Executive Authority (UNTEA).

(b) It will have discretion to start transferring administration to Indos any time after 1 May 1963.

(c) Indo forces in WNG will be at disposal of UNTEA.

(d) UNTEA may use Dutch and Indo officials.

(e) One year before “self-determination”, which must be no later than 1969, UN SYG will appoint a representative and staff to advise and assist in relevant arrangements.

(f) Indo flag can be hoisted beside UN flag beginning 1 January 1963.

I’m keeping my fingers crossed but if Sukarno comes through, as seems likely from his response when Jones delivered President’s letter, we seem to be over the hump. Further problems will inevitably come up but I foresee none comparable to present crisis.

Once Sukarno’s approval comes through, I think the President might call Bunker, whose performance has been outstanding. Jim Bell, his principal back-up in Department (and my chief pressure point), also deserves a hand. I’ll have suggestions later.

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, West New Guinea, 8/1/62–8/6/62. Secret. A copy was sent to Robert Kennedy. A note on the source text indicates the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading, August 8.

1 Attached but not printed. The final agreements, signed at U.N. Headquarters on August 15, are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1121–1129.

284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 284. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, August 2, 1962, 1:35 p.m.

132. Eyes only for Ambassador. No other distribution. Your 200.1 If question of President’s conversation with Subandrio comes up during your discussion with Sukarno, you should state that you have not yet received full details but are fully aware of the most serious view the President would take if there were an outbreak of fighting with respect to West Irian when Indonesia has secured its primary objective by diplomatic and peaceful means. More detail contained in message you received through another channel.2

FYI. The President’s discussion with Subandrio was friendly but entirely frank and firm, emphasizing that world would not be able to understand if Indonesians embarked upon tortuous and unpredictable path of military action when objective has been accomplished.

Subandrio subsequently described conversation as very hard-hitting and told Department officer he had not conveyed full flavor of President’s firm attitude to Sukarno. Subandrio personally appeared to have accepted President’s statement without rancor. Undoubtedly President’s frank and firm presentation of our position resulted in Subandrio’s decision remain in Washington and his acceptance preliminary understanding. End FYI.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–262. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Bell and Rusk, cleared by Harriman and Stone, and approved by Rusk.

1 In telegram 200, August 2, Jones reported that he was seeing Sukarno and Subandrio on August 3. As Subandrio’s discussion with Kennedy on July 26 was likely to be discussed, Jones needed a summary of the discussion. (Ibid.)

2 Not further identified.

285. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 285. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, August 3, 1962, 3 p.m.

207. Policy. CINCPAC also for POLAD. President Sukarno has accepted terms of preliminary understanding on WNG issue between governments of Indo and the Netherlands.

Subandrio asked me to come to his home early this morning to notify me of this final decision (subject only to rubber stamping by Indo Parliament) and to hand me a copy of the agreed text. I congratulated Subandrio on major diplomatic victory thus achieved and I [he] took occasion to express deep appreciation for efforts USG “without which peaceful solution would not have been possible.” He said Ambassador Bunker was “wonderful”, repeated several times “you can be proud of Bunker” in describing skillful handling discussion of difficult and delicate subjects.

When expressing appreciation for President Kennedy’s support, Subandrio—clearly relishing experience in retrospect, observed that in all his career he had only been “threatened” twice—one by Mao, Chou En-lai in Peiping; second by President Kennedy in Washington! Subandrio gave dramatic account of his interview with President Kennedy in which he said President had stated vigorously that he was on side of Indos in this dispute but that US would have to switch to support of Dutch if GOI walked out on one of the greatest diplomatic victories of all times and resorted to use of force. He, however, credited President Kennedy’s personal intervention at critical point with saving negotiations. It was obvious Subandrio’s decision to stay on resulted from this meeting. Finally, he said it was quite obvious that tactful exercise of State Department influence with Dutch had made agreement possible.

For record he wanted to make clear that GOI had not decided launch military attack in West Irian area immediately upon his return home; that decision to do so would have rested upon what he had to report. I commented that my assessment had been that Indos were poised for attack in event Foreign Minister returned to report failure of talks which Subandrio did not deny.

Subandrio further stressed outcome was outstanding diplomatic victory for US as well as Indo. Only US could have accomplished this result. Settlement of this dispute would mean much to US in terms of prestige in Asia and Africa. He noted it was first time US or any Western power had actively intervened to settle colonial dispute in favor of former colony. It was in truth historic occasion. (By inference, in context of what has gone before, this implied major defeat for Commie diplomacy and internal political effort by PKI.) Subandrio also noted that UN role in settlement this historic dispute should be substantial help to U Thant and offset on world stage experience in Congo.

I took advantage of this warm and friendly moment to urge strongly point raised in Deptel 125,1 emphasizing that now is time for GOI to play part of generous victor. Subandrio noted that agreement in paragraph 25 stated “after this agreement has been signed”, diplomatic relations will be resumed. He said this gave GOI great flexibility and assured me it was his intention resume diplomatic relations almost immediately if implementation of agreement went well. He was thinking in terms of month after signing. He pointed out that Sukarno, Nasution and others based on past experience were still suspicious that Dutch would create obstacles to smooth transfer of administration. But if all went well in first weeks there was no reason why diplomatic relations could not be resumed at once.

In this connection, he said President Sukarno, to whom he reported last night after 8 p.m. arrival, had expressed fear Dutch Parliament might not act promptly to ratify agreement and hoped US Government would do what it felt it could to impress upon Dutch importance of expeditious action. I said I would pass on this request at once but I observed I thought Sukarno’s fears were unfounded.

When Subandrio arrived at airport last night, majority of Cabinet led by First Minister Djuanda and large crowd of well-wishers were there to meet him. Spontaneous cheer went up from crowd as Subandrio stepped from plane. Sense of relief at result of talks was evident on all sides.

President Kennedy’s use of term “West Irian” in his press conference2 did not go unnoticed here. It was highlighted in press and several spoke to me about it at airport, including Deputy First Minister Leimena who, with big smile, noted this was first time President or any Washington official had publicly used Indonesian name for territory. Subandrio did not say but his elation suggested Sukarno’s approval of WNG understanding reached by his Foreign Minister had been wholehearted.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 656.9813/8–362. Secret; Niact. Repeated niact to The Hague, priority to Canberra, London, USUN, CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 125, July 31, the Department suggested that Jones stress to Sukarno that “magnanimity is a two-way street and counsel him that immediate resumption of relations after signing the agreement would be a constructive step towards restoration of good relations.” (Ibid., 656.9813/7–3162)

2 In his press conference on August 1; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, p. 592.

286. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 286. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, August 15, 1962.

Without trying to count too many chickens before they’re hatched, we ought to capitalize on the WNG settlement by moving fast toward the “future fruitful cooperation” of which you spoke to Sukarno.1

Capital of the sort we’ve gained is a transitory asset to be used while it’s still good. Moreover, Indonesia is one of the truly big areas of East-West competition; having invested so much in maneuvering a WNG settlement for the express purpose of giving us leverage in this competition, we’d be foolish not to follow through.

Even on an austere basis, this will cost a good deal of money. But we’ve been allocating very little to Indonesia in comparison to the total $800 million in military aid and $640 million in economic the Bloc has committed. For FY 1962, for example, we budgeted $79 million economic aid (almost 70% PL–80) and $7.6 million in MAP.

Current planning is to move in fast with only $15 million for emergency aid to get export industries going again, plus $4 million in civic action. But this is far from what will be needed shortly. Indonesia’s economy is a mess, and it has been hinting it would like a cool $400–1,000 million from us. This is nonsense, but one current guess is that at least $250 million will be needed, along with some $80 million from IMF if the Indos accept a decent stabilization plan. We can probably find the money from AID contingency fund, MAP transfer authority, and perhaps Ex-Im Bank.

We’ll want to think long and hard before engaging on yet another major aid venture, but the game is worth the candle. Indonesia has more people, and perhaps resources, than the whole of mainland SEA. Yet its internal weakness makes it a tempting prize for Communist penetration or even parliamentary takeover. The PKI is the only strong and well-organized party (indeed the largest in Free Asia). The Soviets themselves are investing heavily. While not suggesting that we try to match them, we can’t afford not to compete for such a prize. Therefore to ensure that we move fast and think big, I urge you issue attached hortatory word.2 It only cranks up a planning exercise, so you’ll still be able to call a halt later if the package looks too big.

R.W. Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Komer, 8/62. Secret.

1 Reference is to Kennedy’s July 30 letter to Sukarno; see footnote 1, Document 282.

2 Apparent reference to Document 287.

287. National Security Action Memorandum No. 179 287. National Security Action Memorandum No. 179Source

Washington, August 16, 1962.

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE SECRETARY OF STATE

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

THE ADMINISTRATOR, AID

THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

THE DIRECTOR, USIA

SUBJECT

U.S Policy Toward Indonesia

With a peaceful settlement of the West Irian dispute now in prospect, I would like to see us capitalize on the US role in promoting this settlement to move toward a new and better relationship with Indonesia. I gather that with this issue resolved the Indonesians too would like to move in this direction, and will be presenting us with numerous requests.

To seize this opportunity, will all agencies concerned please review their programs for Indonesia and assess what further measures might be useful. I have in mind the possibility of expanded civic action, military aid, and economic stabilization and development programs, as well as diplomatic initiatives. The Department of State is requested to pull together all relevant agency proposals in a plan of action and submit it to me no later than September 15th.

John F. Kennedy

* Source: Kennedy Library National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC, NSAM 195. Secret. Copies were sent to Robert Kennedy, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Maxwell Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, Robert Johnson, Komer, and Forrestal.

288. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 288. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, September 5, 1962.

JCSM-692–62

SUBJECT

US Policy Toward Indonesia (NSAM 179) (U)

1. Reference is made to: a. National Security Action Memorandum No. 179, dated 16 August 1962, subject as above.1

b. JCSM-725–61, dated 13 October 1961, subject: “US Strategic Interest in Indonesia (U).”2

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed, from a military standpoint, the US objectives and programs for Indonesia with the view of participating in a coordinated military, political, and economic program designed to achieve the revival of an Indonesian society oriented to the West. In this regard the Joint Chiefs of Staff agree that an expanded military civic action program has potential for long-term and short-term benefits to both US and Indonesian interests. Specifically, following the peaceful settlement of the West Irian issue, Indonesia must face the reality of the problems involved in achieving economic recovery, along with the problem of maintaining internal tranquility in the face of efforts of communist forces to exploit the existing conditions of widespread poverty. Military civic actions, aimed simultaneously at improving rural economic conditions and at developing an enlightened pro-Western attitude among the soldiery, can contribute to solution of both problems. Each of the US Military Services is alert to these opportunities, and each is prepared to provide optimum support to the program envisaged in reference la.

3. US military assistance programs and plans for Indonesia have been designed mainly to offset Communist Bloc influence and to meet internal security needs. It is the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that, although the general orientation of those programs is sound, much can be done to give them a more direct relationship with military civic action. Similarly, any reorientation of US military assistance efforts must be directed, wherever possible, to diminishing Indonesia’s reliance on Soviet support.

4. Early correlation of plans for available funds to Indonesia is an essential element to the formulation of a realistic program for that country. This requirement is particularly applicable to US military assistance planning to carry out an expanded military civic action program while still meeting essential needs of Indonesia to maintain a strong internal security posture.

5. In regard to the matter of aid for Indonesia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff confirm their views on this subject as expressed in reference lb. Specifically, decisions taken should reflect a consideration of the effect of an Indonesian aid program on other areas such as the Philippines and Thailand. Conversely, programs pertinent to other areas should, in the future, be considered in light of their effect on Indonesia.

6. An additional and equally important consideration is the delicate balance which exists between the Indonesia Communist Party (PKI) on the one hand the anti-Communist Indonesian Armed Forces on the other, together with President Sukarno’s proclivity for balancing these forces against each other. Care must be taken to avoid any action which would reduce the stature of the key anti-Communist leaders upon whose influence the future alignment of Indonesia on the side of the Free World will largely depend. These individuals are a strong anti-Communist asset, but their influence in the Indonesian Government could be jeopardized by an overidentification with the US program.

7. The situation in Indonesia is considerably different from that in most of the countries to which US assistance is being given in that there are vast quantities of Soviet equipment presently available in that country—far more than the Indonesians have been able to absorb. It would appear in the best interests of the United States to guide such assistance as may be given into paths leading to the attainment of the US objective to reduce Communist presence and stature. Therefore, the normal pattern of training the military in the use of new equipment must be varied to avoid the improvement of proficiency in the use of Soviet-supplied equipment. The peculiarities of the power factors extant in Indonesia may well prove to be the governing consideration in determining the propriety of any action which may be proposed.

8. The details of what the United States can do in Indonesia will be contained, in part, in the various agency and departmental reports developed in response to the President’s memorandum (reference 1a). Of even greater impact will be the report of the interagency Civic Action Survey Team, which is due after mid-October.3 In the meantime the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that all of the agencies concerned should initiate the desirable preliminary actions in order to save time, acknowledging that modifications will be required when the specific recommendations of the Survey Team are received. Specifically, the following actions should be considered: a. Initiate diplomatic arrangements to augment the current level of US economic and military specialists in Indonesia, initially without respect to specific numbers.

b. Achieve a general determination of funds which will be available to carry out the program envisaged by the President (reference 1a).

c. Review current military assistance plans and programs with a view to reorienting them more directly toward support of civic action and to diminish, wherever possible, Indonesia’s reliance on Soviet support.

d. Anticipate the requirement for a follow-on military Civic Action Survey Team composed of representatives from each of the Military Services. The purpose of this team would be to refine military aspects of the program developed by the interagency team.

e. Identify and earmark skilled military personnel which may be needed for civic action mobile training teams to train and advise Indonesian units.

f. Establish general requirements for, and initiate language training of, US personnel who may be selected for duty in Indonesia.

g. Develop a native language troop information and education program for the Indonesian Armed Forces aimed at portraying the superiority of democracy over communism.

h. Anticipate and plan for an Indonesian Armed Forces military education and training system aimed at developing skills with longterm civilian utility, and prepare model curricula proposals for presentation to the Indonesian Armed Forces.

i. Initiate planning for an expanded program of continental US training for the Indonesian Armed Forces designed primarily to influence and train younger officers and enlisted personnel.

j. Re-examine the content of counterinsurgency instruction in the Foreign Service Institute Interdepartmental Seminar and in the Joint and Service Colleges to ensure an adequate treatment of Indonesia.

k. As an expression of US good faith, expedite implementation of those portions of the FY 62 and FY 63 Military Assistance programs which have civic action dividends. This would include those elements applicable to communications, construction equipment, vehicles, light aircraft, and sealift for inter-island support.

l. Develop a program for mutual exchange visits of ranking diplomatic and military representatives.

m. Alert US intelligence agencies to the priority requirement for the essential elements of counterinsurgency information pertaining to Indonesia.

n. Consult with Australia and New Zealand on the political, military, economic, and sociological measures to be taken in Indonesia, giving due consideration to the advantages which might be obtained from the establishment of an ANZUS position and a coordinated program.

o. When politically feasible, initiate arrangements for visits of selected elements of the US Armed Forces to Indonesia.

9. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The actions listed in paragraph 8, above, be forwarded to the Department of State for inclusion in the plan of action to be submitted to the President. Meanwhile, those coming under the cognizance of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Military Services will be initiated without delay.

b. The Indonesia program be placed under the cognizance of the Special Group (CI), in order to ensure rapid achievement of the objectives outlined in reference la.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
G.H. Decker
Acting Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 091 Indonesia. Secret.

1 Document 287.

2 Document 198.

3 The report of the interagency civic action team, not printed, was attached to the enclosure to Document 291.

289. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to Secretary of State Rusk 289. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Murrow) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 14, 1962.

SUBJECT

U.S. Policy Toward Indonesia (Reference National Security Action Memorandum No.179)1

This statement is submitted for the record in confirmation of papers and comments made available to your working group during the past three weeks.

The Agency has reviewed USIS programs in Indonesia and considered what further actions might be useful. The following actions are contemplated if the local environment permits: 1. Civic Action: Under the Country Team, advise and counsel appropriate elements of the Indonesian Armed Forces on public relations/psychological programs the latter should undertake. Principal aim would be to enhance the public image of the armed forces as civic action innovators. USIS informational output (magazines, motion pictures, photo exhibits, etc.) would help tell the story, of course.

2. Youth: Increase, across the board, USIS activities focussed toward the young men and women of Indonesia. At least one American USIS officer will devote full time to this pursuit; but all officers will be involved to varying degrees.

3. Americana: Earnest, persistent efforts will be made to establish “chairs” in American studies at the larger universities of Indonesia. Paul Neilson2 already has enlisted the support of Indonesian Ambassador Zain toward this end. The Ambassador also has pledged to support efforts to get additional books on American political thought, economic system, etc., into Indonesia, especially into the hands of students. In both efforts (more books, establish “chairs” of American studies), private foundations are to be encouraged to assist.

4. USIS Branches: Open additional outlets for USIS, especially in outlying regions. These probably will be no more than “reading rooms” at the outset.

5. Travel: Keep as many USIS Americans “on the road” regularly or as circumstances and difficult transportation methods will permit. The aim is to develop the widest personal contact with military commanders, territorial and regional officers, teachers and youth groups.

USIS Indonesia and IAF Washington should support the following actions by other U.S. government agencies:

1. Establish a Peace Corps unit in Indonesia, particularly stressing the teaching of English.

2. Support the Department of State’s projected expansion of the educational exchange program, with special attention to youth, sports and labor.

3. Support the Embassy’s proposal to use PL-480 and IMG-generated rupiahs to establish a National Science Academy and a National Sports Academy.

Caution: The time is propitious for a new and better relationship with Indonesia, but many problems remain. First and foremost, Sukarno’s “cult of personality” will continue to be the dominating factor in U.S.-Indonesian relations. Second, the alarming economic deterioration will be the principal factor affecting Indonesian actions for a long time to come. Third, any actions the U.S. undertakes in furtherance of better relations with Indonesia must be pegged to a real understanding of and a demonstrated respect for Indonesia’s neutral stance. Fourth, “patient persistence” should be the key attitude of all Americans involved, on the scene and here in Washington; we should refrain from glamorous, immediate-impact actions. Fifth, the communist bloc “ain’t going to take this lying down” and we should be prepared for a long, intense struggle.

E.R. Murrow

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/9–1462. Secret.

1 Document 287.

2 Counselor and Public Affairs Officer at the Embassy in Djakarta.

290. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 290. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, September 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

Aid to Indonesia

I have gone over rather carefully the “Plan of Action for Indonesia” dated September 15, 1962 (as revised).1 I still have the doubts which I expressed to you after a cursory reading of the Plan. I think generally that it tends to get us too deeply involved in the very large and complex problems of Indonesian balance of payments and internal inflation.

I think it would be quite dangerous for us at this early stage to start planning for long-range Indonesian recovery and development. The Plan gives some indication of the enormity of the problem, pointing out that Indonesia’s 1963 balance of payments deficit will total $295 million of which more than half ($170 million) represents repayment of outstanding foreign debts which are largely Soviet. I think it would take something of a political revolution to get a meaningful program through Congress if our object is to tackle their balance of payments problem. Not only are the amounts involved staggering, but the political repercussions of even indirectly paying off debt incurred for military equipment in the Soviet Union would be deafening.

Even leaving aside problems of size and domestic politics, I seriously question whether Indonesia presently has the kind of Government with whom we could fruitfully cooperate in achieving fiscal stability and economic reform. My impression from the cables is that attempts by us to cajole and induce the Indonesian Government to follow classic policies towards monetary reform would not only be met with resistance, but also with suspicion. To the extent we became identified with some of the unpopular reforms such as those suggested in the last paragraph of page 5 of the Plan, we could become most unpopular. I am not at all sure either that we can successfully hide behind the skirts of the IMF, since at some stage or other we would be called upon to associate ourselves with any IMF plan and, as the memorandum recommends, assist in financing it.

The “immediate program” set forth in the Plan is, I think, worth the doing. We certainly should be eager to offer whatever emergency food relief and spare part assistance that seems justified. The same holds true for civic action, Peace Corps, and paramilitary assistance. Perhaps as we learn more about their physical needs as distinguished from their fiscal and monetary problems, we will be able to recommend other programs and possibly projects which could be useful. But I do not think we ought to encourage the Indonesians to think that we can bail them out of their international payments problems or their budgetary difficulties until we are convinced that they have the insight and the guts to carry out needed reforms on their own.

MVF

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.5-MSP/9–2462. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Ambassador Jones, who was in Washington for consultations, saw the memorandum. A note at the end by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs Avery F. Peterson reads: “In short, for reasons you know of, Mike comes down for emergency support only at this stage. AVP”

1 A draft of the enclosure to Document 291.

291. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President Kennedy 291. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to President KennedySource

Washington, October 10, 1962.

SUBJECT

Plan of Action for Indonesia

Pursuant to National Security Action Memorandum 179 of August 16, 1962, the Department of State coordinated the efforts of the agencies having a special interest in the programs for Indonesia and now submits a Plan of Action for Indonesia. This report and the appended background statement are concurred in by recipients of NSAM No. 179.

It is proposed that many of the most significant programs be considered on a contingent basis. Although the West Irian settlement may mark a turning point in U.S.-Indonesian relations, positions have not yet been taken by the Government of Indonesia on crucial issues which will determine the effectiveness of outside aid, such as economic stabilization, military demobilization, and Indonesian leaders’ attitude toward Western economic influence.

It would be a mistake to press the Indonesians too hard on these crucial issues as they are likely to misinterpret our interest as a form of interference. They must show an awareness of their economic needs and express a desire to receive Free World assistance. Only they can take the initiative in dealing with the problems of inflation, inadequate foreign exchange and shortages of food and critical materials. Until they take effective measures in their own behalf, Free World assistance of major proportions would be wasted. Our assistance should be related to their actions. If and when Indonesians do demonstrate an awareness of needs and a desire for support, there should be a generous response not only by the United States but cooperatively by other interested nations of the Free World. U.S. actions other than in the initial phase should be in, response to varying degrees of Indonesian initiative.

In the meantime, there are several things that can be done: First, substantial augmentations should be made to the existing PL 480 program to provide food and fiber to Indonesia, some $60–70 million of which are needed immediately.

Second, existing U.S. programs, including technical assistance of some $17 ‘million and a relatively modest military assistance program, should be adapted to the new situation in Indonesia, examples being increased emphasis on civic action and improved internal security.

Third, action should be taken to implement the Peace Corps program now in an advanced stage of planning.

Fourth, upon request and subject to adequate control, assistance up to $15-$20 million should be extended, prior to basic reforms, to supply urgently-needed spare parts and raw materials, thus to prevent further slackening of industrial production.

Fifth, Indonesia should be persuaded to adopt an IMF-approved stabilization program. In this there needs to be balance to see that the necessarily harsh and negative stabilization measures are combined with a positive developmental approach.

Sixth, other Free World nations should be persuaded to join in a major stabilization and development program after Indonesia has fulfilled the necessary conditions. The United States will attempt to create a multilateral effort, from the outset, in any stabilization program.

Seventh, Free World creditors should be persuaded to relieve Indonesia’s onerous debt burden which accounts for over half of the estimated balance of payments deficits in 1962 and 1963.

And finally, as a politically essential concomitant to anything beyond the emergency assistance described in the first through fourth paragraphs above, Indonesia should be persuaded to obtain relief in debt payments to the Soviet Bloc which represent about 40% of the debt servicing requirements.

On the first three action steps, the United States can and should continue the initiative. Indonesia clearly needs the food and fiber, our assistance in the extensive demobilization program represents a political and economic opportunity of the first order of importance, and initiation of a Peace Corps program will have an immediate impact.

The crucial step for both Indonesian interests and our own objectives is the stabilization program. Early and well-supported stabilization measures are the only means by which Indonesian economic recovery can get significantly underway, and stabilization activities will probably have to continue for a protracted period before an adequate base is established for planned development. Prospects of satisfactory Indonesian initiative and performance are highly uncertain and the next several months will require a careful blending of direct U.S. diplomatic moves and active pursuit of cooperative actions by other Free World countries and institutions such as the IMF if the forces in Indonesia capable of mobilizing and administering this effort are to have an opportunity to undertake this task.

Initial moves are underway.1 And as the Indonesian situation comes into focus, further measures and changes in this program will be proposed.

NSAM No. 179 requested suggestions in several fields, including diplomatic initiatives. Other than the effort to induce a conviction on the part of President Sukarno of his responsibilities and opportunities in the economic field and the approach to Development Assistance Committee countries and Australia (reinforced by recent talks which the Secretary and Governor Harriman had with Foreign Minister Subandrio), this memorandum does not deal in depth with the wide range of diplomatic openings which may be available. The Department of State and other agencies are, however, continuing to review what further measures might be useful in improving U.S.-Indonesian relations. A report will be made on these measures to the extent they seem feasible and desirable.

George W. Ball

Enclosure2

Washington, October 2, 1962.

MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT

Background to Plan of Action for Indonesia

REFERENCE

NSAM No. 179 of August 16, 1962

I. Problem

The West Irian settlement may present a major opportunity both to increase U.S. influence and to assist Indonesia to meet a heavy drain on its financial and managerial resources. The dimensions of the opening which may be available to the Free World are, however, still unknown and there are obstacles and uncertainties confronting U.S. action programs other than in the emergency phase:

(1) There are differences of view about the seriousness of the current economic situation. The Indonesians appear to regard the situation as less serious than does the United States. The Indonesian economy has inherent resiliency

(2) The Indonesians have not yet requested major Free World assistance.

(3) Unless the Indonesians make basic managerial, fiscal and foreign exchange reforms, large-scale external assistance would have no lasting effect.

Therefore, the action recommendations in V below fall into these three categories: (1) programs that can be implemented immediately, notwithstanding the above factors; (2) contingency plans for possible future actions, subject to specific conditions being met; and (3) long-term development.

II. Background

A. Economic—Indonesia is faced with a severe inflation and adverse balance of payments. An increasingly unfavorable trade balance has resulted from a decline in earnings from rubber and petroleum. Foreign exchange reserves have fallen to the working balances of the commercial banks (estimated as $80 million). The government has drastically restricted imports, resulting in substantial cutbacks in production because of shortages or maldistribution of imported raw materials and spare parts. Industry is operating at only 30–40 per cent of capacity. Urban food supplies are inadequate.

Inflation has been severe. The money supply doubled in the year ending July 1962, largely because of a government deficit nearly as large as revenues. The Djakarta consumer price index rose by 67% during the last half of 1961, and another 85% in the first five months of 1962, although recently it has held fairly steady.

The payments problem is aggravated by the heavy foreign debt burden. Foreign debt (excluding short-term supplier credits) amounts to over $1 billion, largely to the Soviet Union, the Netherlands, and the United States. The current annual debt servicing requirement is estimated to cause more than half of the estimated 1962 and 1963 balance of payments deficits. Before additional assistance is given, every effort should be made to relieve the debt burden by refunding and moratoria on repayments, at least for military goods, both by Free World and the Soviet Bloc.

Unless Indonesia deals effectively with its own economic problems, Free World assistance will be of little value. Though not specific as to dimensions or time-phasing, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff report in July proposed that the Indonesian Government raise prices of state-produced goods and services, stabilize money supply, simplify the exchange system, devalue the rupiah, increase taxes, cut government expenditures, reduce smuggling, and centralize the control of foreign exchange. These elements seem essential to stabilization but need follow-through in a recovery and development program designed to restore existing productive capacity and create infrastructure required for further economic development.

B. Soviet Bloc Economic Penetration—The Bloc has given more aid to Indonesia than to any other non-Communist country, approximately $1 billion military and $650 million economic credits. By attempting to tie up future Indonesian exports through trade agreements and acceptance of economic and military credits, the Bloc is seeking to shift the Indonesian trade pattern from the West to the Bloc. If adequate assistance is not available from the Free World, Indonesia will be forced to lean more heavily on the Bloc.

C. Domestic Political Pressures—General Nasution, keenly aware that the army is a drain on the overburdened economy, desires an orderly demobilization. Against the army stands the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI)—the largest Communist party outside of the Bloc. Between these forces is Sukarno. Unless he exercises positive economic leadership or delegates power on economic matters to competent ministers, the Bloc may eventually gain control of Indonesia’s resources and the PKI may seize power.

III. U.S. Objectives in Indonesia

Indonesia’s geo-political position and magnitudes make it important to the United States. Our commitments on the Indo-China peninsula could be lost if the bottom of Southeast Asia fell out to Communism. It therefore remains our objective (1) to keep Indonesia independent and out of the Sino-Soviet camp, (2) to help Indonesia become a politically and economically viable nation, and (3) to help solve Indonesia’s stabilization and recovery problems and eventually launch a national development plan. The last was implicit when President Kennedy in 1961 sent a group to examine Indonesia’s economic plan, thus to determine sectors in which we could help.

The United States cannot obtain these objectives alone. It will be necessary to get the assistance of other Free World countries through the Development Assistance Committee (DAC), the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank.

IV. Political Strategy of Indonesia

The reason for a vigorous U.S. effort to achieve settlement of the West Irian issue was that it would have an impact on the internal balance of political power. Settlement would serve our interests because it would strengthen two groups in Indonesia, namely the army and a small but important group of non-leftist officials seriously interested in economic development.

The West Irian issue had dominated Indonesian politics, kept the army preoccupied with military preparations and dependent on the Communist Bloc for support. Large military expenditures and exclusive political concentration on West Irian also ruled out a serious development effort. Meanwhile, Communists exploited the West Irian issue and Soviet support to strengthen their political position. A military attack would have accentuated all of these trends and seriously endangered the position of those who want to cooperate with us.

Now that a settlement has been achieved, it should be put to constructive use (1) by turning the attention of Indonesians away from militant nationalism and toward development and (2) by strengthening the army in the countryside. These are the two major elements of a longrun strategy to keep Indonesia non-Communist and to begin to give that country some forward momentum. More specifically:

a. We should seek to convince Sukarno that (1) his position in Indonesian history as a revolutionary leader can best be reinforced through actions which will further economic development, (2) he should delegate major authority in economic matters to competent subordinates, and (3) he should add to the government individuals with knowledge and ability needed to formulate and administer development programs.

b. We should collaborate with those civilian Indonesian leaders who are interested in the modernization and development of Indonesia.

c. We should strengthen the army’s role in economic and social development activities.

V. Action Recommendations

A. Subject to Immediate Implementation3

(1) PL480—$32 million of rice, $3.7 million of wheat flour and $23.1 million of cotton have already been approved under an existing agreement and will be shipped promptly. The rice supply is four times larger than our annual commitment. $13 million of vegetable oil is under consideration.

(2) Civic Action—Following the return of a Civic Action Survey Team now in Indonesia, the United States will be prepared to launch a civic action program aimed at (a) vocational training and (b) rural reconstruction and development. These programs reflect General Nasution’s desire that demobilization of older members of the forces proceed as rapidly as possible under the conditions that dischargees have civilian jobs waiting for them, and that while still in uniform, army personnel will be utilized effectively in rural development.

(3) Military and Police Assistance—The Army will receive the bulk of the present Military Assistance Program (MAP) which will stress civic action, communications, arms standardization, and equipment for construction and work battalions. It will be necessary to retain in the MAP for the other armed services some carefully screened status items desired by the Indonesians (such as a new patrol gunboat for the Navy and T-37 jet trainers for the Air Force).

Assistance to the Indonesian police will be concentrated upon the 23,000 man Mobile Brigade. Nasution has previously requested an estimated additional $11.5 million for the internal security functions of the Mobile Brigade. These requirements are being updated.

(4) Peace Corps—President Sukarno and the Peace Corps Director met in September to discuss a Peace Corps program for Indonesia. A tentative plan for immediate implementation is being drawn up.

(5) A.I.D.—The Development Grant program will be continued at about $17 million. Emphasis will be placed on public administration and technical education in an attempt to alleviate some of the critical managerial weaknesses. Loan applications will also be considered; however, until stabilization measures are taken (see contingency planning below), development loans should be extended only on a selective basis.

(6) EX-IM Bank—Export-Import Bank expects to make loans in FY 1963 of $3.95 million for a cement kiln and $17.6 million for a thermal power plant. The Bank will also extend usual U.S. supplier credits.

(7) Emergency Assistance for Industry—To forestall further slowdown of production activities, the United States, upon request, should consider a loan or grant of $15-$20 million for urgently needed spare parts and raw materials. There are indications that the Indonesians are beginning to recognize the importance of such imports and desire outside assistance in making a preliminary survey of requirements and planning the proper administration and distribution of spares and industrial commodities. Such assistance could be given prior to adoption of a comprehensive stabilization program, provided there were adequate control of the funds.

A. [B] Contingency Planning

(1) Stabilization—The United States should itself do nothing further until the first step in a program of stabilization is taken by the Indonesians, e.g., to develop and agree to give effect to a far-reaching program of stabilization along the lines of the IMF Staff Report. This would qualify Indonesia to draw as much as an additional $82.5 million from the IMF. The likelihood that Indonesia will be willing to undertake a stabilization program will be greatly increased if the United States and other Free World countries are prepared conditionally to offer substantial financial assistance. Furthermore, since Indonesia’s maximum borrowing potential from the IMF is far short of its prospective needs, concurrent offers of aid from other sources may be necessary in order to obtain IMF assistance.

The balance of payments deficit for FY 1963 is estimated at $200-$300 million, including $170 million debt servicing. This estimate assumes Indonesian acceptance of an IMF-approved stabilization program; an austere import level; and recovery of export earnings. Conjecture regarding methods of meeting the gap includes refunding or moratorium on $60 million military debt repayment to the Bloc, $20 million reparations from Japan, $35 million in credits or refunding by other Free World nations and—from the United States—deliveries of some $40-$60 million in food and fiber, $15 million refunding and $15 million for emergency imports. This would project a need for new loans in the range of $15 to $115 million with the United States as a major source, the amount depending on whether the payments deficit is $200 or $300 million. The controlling principle in any stabilization program will be an attempt to involve as many nations as possible from the beginning of such assistance.

While the Indonesians are negotiating with the IMF, and as the magnitude of requirements comes into focus, the United States should: (a) request Indonesia to obtain a moratorium on repayment of Soviet credits; (b) continue diplomatic efforts to convince Free World creditors to refund outstanding debts or to extend additional aid; (c) seek to induce the EX-IM Bank to make refunding concessions; (d) seek resolution of the long-standing debt question between the Dutch and Indonesian Government (at present the World Bank will not participate in Indonesia because of the issue); and (e) be prepared to contribute to the remaining deficit on request.

(2) Long-term Development Assistance—The deflationary stabilization measures recommended by the IMF must be accompanied by simultaneous positive action to correct the structural defects which inhibit recovery of productive capacity.

The direction of this effort can be gained from the report of the U.S. Economic Survey Team which visited Indonesia in August 1961. This set forth a program of recovery and development which laid special emphasis upon strengthening the nation’s infrastructure and making full utilization of existing industrial capacity. The Team recommended that much of the existing U.S. aid program be kept intact and made the following additional aid recommendations to be given effect mainly over a 3–5 year period: Proposed Program Grants $ million Loans $ million

Education 30–40 40

Transportation 7

Resource Survevs 2–3

Food Distribution 3

Spare Parts and Maintenance 25–30

Inventory Replenishment 20

Tin Rehabilitation 12

Electric Power and Coal 18

Regional Research Center 10

Total l52–62 105-110

In addition, the Team proposed that other free nations and international organizations provide loans amounting to $165 million for the rehabilitation of the rubber industry and for spare parts and inventory replenishment.

The Team recommended that major expansion of productive facilities be considered only after the Indonesian Government had demonstrated its ability to improve the country’s infrastructure, to utilize existing industrial capacity and to finance new light industry.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC, NSAM 195. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Peterson, cleared by Frank K. Sloan for DOD, Janow for AID, FitzGerald for CIA, Dan Moore for USIA, Kenneth R. Hansen and Robert Amory for BOB, and Dillon and W.W. Diehl for Treasury. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.98/10–1062)

1 Harriman and Jones met with Subandrio at the United Nations to discuss prospective U.S. assistance to Indonesia. The report of their discussion is in Secto 2 from USUN, September 24. (Ibid., 798.56/9–2462) In addition, General Maxwell Taylor, designated to be Chairman of the JCS, was in Indonesia on September 19. He held talks with Indonesian defense and military leaders about U.S. military assistance. Reports are in telegrams 547 from Djakarta and 418 from Manila, both September 19. (Ibid., 798.00/9–1962 and 798.5/9–1962)

2 Secret: There were 18 attachments to this memorandum, which were apparently not submitted to the President. They were: 1) Economic Background, 2) Balance of Payments Analysis and Stabilization Requirements, 3) Outstanding External Debt and Estimated Schedule of Repayments, 4) Summary of Indonesia’s Debt to Holland, 5) Sino-Soviet Bloc Aid to Indonesia, 6) Political Assessment, 7) The Potential for Insurgency in Indonesia, 8) Summary of IMF Staff Report on Indonesia Consultation, 9) PL 480 Program, 10) Civic Action Program, 11) U.S. Military Assistance Program, 12) Peace Corps, 13) Summary of Foreign Aid Obligations to Indonesia, 14) Non-U.S. Free World Aid, 15) Aid Program—Indonesia, 16) Summary of Export-Import Loans to Indonesia, 17) Summary of Free World Governments’ Responses to U.S. Inquiry regarding Aid to Indonesia, and 18) U.S. Economic Survey Team Report (summary). (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC, NSAM 195)

3 Next to Actions A, 1–4 is a handwritten “O.K.”

292. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 292. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Plan of Action for Indonesia

Attached is the State Department’s Plan of Action for Indonesia prepared in answer to your request of August 16, 1962.1

Basically the proposals contained in the paper fall into two categories: emergency economic assistance which we would undertake right away if you approve; and longer range goals for the future.

The emergency economic measures include $60-$70 million of PL 480 food and fibers; $17 million of technical assistance, plus a “modest” MAP program concentrating on civil action and internal security; Peace Corps; and $15 to $20 million grant for spare parts and raw materials to start basic industries going again.

The necessity for these emergency steps has been fairly well established, and I think you should approve them, perhaps indicating that they should be taken as quickly as possible in order to get maximum political advantage.

The longer range program is, I think, still very fuzzy. The Plan suggests that we push Indonesia into an IMF stabilization program, persuade other countries to join us in financing it, and persuade Free World creditors to postpone Indonesia’s debt. This may lead, it seems to me, into a far more massive effort than we either can or should undertake. While you may want to encourage Indonesia to seek fiscal advice from Western sources such as the IMF, I doubt that you would want to indicate at this stage even by implication that we stand ready to finance stabilization. If this is your reaction, it should be transmitted to the Department.

Mike

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 195. Secret

1 Enclosure to Document 291.

293. Memorandum of Conversation 293. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 11, 1962, 9:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Conversation of the President with Howard P. Jones, United States Ambassador to Indonesia

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Howard P. Jones, United States Ambassador to Indonesia

Michael V. Forrestal, Senior Staff Member of the National Security Council

President Kennedy received Ambassador Howard P. Jones for forty-five minutes today to discuss the Indonesian situation and initiatives which might be productive following on the heels of the peaceful settlement of the West Irian dispute.

A summary of the conversation follows: 1. President Sukarno’s invitation to President Kennedy to visit Indonesia. Ambassador Jones extended to President Kennedy the urgent renewal by President Sukarno of his earlier invitation for the American President to visit Indonesia. Recognizing the many demands upon President Kennedy, the Ambassador, nevertheless, strongly urged that the President endeavor to find time for a trip to the Far East which would include a visit to Indonesia. The Ambassador emphasized that no American president had ever visited this fifth largest country in the world and that the Indonesians, emotional and sentimental as they were, would be more moved by such a gesture than any amount of financial assistance. The President, pointing out that he would have to visit other countries if he made a trip to Indonesia, nevertheless, promised to give the matter earnest consideration.

2. The relationship between President Kennedy and President Sukarno. The Ambassador emphasized that Sukarno placed a high value on what he considered to be a rapport between himself and President Kennedy, that Sukarno felt they talked the same language, and that Sukarno, who personalized everything, regarded international relations in the light of personal relations. This was an important relationship to preserve. The Ambassador expressed his appreciation for the help he had had from President Kennedy in this respect in the past, stressed that this was another cogent reason for a personal visit and urged that every effort be made to continue this relationship on the same cordial basis. President Kennedy suggested that the Ambassador carry back a personal letter to Sukarno and asked the Ambassador to prepare a draft for consideration.

3. Djakarta By-Pass. The President inquired whether this project was really worthwhile from the standpoint of United States objectives. Ambassador Jones replied emphatically, “Yes; indeed, in the political climate there obtaining, it was necessary” It was America’s rather dramatic contribution to the Asian Games on which all Indonesian attention was focused, but it was in any event a much needed improvement.

4. Asian Games. The President inquired whether the Asian Games weren’t something of a mess. The Ambassador agreed, observing that Sukarno’s refusal to admit the GRC and Israel was a stupid blunder, resulting in considerable loss of prestige to Indonesia.

5. West Irian. Ambassador Jones expressed his appreciation for the President’s leadership and active initiatives in the West Irian issue, commenting that a peaceful settlement would never have been reached without this. The Ambassador urged that the political advantage thus obtained be followed up immediately before time had eroded our advantage.

6. Plan of Action for Indonesia. Ambassador Jones referred to the plan of action for Indonesia which had been prepared at the President’s request covering economic, military and other initiatives which the United States might take to exploit our improved political position in Indonesia. The Ambassador said that he agreed entirely with its recommendations and urged that time was of the essence in implementing these recommendations if we were to effectively exploit the present favorable position we had in Indonesia. Ambassador Jones said we had an opportunity today we had not had since 1950 to cement relations between the United States and Indonesia. He particularly urged that the recommendations for emergency assistance in the Plan of Action be implemented on an urgent basis. Immediate help to enable the country to import badly needed raw materials and spare parts was especially important. The President inquired of Mr. Forrestal whether we had the money to do what was suggested. Mr. Forrestal replied it would be a close thing, but could be done.

A discussion then took place on various aspects of the Action Plan.

7. The Peace Corps. Ambassador Jones reported on the status of the Peace Corps in Indonesia and expressed his gratification that Sukarno had at last concurred in the establishment of a Peace Corps program in his country. Sargent Shriver’s visit to Djakarta had been outstandingly successful and we should shortly have a program underway.

8. Civic Action and Military Aid. The President referred to General Maxwell Taylor’s recommendation that we do everything possible to develop closer relations with the Indonesian military and wondered what Ambassador Jones thought about this. The Ambassador replied that he considered this of vital importance, that we are pinning our hopes on the Army in our efforts to curb the power and influence of the communists in Indonesia. The Army, most of whose officers were U.S.-trained, was basically anti-communist and we should do our utmost to keep the United States and Indonesian military together. We had a small military aid program in Indonesia. This should be continued and expanded as appropriate. The next important initiative in keeping close to the Indonesian Army was in the field of civic action. The Indonesian Army recognized it had a political role to play and that assistance in rural reconstruction and development was one way to endear itself to the people. We ought to do all possible to assist the Army in this task. The President concurred.

9. Long Range Economic Stabilization Program. Regarding this phase of assistance to Indonesia, the Ambassador suggested the desirability of the IMF taking the initiative in this sensitive area to avoid the unfavorable reaction accompanying any feeling on the Indonesians’ part that the United States was interfering in what they regarded as their internal affairs. A financial and economic stabilization program would necessarily involve some hard decisions and the IMF seemed the appropriate agency to discuss this problem with the Indonesians.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.11-KE/10–1162. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The time of the meeting, which lasted until 10:10 a.m., is taken from Kennedy’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

294. National Security Action Memorandum No. 195 294. National Security Action Memorandum No. 195Source

Washington, October 22, 1962.

MEMORANDUM FOR

THE SECRETARY OF STATE

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

THE ADMINISTRATOR, AID

THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

THE DIRECTOR, USIA

SUBJECT

U.S. Policy Toward Indonesia

The President has considered the Plan of Action for Indonesia contained in the memorandum from the Department of State dated October 10, 19621 in response to NSAM 179 of August 18, 1962.2 The President has approved those action recommendations for emergency assistance proposed in the Plan of Action and the background memorandum attached thereto with the exception, however, of the recommendation that the United States supply $15 to $20 million of spare parts and raw materials.

The President wishes to be informed of the extent to which procurement of spare parts and raw materials is proposed to take place outside the United States.

The President has not approved the measures proposed beyond the emergency assistance referred to above. He will, however, consider these and other specific proposals for additional steps which the U.S. might take both in the economic and diplomatic fields when they are presented.

McGeorge Bundy3

* Source: Department of State, NSAM Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 195. Secret.

1 Document 291.

2 Document 287.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Bundy signed the original.

295. Letter From President Kennedy to President Sukarno 295. Letter From President Kennedy to President SukarnoSource

Washington, November 2, 1962.

Dear Mr. President: I have recently had a long talk with Ambassador Jones, in the course of which he told me of your invitation for me to visit Indonesia. Having heard so much of your country from my brother, Bobby, and from many others who have visited or lived there, I want very much to visit Indonesia.

Although I cannot accept your kind invitation at this time, I have not given up hope of eventually visiting your country when my duties permit. In the meantime, you have my warmest thanks for your invitation.

I am encouraged by the course of developments in Cuba since my letter to you on October 22,1 although, of course, much still remains to be done before we can consider the episode closed. In this connection, I am aware of the restraint exercised by your government throughout the Cuban crisis. It unquestionably contributed to the atmosphere which made a peaceful settlement attainable. Let us hope that we can now turn the perilous events of the past weeks into a real advance toward the free and peaceful society for which we both strive.

From all reports, the transfer of administration in West Irian is proceeding smoothly within the terms of the August 15 agreement. It took mature and imaginative statesmanship both on the part of your Government and that of the Netherlands in reaching agreement for the peaceful settlement of this longstanding dispute, and I am glad to see a conciliatory atmosphere at the start of its implementation. As you know, I have instructed United States authorities to cooperate closely with the United Nations in providing logistic support for the United Nations Temporary Executive Authority in West Irian.

As you know, Secretary Rusk and Assistant Secretary Harriman discussed economic problems briefly with Foreign Minister Subandrio in New York in September,2 and conversations between other Indonesian and American officials are continuing. I am sure that from these and other contacts an effective program will emerge.

You certainly face a challenging and exciting task in this great endeavor. There was a time, of course, when economic matters appeared less dramatic to many than political affairs, but this is certainly not true today. I can think of few better measures of the greatness of a nation and its leaders than their success in developing its resources for the benefit of all its citizens. I know that Indonesia, under your leadership, is well embarked on this adventure.

I was delighted to hear from Sargent Shriver of your long talk with him last month and the enthusiastic reception you gave him.3 I understand that preparations for establishment of a Peace Corps program are well under way. I am convinced both that the Peace Corps can make a real contribution to the continued development of Indonesia and that my country, in turn, will be much the richer from the knowledge of Indonesian life and culture which returning Peace Corps volunteers will bring. They will also be able to learn much in the way of new, practical techniques from your people.

Aside from the matter of economic development, there are a number of other major issues in which our two countries share a deep interest. The various forces shaping events in Southeast Asia, for example, have long been a source of considerable preoccupation to both of us. In this particular field, it seems to me that it would be most useful if those officials of our two countries who are most directly concerned with Southeast Asia could periodically exchange views on the general problems of the region and our mutual interests there. If this idea appeals to you, you might wish to discuss it with Ambassador Jones.

I am asking Ambassador Jones to carry this letter to you on his return to Djakarta,4 and to give you the warm personal regards of myself and my family.

Sincerely,5

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11 /62–12/62. No classification marking. Drafted by Forrestal and Bell at the instruction of the President after his meeting with Jones; see Document 293. Komer had hoped that President Kennedy would decide that the salutation to this letter should be “Dear Bung Karno,” the familiar term used by Sukarno’s friends and associates in Indonesia, but the decision was left to the President. (Memorandum from Forrestal to Kaysen, October 22; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62)

1 Not printed. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence, Lot 66 D 204)

2 See footnote 1, Document 291.

3 A memorandum of the Shriver—Sukarno discussion has not been found.

4 The letter was sent to the Department of State for telegraphic transmission to Djakarta.

5 Printed from an unsigned copy.

296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 296. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, November 23, 1962.

Indonesia

During the past ten days, the Department of State and AID have been developing a series of steps for dealing with the Indonesian problem about which you should be informed.1 As these steps are taken the U.S. will obviously find itself more and more drawn into the stabilization and development of the Indonesian economy, and you may wish to lay down some guiding principles before things get too far along.

1. Under the authority you have already given, we are in the process of providing Indonesia with 150,000 tons of rice for delivery to Indonesia by late February or early March of 1963.

2. We have asked the Indonesians to prepare a list of emergency spare parts and raw materials needed to get some of their basic industry back into operation at full capacity. It is now working at about 50% capacity and the two rubber plants in the country will soon close down completely for want of carbon black. The Indonesians are preparing such a list, and once we have gotten it and assured ourselves that the spare parts and commodities will in fact reach the industries, AID will ask you for authority to make a loan to finance at least the American component, and perhaps a small portion of the foreign component.

3. The Ex-Im Bank has two outstanding loan applications from Indonesia; one for $4 million for an addition to a cement plant, and one for $17 million for a thermal power plant. State plans to ask the Ex-Im Bank to go ahead with the $4 million loan and defer the $17 million loan until we can assess the results of Indonesia’s stabilization and development efforts referred to below.

The above steps are being taken as quickly as possible and are intended to demonstrate to the Indonesians that we can respond quickly in an emergency, but cannot consider any assistance of a large or longterm nature until they have undertaken basic reforms on their own. The following longer range actions are getting under way.

4. An informal advisory group is being set up here, made up of people from Walt Rostow’s office, Budget, AID, and one or possibly two outside economists. This group will supervise and review the preparation of a U.S. policy toward Indonesian stabilization and development.

5. An IMF team is already on its way to Djakarta, and we are sending an AID man over with them in an effort to exercise some influence on the IMF stabilization program. We are trying to avoid what Rostow describes as the typical “one shot” IMF stabilization program which tends to ignore development and is quickly abandoned as soon as the going gets rough. The philosophy is to develop a program which provides stabilization in a series of steps and a concurrent program of development of those industries which would accelerate further development and produce, or conserve, foreign exchange.

6. There is a Development Assistance Committee (DAC) meeting in Paris on December 11th at which the U.S. will stimulate discussion of Indonesian stabilization and development problems and the possibility of rescheduling debt from participating countries. We will also discuss with the DAC countries the possibility of their providing a portion of the spare parts and raw materials referred to in paragraph 2.

7. We will urge the Indonesians to send their people out to visit DAC countries to try to get foreign assistance for their development projects and support for their stabilization program, and also to drum up business interest in the production-sharing schemes which have already been developed by the Indonesians.

8. When an acceptable IMF stabilization agreement has been concluded (possibly next spring), and when the Indonesians have convinced us by their performance during the related negotiations that they are willing and able to implement a stabilization program and a development plan, we would present them with the U.S. proposal for economic assistance which will by then have been developed here in Washington. A part of that program would include the $17 million Ex-Im Bank loan for the power project. The U.S. program would not attempt to finance all external resources needed for Indonesian stabilization and development. We would assume that other countries would participate and we would only support development efforts in those areas where we were convinced that the Indonesians had adequate managerial skills.

9. Finally, we will consider whether we can influence the Dutch to get together with the Indonesians to settle their differences. Some compromise of Dutch debt is necessary in order to get World Bank loans for Indonesia.

These steps will, if the Indonesians perform, place us in the position of having eventually to consider an aid program for Indonesia. At the moment it is impossible to guess what the size of such a program might be; but it is clear that it will be sufficiently large to require a strong political and economic justification before Congress.

I should imagine that there are at least three major principles which we should keep firmly before the Indonesians as they walk through the steps outlined above. The first is that it will be essential for them to maintain a careful, friendly neutrality on international issues. The second is that they demonstrate that they have the will and the political ability to put their economic house in order before we can approach Congress with a request for significant aid. Third, we must satisfy ourselves that the stabilization program is rationally and practically conceived so that we do not repeat the unfortunate experience of Argentina.

So far the Indonesians have performed very well on the first of these criteria. Their behavior during the Cuban crisis was unusually restrained. It remains to be seen whether this behavior continues and whether they are willing to undertake the political burden of stabilization and development.

MVForrestal2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret.

1 A paper entitled “Indonesian Stabilization and Development, an Outline of Major Topics,” November 11, was submitted by Forrestal to Kaysen on November 16, as a possible outline for an interagency group from the Department of State, AID, and the White House. On November 16, Janow suggested to Harriman a step-by-step plan that he outlined in a November 16 paper. (Both ibid.)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

297. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 297. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, December 17, 1962.

Emergency Assistance to Indonesia

You will recall that a program of emergency assistance to Indonesia was discussed with you in October.1 You approved the program as recommended by State except for that part of it which provided for between $15 and $20 million of raw materials and spare parts for Indonesian industry, which is apparently operating at only 50 percent capacity for lack of these commodities. At that time you wanted to know whether these commodities would be procured in the United States or elsewhere before approving this part of the program.

The Indonesians have now furnished us with a list of raw materials and spare parts, approximately $17 million of which would come from the U.S. and $18 million from other sources. State and AID propose to offer the Indonesians a $17-million loan for raw materials and spare parts, to be procured in the United States repayable in U.S. dollars at 3 percent with a maturity of 10 years and a 2-year grace period.

The terms of the loan are thought by AID to be fairly “hard” under the circumstances and not entirely realistic. It is proposed, however, that the loan will contain a clause for renegotiation after a stabilization and development program has been accepted by Indonesia and in the light of any debt rescheduling which may be part of such a program. This is intended to be an additional incentive on the Indonesians to adopt the required measures.

AID’s position is that such a loan at this time is not justifiable on strict economic grounds since, in the absence of stabilization measures, it simply would release an equivalent amount of Indonesian foreign exchange for uneconomic purposes. The justification for this loan is political. Governor Harriman feels strongly that the loan is essential as an indication of our willingness to consider economic assistance to Indonesia once they have put their house in order. An IMF team is presently in Indonesia working on a stabilization and development program. Governor Harriman believes that Indonesian willingness to accept the political burdens of such a belt-tightening program will be substantially affected by a demonstration at this time that the United States was serious when it told Indonesia that it was prepared to give favorable consideration to economic assistance after the settlement of the West New Guinea dispute.

It must also be borne in mind that Governor Harriman told Foreign Minister Subandrio in New York last September that we would provide emergency assistance for spare parts and raw materials.2

The alternative to approving this loan at this time would be to postpone it until we have more evidence that the Indonesians are able and willing to put their affairs in order. The Bureau of the Budget points out that so far the evidence is sadly lacking that this is the case. BoB suggests that we defer any assistance until we are satisfied that it will be properly used. To do otherwise, they suggest, is to start down the same path of balance of payments financing which has proved so ineffective in other countries.

My own recommendation is that you approve the loan as proposed with an injunction against any further commitment until a satisfactory stabilization and development program is accepted by the Indonesians.

MVForrestal3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret.

1 See Document 294.

2 See footnote 1, Document 291.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

298. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State Rusk 298. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, December 18, 1962.

SUBJECT

Emergency Assistance to Indonesia

On December 17, 1962 the President approved the proposal of the Department of State and the Agency for International Development for a $17-million loan to the Republic of Indonesia to finance the emergency importation of certain raw materials and spare parts for Indonesian industry. Procurement is to take place within the United States, and the loan is to be payable in dollars on such terms and conditions as the Department of State and the Agency for International Development deem advisable.

The President desires that any proposal for additional financial assistance to Indonesia be discussed with him before commitments are made.

MV Forrestal

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 11/62–12/62. Secret. Also sent to the Acting Administrator of AID.

299. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 299. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, January 4, 1963.

SUBJECT

General Nasution’s Position on the Role of Indonesian Armed Forces

With reference to INR Research Memorandum RFE–67, December 28, 1962 on Soviet Military Aid to Indonesia,1 you raised the question of General Nasution’s position today. The military aid figure of $1.3 billion, incidentally, is an approximation, and of this amount approximately $800 million has been used already.

We estimate that when the chips are down General Nasution will support Sukarno in whatever action he may decide to undertake. Nasution would attempt to have a moderating influence before the decision was made but would not oppose him on something already decided. In the case of Brunei, Nasution has himself stated publicly that Indonesia sympathizes with the Azahari2 uprising, and the Army has engaged in covert training and other activity in support of the Azahari rebels.

General Nasution’s own power position appears to remain very strong. There is no evidence to date that his switch from Chief of Staff of the Army to Chief of Staff of all the armed forces has reduced his power. Indeed it has been reported that he should be able to consolidate his power over all three services (four, counting the police) while retaining the loyalty of the Army. Nasution and General Jani, the new Chief of Staff of the Army, [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] recognize the need for closing forces in the face of attempts by civilians like Subandrio to assume Army prerogatives as in West New Guinea. [3-2/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Certainly General Nasution recognizes the crucial impact on economic development that the size of the armed forces, their equipment and the purposes their use will have. The most recent statements on the planned size and purpose of the Army emanate more from Jani than from Nasution but they appear to have Nasution’s sanction. According to these statements, the Army plans to stabilize its strength at 200,000 conscripts over the next two or three years, with no new intakes except for technicians and cadets for the Military Academy. There is a definite interest in economic development and civic action, and a number of construction battalions for various developmental projects are being formed. Aware that a large portion of the $1.3 billion worth of military equipment from the U.S.S.R. is superfluous to Indonesia’s needs, General Nasution might be expected to attempt to obtain cancellations on many of the items which have not yet been shipped. In the final analysis, however, such cancellations, and the still more important question of whether Indonesia plans to use its armed forces for defense and development or for expansionist goals, depend on President Sukarno rather than on General Nasution. General Nasution has had ample opportunity to oppose Sukarno at crucial points in the past and has not done so. We have no reason to think that there is any essential change in this relationship now.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 798.551/1–163. Secret. Drafted by James B. Freeman of SPA.

1 In this attached report, December 28, 1962, INR posed two questions: 1) What were Indonesia’s motives and intentions in accepting Soviet military aid, and 2) how would the Soviet Union respond to Indonesian efforts to secure more favorable terms for repaying Soviet debt incurred for military aid? INR concluded that Indonesia’s acceptance of $1.3 billion in modern Soviet military equipment was to help acquire West New Guinea and increase general national prestige and influence, not to seek territory concessions in Portuguese Timor or British Borneo. Sukarno and the Indonesian military saw Soviet military aid as to their advantage; the PKI considered that it contributed to the party’s influence. The Soviet Union was likely to grant Indonesia more favorable terms of repayment for fear of driving Indonesia into the U.S. or Communist Chinese camp.

2 A pro-Indonesian dissident.

300. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 300. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, January 16, 1963.

McGB:

Given all the anti-Sukarno emotionalism rampant these days, I was delighted to find the Governor1 thoroughly statesmanlike (I didn’t have to do any selling). He says we’re just going to have to “sweat out Sukarno”, alternately using the carrot and stick, but essentially living with this guy and trying to box him in. He agrees that we must turn Sukarno off Malaysia by (1) working harder to get the Phils to stop serving as a talking horse for Indos in Borneo; and (2) making more of a political demonstration of our interest in Malaysia. I did a cable for him to send Mike who’ll begin the educational process on Sukarno.2

Incidentally, Averell blew up at Guy Pauker’s latest RAND memo.3 He asked me to tell you that he can’t understand how a former pupil of yours could be so dim. We agreed that Guy’s policy prescriptions were ideally suited to bringing about the precise thing he seeks to avoid, an Indo tie-up with Moscow. All these guys who advocate “tough” policies toward neutralists like Nasser and Sukarno blink at the fact that it was precisely such policies which helped influence these countries to accept Moscow offers in the first place. The best way to keep Nasser or Sukarno from becoming prisoners of the USSR is to compete for them, not thrust them into Soviet hands.4

I can see we’re going to have a tough time defending our Indo policy for the next few months (especially with the Brits taking a “head-insand” attitude).5 I fear for the $50–75 million we ought to invest in an Indo stabilization plan if they buy IMF terms. Yet at a time when we are spending hundreds of millions to hold SEA mainland, it is sheer folly not to protect its seaward flank (unpleasant as the owner of this real estate may be).

For your memory book, Averell feels we’ll have to let the Bung have Timor in 2–3 years at outside. He wants to beat up Salazar. When I said “Azores” he countered that we should have NATO-ized it years ago. We’ll now have to sweat out Sukarno and Salazar too.

Bob K.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 1/63–2/63. Secret.

1 Harriman.

2 See Document 301.

3 On January 11, the Rand Corporation submitted Guy J. Pauker’s memorandum, RM–3481–1–PR, “The Stategic Implications of Soviet Military Aid to Indonesia.” Pauker concluded that continued acceptance of large-scale Soviet military aid after the settlement of the West New Guinea issue endangered the Indonesian Army, increased the influence of the PKI, and encouraged Indonesian expansion into Portuguese Timor, North Borneo, and possibly other areas. Pauker recommended a tough U.S. stance toward Indonesia in enforcing the West New Guinea settlement and in protecting Timor, Borneo, and Malaysia. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Rand Studies, Part C)

At Harriman’s request, Hilsman commented on Pauker’s report. In RM–3, Hilsman stated that INR disagreed with the conclusions and found that they obscured rather than clarified U.S. policy toward Indonesia. (Ibid., Vol. III, 1/63–2/63)

4 In a memorandum to the Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, William Bundy of ISA stated that Soviet military aid to Indonesia appeared “excessive to the legitimate defense needs of the Indonesian armed forces.” Such aid, in ISA’s view, encouraged Indonesian expansionism and posed a threat to Indonesia’s neighbors. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, DOD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4564, Indonesia 092–333, 1963)

5 In a January 11 aide-mémoire, Lord Home informed Rusk of the United Kingdom’s “grave concern” about Indonesia and the need for tripartite talks among representatives of the United States, Australia, and the United Kingdom. Lord Home believed that Sukarno’s territorial ambitions were not satisfied with West Irian and constituted a real danger to Borneo, Timor, greater Malaysia, and the rest of New Guinea. While he understood U.S. policy in Indonesia, Home questioned whether it would not aid Indonesian expansionism. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 1/63–2/63) In delivering this aide-mémoire, British Ambassador Sir David Ormsby Gore discussed it with Harriman. (Memorandum of conversation, January 16; Department of State, Central Files, 798.00/1–1663)

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, January 16, 1963, 10:09 p.m.

682. Personal for Forrestal from Harriman.1 Important that in addition to your underlining to Indonesians urgent importance their taking adequate stabilization measures if U.S. is to contribute, you should take opportunity to discuss frankly with Sukarno and others Indonesian territorial ambitions particularly Malaysia.

Bearing in mind Sukarno’s vanity, his strong nationalism, and his known admiration for President Kennedy, suggest, in consultation with Ambassador Jones, appropriate line might be to refer to statements over the years by leading Indonesians that the real threat to Indonesia is ultimately the ChiComs and that in last analysis the Indonesians rely on U.S. military strength in Pacific to protect them against this threat. We agree that the real threat to Indonesia and rest of Southeast Asia has been amply demonstrated in India. As Sukarno knows, we are heavily engaged in trying to preserve peace of area also in Viet-Nam and Laos and are fully committed to prevent Chinese Communist expansionism. Our effort on Mainland Southeast Asia to contain ChiCom expansionism is certainly as much in Indonesian interest as our own. Best political move to deter this expansionism further in direction of Indonesia is development of a viable buffer state insulating Indonesia from the threat from North. We cannot conceive of a healthy Malaysia ever becoming a threat to Indonesia or Indonesian interests. We have considered various ways of the Borneo territories making the transition from colonialism and are convinced that only feasible way to build strong opposition to ChiComs and their expansionist tendencies is through development of a Greater Malaysia. We have no doubt that British are sincere in wishing to liquidate this vestige of colonialism in a manner which in long run will prove of greater benefit to the Indonesians. For these reasons we believe he should not attempt to block Malaysia which we intend to support vigorously. You may find an appropriate moment to point out that he needs President Kennedy’s good will since if he bases his foreign policy on “go it alone” with only Russian backing, he will find himself in their clutches.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 101.2/1–1663. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell, cleared in draft by Harriman and in substance by Komer, and approved by Bell.

1 Forrestal, along with Hilsman, undertook a fact-finding trip in Southeast Asia December 28, 1962–January 15, 1963. The majority of Hilsman’s time was spent in Vietnam, but he also visited Indonesia, Laos, and Thailand.

2 In telegram 1117 from Djakarta, January 20, Forrestal reported on a meeting he and Jones had with Sukarno on the morning of January 19. Sukarno told Forrestal he had achieved his goals of “unification, internal security, and West Irian.” His remaining goal was “economic stability and growth.” Forrestal encouraged this emphasis. When Sukarno asked: “how much and how soon?”, Forrestal responded that the United States was prepared to assist, but was waiting for a demonstration of Indonesia’s willingness “to make a political act of faith in support of sound economic policies.” Sukarno expressed willingness to address Indonesia’s economic problems and noted that his primary interest was economics. (Department of State, Central Files, 798.11/1–2063)

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 302. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, March 1, 1963, 6 p.m.

1333. For Harriman. I have just had intensive review US position here with Country Team, and we agree on following assessment: 1. Next few weeks may be critical ones for Indonesia.

2. If Indonesia can survive short run, we should be able assure ourselves of a neutral, independent and non-Communist nation.

3. Present economic plight this country and need for concentrating attention on economic reforms have been repeatedly stressed by all principal government officials including President Sukarno since West Irian settlement

4. Need for external assistance to implement any economic stabilization plan unchallenged. In face strong PKI hopes divert GOI from cooperation with US on stabilization and development, real issue is whether external assistance is to come from free world (USA) or from Communist bloc (USSR).

Sukarno is one of our biggest problems in Indonesia but we must approach Indonesia’s needs and role we play here in terms importance US places upon Indonesia and not on basis that Sukarno is eternal. Apart from Sukarno and his inner circle, capable American and Western trained young men hold responsible positions at secondary and tertiary levels in military services, civil service, professions, universities and even private business. It is this strength and friends US has here which gives us all confidence in long run.

Understandably our purchase of time is expensive. Considering, however, vast riches this archipelago, its sea lanes and harbors, its natural resources, and well proved ability its people to survive under hardships of both war and peace, importance of keeping these resources from international Communist domination is, I am certain, vital to West and free Asia alike.

Principal current considerations for US policy are: 1. Soviets gambled $1 billion in modern military hardware that they could by pushing Indonesians into conflict with West over WNG bring Indonesia into Communist camp. US foiled this scheme by acting as go-between to encourage peaceful settlement and transfer area to Indonesia.

2. As result NG settlement Indonesians temporarily drew back from Soviets and attempted halt flow massive military assistance as Soviet military technicians left in droves. Indonesians turned toward US hoping for massive economic assistance, and for renewal military shipments. In response US approaches, Indonesians have been making real effort to initiate economic stabilization program as base for development aid from US and other Western countries. Indonesia’s military is now inaugurating civic action program with US help.

3. Soviets suffered what may be but temporary setback, however. Seemingly more by accident than by anyone’s design, Brunei rebellion has given Soviets new opportunity pit Indonesians against West and set stage anew for Soviet victory in Indonesia. Indonesians have characteristically reacted to what to them is a colonial issue. Flow of Soviet military aid continues. At this crucial time Indonesians are being diverted from their concentration on correction their economic ills, to face what they see as new conspiracy aimed at undermining only recently established Indonesian unity.

4. A small group of Indonesian leaders led by First Minister Djuanda continues emphasize economic stabilization program. His representatives are in US now discussing this program with IMF and USG. Should they fail receive US support for this program which they prepared and how discuss with Sukarno’s approval, their defeat would be an incalculable loss not only to them personally, but more important to US and its operations here. These men represent those who believe in US sincerity toward Indonesia and who would re-emphasize cooperation with US. Djuanda’s record has been consistent in this regard. His long service in Cabinet positions of trust is perhaps best token that Sukarno, despite resentment he undoubtedly harbors for outside support (Taiwan and the Philippines, which to many Indonesians means US) for 1958 rebellion, is still willing give Indonesian-American cooperation another chance.

5. Indonesians have been led expect steps will be taken soon meet economic ills. As in past Sukarno and Djuanda have turned first to US. If program developed by Indonesians with IMF and US advice does not move forward in way which makes it possible for Sukarno and Djuanda government retain confidence in US and show results political situation here could take sharp turn to left.

6. All issues in Indonesia are enormously complicated by struggle going on behind scenes (though occasionally in full view) for Sukarno’s favor and number one position in Cabinet. Vying for First Minister Djuanda’s position (like jackals they are expecting his early political, if not physical, demise) are principally Chaerul Saleh and Subandrio, although Ruslan Abdulgani not out of running, and even Ali Sastroamidjojo has hopes lightning will strike. All are playing for PKI favor and support to further their own ambitions.

7. Communist Party in Indonesia is not yet in government, but is in position exert enormous pressure on government. It is aided in this by economic situation which has pushed endurance of Indonesian people almost to what even for this most enduring people may be limit. PKI cannot yet exert military pressure in Indonesia, but if Soviet military assistance continues grow and ours continues trickle, PKI may achieve that ability.

8. Fact that MAP programs for last three years are being held in abeyance is undermining Indonesian Army’s confidence in US as supplier and weakening military’s influence. If Indonesian Army, greatest organized domestic force opposed to Communism in Indonesia, has to turn to Soviets for its military supplies, it will undoubtedly undermine army’s anti-Communist position.

9. US still holds good hand. It would be tragic for US at this point not to play its hand for all its worth. To hold its position and improve it, US needs to do three things: A. Act to prevent clash between Indonesians and Malayans and British over Malaysia (development in which US would almost surely be drawn into a head-on conflict with Indonesia);

B. Be responsive to Indonesia’s attempts implement stabilization program and to Indonesia’s estimated need for approximately $600 million foreign exchange or its equivalent over next three years;

C. Resume flow of military supplies to army

A Presidential letter to Sukarno giving him hope that President Kennedy will visit Indonesia during his term of office would be helpful at this critical point. When I presented President Kennedy’s much appreciated Idul Fitril message to Sukarno,1 his eyes lit up when I said I had a message from President Kennedy and he said, expectantly, “good news?” before I could explain what it was. He was obviously pleased but just as obviously had hoped for more.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 1–1 INDON. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

1 Reference is to a February 22 Presidential message to Sukarno expressing greetings for the Moslem holiday. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 1/63–2/63)

303. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 303. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, March 6, 1963.

Indonesia

Mac Bundy tells me that you did not want to commit yourself to a visit to Indonesia in connection with any other trip you might make to the Far East.1 I would like the chance to argue this point with you. President Eisenhower made a mistake in 1958 which has cost the United States dearly. On a trip to the Philippines and Japan in that year, he excluded Indonesia, although previously the Indonesians had been allowed to believe that he would not neglect the largest country in Southeast Asia.

The memory of this refusal plus certain other mistaken actions which we took in the same period is still very strong in the minds of most Indonesians, and particularly in the mind of President Sukarno.

As you know, Indonesia is by far the largest and potentially the most powerful country in Southeast Asia. It has developed a sense of national unity—unusual in that area—and it is dominated by a man who is moved much more by personalities than by objective facts of international life and is peculiarly susceptible to political gestures. That the Soviet Bloc realizes the importance of personal visits is evidenced by the fact that since 1958 of the 20 VIP visits of Bloc officials to Indonesia, 6 were by chiefs of state or government. For these reasons a personal gesture from you to Sukarno would be worth multiples of millions of dollars of U.S. aid and should have a disproportionately large leverage effect on Indonesian policy.2

Unless the course of Indonesian policy swings more violently than we suspect, I should imagine that you would not omit a visit to that country on any Far Eastern visit you made, since to do so would be the strongest possible kind of signal from the United States that we were implacably opposed to Indonesia and her aspirations. If this is true, it seems to me that you lose nothing and perhaps gain a present advantage in making this intention explicit to Sukarno at this time. If between now and the time you actually decide on a visit to the Far East conditions have so changed as to make it inadvisable for you to go to Indonesia, you can always change your mind. The point is that a refusal to visit Indonesia after you have told Sukarno that you would, will be no stronger a rebuff to him than a failure to visit in the course of a trip to any other country in the Far East.

The advantage of making your intention to visit him explicit at this time is that it puts a mild restraint on Sukarno from upsetting any apple carts during the next 18 months.

Another thought that is in the back of my mind is that we may for many reasons decide that we cannot meet Indonesia’s expectations for a significant loan in connection with their stabilization program. Should this happen, the effect would be somewhat softened in Sukarno’s mind by a political gesture from you.

MVForrestal3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 3/63–4/63. Secret.

1 In a February 19 memorandum to Komer, Forrestal asked Komer’s advice about a possible Presidential trip to Indonesia. Forrestal noted that it was “Jones’s thesis” that a visit and a friendly letter from President Kennedy would restrain Sukarno. Forrestal suggested that it could be argued that they might convince Sukarno that he could count on U.S. support “despite his grandiose schemes” and ambitions in North Borneo. (Ibid., 1/63–2/63) Komer responded in a memorandum to Forrestal that “I am with you 100%.” Komer agreed the President should write Sukarno to settle the visit issue, but also “we try to turn the Bung off while there is still time.” (Ibid., Meetings and Memoranda, Staff Memos, Komer, 1/63–2/63)

2 On March 6, Kennedy sent Sukarno a letter thanking him for the renewed invitation to visit Indonesia. The President stated that before the end of his first term, he expected to pay a visit to the Far East, “and I assure you that I would not contemplate such a trip without visiting a country of the importance of Indonesia.” Kennedy also expressed support for the Indonesian decision to implement an effective economic stabilization plan. Kennedy observed that the United States sought to assist countries in the region to develop free from foreign domination and subversion, especially from China. He hoped that Indonesia would contribute to “the common task of making it possible for all the free nations in Asia to develop in peace and security.” The President concluded with a promise to “be in touch with you about my traveling plans when they become more definite.” (Ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 3/63–/63)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

304. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 304. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, April 24, 1963.

SUBJECT

Suggested Presidential Message to President Sukarno in Connection with Transfer of West New Guinea to Indonesia

Ambassador Jones has strongly recommended that the President send a message of congratulations to President Sukarno on the occasion of the May 1 ceremony transferring the administration of West New Guinea from the United Nations to Indonesia.1

The Department agrees that a Presidential message would serve our interests in Indonesia. Effusive messages are certain to come from the Bloc and from many of the Afro-Asians. Since we took such a leading part in the West New Guinea settlement, our failure to follow through with a friendly message at this time would be puzzling to the Indonesians and would give the other side a clear propaganda advantage. The absence of a message from the President would be particularly noticed by Sukarno, who puts much stock in what he feels to be a personal rapport with the President. As you know, this feeling on Sukarno’s part is one of our most useful assets in Indonesia.

We recognize that the Dutch might take offense at a message of this nature and that it could serve to rekindle their dwindling resentment over our role in the West New Guinea settlement.2 It is admittedly somewhat risky, particularly in view of the Dutch parliamentary elections scheduled for May 15. Since we took the onus of promoting the settlement itself to further our interests, however, we doubt that this final gesture would add much to Dutch irritation.

A suggested message from the President is attached.3 Since Sukarno is leaving Djakarta on April 28 or 29 en route to West New Guinea, the message would have to be sent by April 26 to be sure of reaching him in ample time.

Jeanne Davis4

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in draft by Rice, Bell, Francis E. Meloy, Director of the Office of Western European Affairs, and by Robert J. McCloskey, Deputy Director of the Office of News, Bureau of Public Affairs.

1 Jones provided a draft message in telegram 1566 from Djakarta, April 10. In telegram 645 from The Hague, April 11, Ambassador Rice “strongly questioned the advisability of a proposed Presidential message.” (Both ibid.)

2 President Kennedy, through Komer, asked the Department of State to have the Embassy in The Hague review the current state of Netherlands opinion with respect to the New Guinea settlement and the U.S. role therein. (Memorandum from Komer to Brubeck, March 1; ibid., POL 32–1 INDO–NETH) The Department informed Bundy on March 27 that “with the restoration of Dutch-Indonesia relations the Embassy believes that, for all practical purposes, Dutch unhappiness over the US role in the New Guinea affairs is a thing of the past and not a significant factor in our current relations or future dealings with the Netherlands.” (Memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy, March 27; ibid.)

3 Attached but not printed. The message from Kennedy to Sukarno was approved and sent to Jones in telegram 968 to Djakarta, April 26, for use in the transfer ceremony on May 1. (Ibid., POL 32–4 INDON)

4 Davis of S/S signed for Brubeck above Brubeck’s typed signature.

305. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 305. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, May 10, 1963.

Indonesia

I attach two cables which give you the current status of our negotiations with Indonesia on the question of possible U.S. economic assistance (Djakarta’s 1732 and Aidto 1345).1

The Aid Agency is presently operating on the theory that both from the point of view of the situation in the U.S. Congress and from the point of view of a rational approach to Indonesia’s economic difficulties, our efforts should be guided by two fundamental principles. First, we should try to spread the burden of outside assistance to Indonesia among as many Free World countries as possible; and second, we should break up the assistance package into a series of inter-related economic programs in order to avoid a large U.S. stabilization loan. The programs we have in mind are listed on page 6 of Aidto 1345.

There has been some difficulty in getting the Indonesians, and even our Embassy in Djakarta, fully to understand that we cannot provide substantial assistance without having a more precise idea of Indonesian requirements in the light of the specific steps they intend to take on their own to stabilize their economy. Part of the difficulty is that Sukarno himself tends to regard his economic difficulties as problems which can be solved by dramatic political gestures, including a substantial gesture in form of a loan from the United States. Because of this feeling, it has been extremely difficult to get the Indonesian Government to develop with the IMF a detailed program for stabilization and economic development.

Nevertheless, some progress has been made; and we understand that the Indonesians are about to invite the IMF team to return to Djakarta to complete their work on the Indonesian program. Also, on the 15th of this month Sukarno is scheduled to make a major economic address in which he may announce the first in a series of steps which his Government will take at home toward stabilization.

The danger is that from time to time Sukarno will demand excessively large and unrealistic commitments from the United States before the Indonesians have even defined the belt-tightening measures which they will take and which have to be defined before we can talk dollars and cents. Aid is resisting these demands, but one can expect the political pressures to become quite intense.

Finally, the Indonesians have been making unrealistic demands on U.S. oil companies. Unfortunately the oil companies have been too rigid in their negotiations and have not shown much imagination in devising ways of meeting their own financial requirements with Indonesian political requirements. Bob Barnett in State is doing a good job in getting the oil companies to reexamine their positions.

Mike

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading for May 11.

1 In telegram 1732, May 8, Jones reported that during a trip with Sukarno to West Irian Sukarno talked extensively about economic problems. Jones made three points: the United States was not dragging its feet on assistance for political reasons, but as soon as Indonesia reached an agreement with the IMF, U.S. assistance would be accelerated; U.S. aid to Indonesia was far greater than to any other nation; and it was difficult to accept Indonesia “condoning PKI efforts to point finger at US as neo-imperialistic.” (Department of State, Central “Files; E 1–1 INDON)

Aidto 1345, a joint State-AID message, April 26, authorized Jones to review with Sukarno, Subandrio, and Djuanda the U.S. position on stabilization. The message provided guidelines for that review. (Ibid.)

306. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 306. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, undated.

The attached cable to Ambassador Jones in Djakarta will bring you up to date on the potentially serious position which is developing as a result of the deadlock on the Indonesian oil negotiations.1

The Indonesian Government has stupidly put a gun at its own head in an attempt to bulldoze the oil companies (Stanvac and Caltex) into concessions which they probably will not and possibly cannot make.2 We are most worried about the effect of a complete breakdown on Congress. There is already sentiment for barring all aid to Indonesia and news of this might pull down the house of cards. The oil companies have said they will work to calm any Congressional outbursts until June 15 at least.

The cable is somewhat over-written because experience has shown that it is difficult to convince Howard Jones that he must start using his goodwill in Indonesia to save this situation.

Mike

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. Secret; Urgent. A note on the source text indicates that ithe memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading of May 18.

1 Reference is to telegram 1037 to Djakarta, May 18, in which Harriman informed Jones that he had met with Caltex and Stanvac company executives on May 17. The oil company officials indicated that by enforcing new oil laws Indonesia was in effect expropriating their oil operations in Indonesia after June 15. The executives were adamant that they would not export oil from Indonesia after that date. The Department asked Jones “to put all your assets of understanding and sympathy at stake now. We are dangerously at the end of the road,” Jones was to tell Sukarno that a break with the oil companies would have serious repercussions for U.S.-Indonesian relations. (Department of State, Central Files, PET 6 INDON)

2 Regarding Law No. 44 of 1960, see Document 308.

307. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 307. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, May 20, 1963.

Indonesia

Further on the subject of the situation with respect to American oil companies in Indonesia (Deptel 1037 sent to you over the week end).1 It has how been decided by George Ball and Governor Harriman to send Wilson Wyatt as your personal emissary to talk to Sukarno in Tokyo. Wyatt will leave at the end of this week and will be accompanied by Walter Levy, an independent oil consultant who helped Averell during the negotiations in Iran at the end of President Truman’s Administration.

Wyatt advised by Levy will attempt to persuade Sukarno that he must give a political direction to his Minister, Chaerul Saleh, to reach an agreement with the oil companies on a 60/40 production-sharing basis before June 15th. Wyatt and Levy will then proceed to Djakarta in an attempt to work out with Saleh a device by which Saleh’s Ministry will receive a portion of hard currency revenues from Indonesia’s share to finance the domestic oil industry before the remainder is turned over to the Bank of Indonesia for general purposes. Our Ambassador believes that this arrangement, which is satisfactory to the oil companies, is what Saleh is really looking for. The oil companies’ representatives are not this optimistic.

After Wyatt and Levy have prepared the ground on principle, the oil companies have agreed to send top executives to negotiate the final details before June 15th.

The oil companies have informally agreed to keep this matter in strict confidence, at least until we have gone through the above exercise. I would suggest, therefore, that in order to avoid any political repercussions here, we announce that Wyatt is traveling to Tokyo and Djakarta to discuss generally Indonesia’s economic problems and the proposed IMF stabilization plan. If the negotiations go badly, of course, the fat would be in the fire, and we must assume that some of this will then become public.

Up to the present, cooperation between the oil executives and the Department of State has been good; but I imagine that there will come a time when we will have to persuade the oil companies to accept something less than they are now demanding from Indonesia. This makes it very important, I think, to maintain the confidence of the companies in the early stages of the negotiations, so that they will be as reasonable as possible when the time comes for them to show flexibility.

If you agree with all this, a letter to Sukarno describing Wyatt and his mission will be prepared for your signature.2 Another letter will be prepared from you to Wyatt which can be made public at the time he leaves.

MVF

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. III, 5/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s weekend reading of May 18.

1 See footnote 1, Document 306.

2 Sent on May 25. (Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Indonesia Security, 1961–1963)

308. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Buridy) 308. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Buridy)Source

Washington, May 21, 1963.

SUBJECT

Status of American Oil Companies’ Negotiations in Indonesia

The established American oil companies in Indonesia, Standard Vacuum (Stanvac) [Standard Oil of New Jersey and Socony Mobil] and Caltex Pacific (Caltex) [Standard Oil of California and Texas],1 have been engaged in negotiations with the Government of Indonesia (GOI) since early 1961 with a view to reaching agreement on future exploration, production and distribution rights. Shell has been similarly engaged. Under Law No. 44 (1960), oil is a resource belonging to the people of Indonesia and the GOI is the legal custodian thereof. However, the Government may delegate to others as contractors the responsibility of developing this resource. Stanvac, Caltex and the Shell Oil Company produce 90 percent of Indonesia’s petroleum. American oil company investment in Indonesia is approximately $300 million. Indonesia derives in foreign exchange from the export of oil approximately $120 million a year.

The GOI’s basic aim in these negotiations has been to secure not only an immediate improvement in GOI foreign receipts from the industry (changed from 50/50 split to 60/40 split), but also eventual state ownership of all domestic marketing facilities and supporting elements including refineries and processing plants. The foreign oil companies would remain and be primarily concerned with exploration, exploitation, production and export. Concessions would be replaced by contractual relationships between the companies and the GOI.

An important stage in these negotiations was established on May 14, 1963, when the GOI promulgated and made public Regulation No. 18 (Embtel 1751, Tab A)2 which (a) fixes June 15, 1963 as the end of the transitional period referred to in Article 22 of Law No. 44. Under Law 44, existing contracts may continue in effect for a “limited period of time which shall be as short as possible,” pending their renegotiation as “contracts of work” in line with the provisions of the new law; (b) any oil company that elects to do so may request an extension of five months from April 26, 1963 for the purpose of winding up its affairs and terminating operations. A Government committee will be established to determine “a reasonable and proper” settlement between the Government and such company; (c) any oil company desiring to continue doing business in Indonesia after June 15, 1963 will be permitted to do so on the basis of a new regulation which becomes effective on June 16, 1963. The terms of the new regulation are not yet known; (d) during the period from August 28, 1961 through June 15, 1963, the financial regulations set forth in Law No. 476 (1961) will be applicable. (A legal analysis is at Tab B.)3

Law No. 476, among other things, provides in Article 7 that the division of earnings between the Government and the oil companies will be performed by payments on the basis of 60 percent for the Government, 40 percent for the oil companies.

Regulation No. 18 (referred to in the third paragraph above) interprets Article 7 of Law No. 476 as the sharing of production profits after deducting operating costs, but excluding excises, import and export duties, and other Government collections which do not constitute taxes on corporate revenues.

The oil companies have informed the Department that administration of Regulation 18 by the GOI would be tantamount to expropriation of their properties. They regard their situation on that date as presenting them with the alternatives of (1) operating under contract concluded by that date, (2) winding up their business within five months after that date, or (3) operating under the administrative control of the GOI. They say that (2) and (3) are unacceptable. After June 15, they will cease exports unless agreement is reached.

Governor Harriman, other officers of the Department of State and officers of the American companies having interests in Indonesia, agreed on a plan of action on May 17 which is at Tab C.3

Following up previous instructions to Ambassador Jones, the Department telegraphed him on May 18 that notwithstanding conversations with First Minister Djuanda and Subandrio, he must see Sukarno immediately and comply with instructions contained in Deptel 1037.4 (Tab D, Deptels 1037, 1040, 1044, 1045)5 Ambassador Jones is to attempt to induce Sukarno to instruct Minister of Basic Industries Saleh, who has been conducting these negotiations, to stop over-trading and come to prompt agreement on a 60/40 basis and end attempts to whittle the companies’ 40 percent down. Ambassador Jones replied on May 19 that he is seeking an appointment with Sukarno prior his departure for Tokyo which is scheduled May 22. He hopes to reach Sukarno, May 21.

William H. Brubeck6

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, PET 15–2 INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Jarvis and Czyzak; cleared in draft by Bell, Ingraham, Barnett, and Andrew Fensor, Chief of the Fuels and Energy Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, and by Sullivan.

1 Brackets in the source text.

2 Dated May 10, not attached. (Department of State, Central Files, PET 15–2 INDON)

3 Attached but not printed.

3 Attached but not printed.

4 See footnote 1, Document 306.

5 Telegrams 1040, 1044, and 1045 to Djakarta, May 18–19, all reinforced instructions to Jones in telegram 1037 to make the démarche on the oil conflict with Sukarno. (All in Department of State, Central Files, PET 6 INDON)

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Brubeck signed the original.

309. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 309. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, June 10, 1963.

Wyatt Mission to Indonesia

You will be receiving Governor Wilson W. Wyatt, Walter Levy and Abe Chayes on Tuesday at 4 o’clock to hear their brief report on a highly successful good offices mission to Tokyo in connection with the Indonesian oil negotiations.1

Prior to the Wyatt mission, the two American companies, Stanvac (subsidiary of Mobil) and Caltex (joint subsidiary of California and Texaco) had been negotiating fruitlessly with the Indonesian Government for two and one half years. By May of this year they had gotten themselves into a position where they were hardly on speaking terms with the Indonesian negotiators headed by Chaerul Saleh. The Indonesian Government issued its Regulation 18, which the oil companies construed to constitute effective expropriation. As a result we were faced with an intensely dangerous situation in which the oil companies would claim that they had been nationalized without compensation and would be putting pressure on a sympathetic Congress to retaliate against Indonesia. Such an act would destroy whatever progress we have made in turning Sukarno and at least part of the Indonesian political community towards the West and probably would drive Indonesia into closer association with the Soviet Bloc.

The oil company executives, Gus Long of Texaco, and R. G. Follis of Standard of California, approached Averell with a request that the Department intervene in this situation, despite their policy not to engage the U.S. Government in their private negotiations. In face of the fact that the oil companies were already taking action to withdraw from Indonesia, Averell agreed, and suggested that a Presidential mission of good offices be sent to Sukarno.

Accordingly Wilson Wyatt, Walter Levy (a private oil consultant who had helped Harriman during the Iranian negotiations) and Abe Chayes departed for Tokyo on May 27th, after having examined the status of negotiations extensively with representatives of the oil companies. They returned to Washington on June 4th bringing home the bacon. A Heads of Agreement (a short form of preliminary contract) had been initialed in Tokyo which represented substantial concessions by both sides. The Indonesians had withdrawn their insistence that the oil companies finance the foreign currency requirements of domestic production and distribution over and above the 60–40 split. For their part, the oil companies agreed to a formula providing for the sale to the Government of their Indonesian distribution assets within five years and their refining assets within 15 years.

While it cannot be said that the Heads of Agreement does evenhanded justice to both sides, and that difficulties will not arise in the future, particularly with respect to Indonesian domestic needs for refined products, nevertheless considering the stage which the negotiations had reached, the team of Wyatt, Levy and Chayes did a remarkable job.

Wyatt was an ideal leader. He combined a lawyer’s ability to grasp the rather complicated facts quickly and the ability of a Kentucky politician to smooth tempers on both sides with just the right amount of toughness in negotiation. Walter Levy was indispensable to the team. His knowledge of oil company negotiations enabled him to bring to the attention of company executives most of the essential injustices and variations from normal business practice which were concealed in the draft agreements they had presented to the Indonesians. Having softened the companies in this manner, he described for the Indonesian side the areas where they could expect to get a better bargain and those areas where it would be senseless to push for more. Abe Chayes assisted Levy in the separate discussions with each side and was most useful in clarifying the obscurities which are inherent in any oil negotiation.

In conclusion, I expect that the Wyatt mission will prove to be one of the smoothest and most efficient bits of preventive diplomacy which the United States has undertaken in some time. The oil companies apparently feel so as well, and I attach letters to that effect from Messrs. Long and Follis to Harriman.

Assuming that the Indonesians do their part in economic stabilization, we still have to put together a reasonable multinational assistance program for them and sell our part of it to Congress. We should be able to call upon strong support from the oil companies for this purpose.

I must also remind you that President Sukarno is looking forward to a visit from you this fall and will now be more than mildly disappointed if you cannot make it. I attach his letter to you commenting on the mission.2

MVForrestal3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV. Secret.

1 A detailed record of a meeting among Jones, Wyatt, Levy, Chayes, and Sukarno and Indonesian leaders at the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo on May 29 is in airgram A–1711 from Tokyo, May 31. (Department of State, Central Files, PET 10 INDON)

2 None of the attachments is printed.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

310. Editorial Note 310. Editorial Note

At McGeorge Bundy’s suggestion, Michael V. Forrestal brought President Kennedy “up to date on where we stand” on the proposed Presidential trip to the Far East in the fall of 1963. Forrestal noted:

“The foreign policy reasons for making such a trip are, if anything, becoming stronger. In the past three months the Communist Bloc have stepped up their parade of high ranking visitors to the area, including the recent trips of the President of Communist China and Marshal Malinovsky to Indonesia.”

Forrestal reminded the President that President Sukarno, along with the Chiefs of State or Government of Japan and the Republic of China, had been told that a trip would probably occur in October. The countries to be visited would welcome a Presidential visit, but they had been cautioned that the trip depended upon international and domestic conditions. Forrestal added the following observation:

“It may interest you to know that the race problem which you have been dealing with in the United States may have an unexpectedly favorable aspect abroad. The Indonesian Ambassador spent an hour the other day telling me how much he and his countrymen admired the way in which your Administration was taking this toughest of all human problems. He seemed sincere, and I suspect that we may have an interesting bit of psychology working for us. Foreigners, especially poor ones, tend to admire us more when we are in trouble at home and are coping with the trouble instead of pretending it doesn’t exist. An example was the attitude toward us in Latin America during the ‘30s. Furthermore, most of the countries of the Far East themselves have severe problems with minority races, and effective public action by you in dealing with interracial relations strikes a sympathetic chord. This emphasizes the importance of getting wide distribution of yesterday’s magnificent performance both in Alabama and Washington.” (Memorandum from Forrestal to the President, June 12; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, Proposed Presidential Trip to the Far East, 3/63–6/63)

On June 19, Forrestal responded to a request from the President transmitted via Bundy for “an appraisal of the extent to which you [the President] are tied on to a trip to the Far East next October.” Forrestal stated that technically the President was not committed at all since in every case the Far East governments were told the President was “considering” a visit. Forrestal added:

“In one country, however—Indonesia—your failure to make a visit would be disappointing, to put it mildly. If you did not go to Djakarta, and if simultaneously we were unforthcoming in providing assistance to the Indonesian stabilization and development program, Indonesia might well veer away from the hopeful attitude it showed in the oil negotiations and the tripartite Heads of State meeting in Tokyo.” (Memorandum from Forrestal to the President, June 19; ibid.)

311. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Robert W. Komer of the Staff 311. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to Robert W. Komer of the StaffSource

Washington, July 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Indonesia

I think the President should get a briefing on Indonesian aid from the State Department early next week. I suggest that Hilsman and Harriman (if the latter is available) attend together with Bob Barnett and Sy Janow. (Bob Barnett is Hilsman’s Deputy who has been taking the lead in Indonesian aid negotiations.)1 The present situation is roughly as follows:

The IMF team has returned with the recommendation that the IMF enter into a stand-by agreement with Indonesia which would make available $50 million to Indonesia over the next year. The funds would be phased $20 million in the first quarter and $10 million in each succeeding quarter. The Board of the Fund is in the process of acting on this recommendation and will probably act favorably. The U.S. member will vote in favor but will observe that there appears to be inadequate rescheduling of Indonesia’s foreign debt.

This debt problem is our largest present difficulty. The Indonesians so far have rescheduled only 50 percent of the total Soviet debt burden for the next two years (i.e. $41 million of $83 million in the current year). They have made no attempt to reschedule private European debt and they have proposed that all Western public debt be rescheduled on the same terms the Soviets have, i.e. 50 percent. This is not satisfactory for two reasons. First, the total reduction of annual debt burden by the proposed rescheduling is inadequate and therefore leaves a larger gap in Indonesian balance of payments to be filled by foreign assistance. We are asking that the servicing of all Bloc debt be kept to a maximum of $20 million annually, which is approximately equivalent to the current interest charges on such debt. We are also asking that European Governments refund all European private debt in such a way as to effect a 50-percent reduction in the current debt burden.

On July 26 there will be a meeting in Paris of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) at which our delegation (including Janow and Barnett) will seek to start other European countries working on the amount which they will contribute to Indonesian stabilization. Assuming by one device or another that we can get them to match us, we hope to be able to hold our own cash contribution to Indonesian stabilization to approximately $45 million in the first year. This is in addition to current aid and PL 480 contributions.

When our people come back from DAC, we will have to start putting pencil to paper to make our figure firm; and sometime in September we will probably have to announce our intention to make a specific contribution to the stabilization program.

The reason for the meeting with the President is simply to make sure that he understands that we are beginning to march down the road toward a firm dollar commitment to Indonesian stabilization.

I suggest that you ask Roger’s office to prepare a very brief description of the steps which we plan to take together with the rationale which can be used to brief the President. I will talk to Roger over the week end and you can assume that he will bear the major burden of making the presentation.

Cliff Alexander is generally familiar with the subject, should you need any liaison work done.

Michael V. Forrestal2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files; Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV, 6/63–8/63. Confidential.

1 According to the President’s Appointment Book, he did not meet with these officials during the following week. (Ibid.) The President did receive a memorandum on the issue from the Department of State, which he read and approved; see Document 312.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

312. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 312. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, July 23, 1963.

Attached is to bring you abreast of our proposed Indonesian aid policy. The Indos have complied sufficiently with our pressure for stabilization and Bloc debt rollover that we ought to go ahead on getting Europeans to chip in. We must chip in too, but at this point only $25–35 million in new money.

Key problems are: (1) Sukarno’s continued antics, especially on Malaysia; (2) fuel this adds to Congressional anti-Indo mood. But we think we can beat down Hill amendments unless Sukarno makes it impossible. Despite all the pain, our Indo policy is gathering speed in right direction, if we can only stick it out.

Dave Bell is en route to Paris DAC meeting, so if you want change in signals we need to know urgently.

R. W. Komer

Attachment1

Washington, undated.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

SUBJECT

Indonesian Stabilization Program

On July 26 an AID-State delegation will meet with members of the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD to discuss contributions to the Indonesian stabilization program. At that time participants in the meeting will have received what we expect to be favorable action by the IMF Board on its management’s recommendation that there be a $50 million standby arrangement to support what it has judged to be an acceptable program for the stabilization of the Indonesian economy.

The Indonesian economy has suffered steady deterioration since the end of the war. There has been steadily increasing awareness, in Indonesia, particularly over the past eight months, that political and economic stability were related to each other and that without a major effort at economic stabilization its present equilibrium of forces could not be preserved. Against this background and with full knowledge that the PKI (the Indonesian Communists) opposed it, Sukarno decided on May 26 to launch an economic regime of severe fiscal discipline, austere import licensing, and incentive for exports. It has already achieved some success. However, if there are not considerable contributions of external financing to maintain the momentum now achieved, Indonesia faces an exhaustion of foreign exchange and certain bankruptcy. To forestall PKI exploitation of economic chaos and the possibility of Indonesia’s dependence, at a moment of extreme vulnerability, upon Bloc countries, State and AID have held out to Djakarta the hope of a considerable expansion of Free World assistance. IMF approval of their program was based on the same expectation.

Meanwhile Indonesia has been passing through a period of disturbing instability in its attitude toward Malaysia. Sukarno has retreated abruptly from the good feeling established in Tokyo and Manila among the Malayans, the Indonesians and the Filipinos. His recent attacks on the Tunku have been violent, although to some extent understandable in view of the Tunku’s inept handling of the UK Singapore-Malaya agreement reached in London. We hope that Sukarno’s reactions will remain at the verbal level, but if the violence of his oratory is accompanied by military operations, we would be precluded from extending to Indonesia our contemplated assistance.

The U.S. delegation is going to the DAC meeting to argue for generous multilateral support to the Indonesian stabilization program, making it a matter of record, however, that if Sukarno engages in aggression against his neighbors, we on our part would be unable to extend the aid which we could give.

There have been other difficulties in preparing to adopt this position:

(1) The Indonesians are heavily in debt to the Bloc and we could not have considered extending aid to them had they not succeeded in obtaining from the USSR agreement to reschedule annual payments on Indonesia’s military and economic debt. The Indonesians have assured us that the level of net payments will not exceed $20 million a year when drawings on Soviet economic credits are deducted.

(2) We have not been entirely satisfied with what we know about Indonesian intentions toward foreign investment. However, Mr. Wyatt’s participation in negotiations between Indonesian Government and oil companies resulted in acceptance of a “Heads of Agreement” which offers promise of a satisfactory basis for operations of Caltex and Stanvac.

U.S. anxieties about Indonesia’s attitude toward Malaysia have been brought to the attention of President Sukarno, his cabinet ministers, and the Indonesian negotiating team here in Washington. The most explicit warnings have been given that continued opposition to Malaysia would reduce the prospect of a sympathetic attitude toward Indonesia’s needs by certain of our DAC partners and thereby render U.S. aid more difficult. The Indonesians are also fully aware that overt military activity against Malaysia would entirely foreclose all prospects of U.S. aid.

There have been over the past three or four years periods when Indonesian actions made it extremely difficult for us to preserve a useful presence in Djakarta, much less bend the Indonesians to a Western orientation. Throughout this period our combination of military assistance (about $31 million in FY 1961–63), plus grant aid (about $55 million), AID loans (about $20 million), and PL 480 deliveries, have placed us in a situation where Indonesia has become accustomed to significant economic dependence upon the United States and where our aid has demonstrably affected the orientation of many individual Indonesians, whose concern about Sukarno’s recklessness may be as great as ours.

The proposed U.S. contribution falls within an estimated range of $110 million to $135 million, constituted as follows (attributed to the standby year): PL 480 $78 million

March 1963 loan for imports $10 million (out of 17 total)

Subtotal $88 million

Rescheduling of debt payments due U.S. Govt agencies $ 13 million (minimum)

Subtotal $100 million (rounded)

New AID stabilization loan $25–35 million

Total $125–135 million

We believe that it is essential that we continue to take calculated risks in forestalling developments which could cause Indonesia’s dependence upon the Bloc to increase. To forestall this, our planned economic assistance is negligible when compared with the strategic consequences of a failure of our present effort.

Attached are Circular telegrams 99 and X–83, which constitute the position we have asked be put to our allies.2

Dean Rusk3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV, 6/63–8/63. Confidential. In a covering note to McGeorge Bundy, Komer asked if his memorandum and the attached memorandum from Rusk could be included in the President’s night reading. Komer suggested that a meeting with the President should be arranged if Kennedy had “any qualms.” Bundy wrote on the note: “P[resident] saw & approved.”

1 Confidential. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that Barnett drafted it and that Janow, U. Alexis Johnson, and Rice concurred. (Department of State, Central Files, E 1–1 INDON)

2 Dated July 17 and 18; attached but not printed.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

313. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff 313. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development (Janow) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council StaffSource

Washington, August 29, 1963.

SUBJECT

$10 Million Interim Loan to Indonesia

Since July 22, the date of Secretary Rusk’s memorandum for the President on the Indonesian Stabilization program1 (which we understand the President approved), there have been several developments which argue for proceeding now with negotiation of an interim balance of payments loan of $10 million to Indonesia. This loan would be the first tranche of AID assistance contemplated in the July 22 memorandum.

On July 24 the IMF approved a standby loan of $50 million for Indonesia and has since authorized Indonesia to draw up to $20 million as a first advance against the total.

On July 26 a meeting of the DAC/Indonesia Working Group heard an IMF presentation of the Indonesian financial position and recognized an Indonesian need for an additional $50 million in new credits to finance essential import licensing during the summer and ensure adequate government revenues from exchange transactions and customs by the end of the calendar year. Credits from DAC/Indonesia participants to help meet this need were left to bilateral negotiation. The U.S. advised the delegations assembled that the U.S. would make a contribution. The need for a second DAC meeting in September was tentatively agreed.

The authority granted the U.S. delegation to the DAC/Indonesia meeting of July 26 authorized a maximum U.S. commitment of $125–135 million in all forms of aid attributable to the IMF standby year. Of this amount $25–35 million was to be in the form of an AID balance of payments loan. The authorization to the U.S. delegation was the same as the “proposed U.S. contribution” detailed on page 3 of the Secretary’s memorandum of July 22. The maximum contribution was to be committed only in the event broad DAC support, with appropriate contributions, materialized at that meeting. The first DAC/Indonesia meeting was called to precede the August holiday and as it turned out did not give other governments time to formulate positions after receipt of the IMF report. Pending more concrete decisions to be announced at a second DAC meeting, we decided that an AID loan of $10 million out of the $35 million maximum would be a suitable U.S. contribution to the immediate Indonesian requirement.

Accordingly, in discussion with Khouw Bien Tie, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Indonesia, in Paris following the DAC/Indonesia meeting (which the Indonesians did not attend), I said, with David Bell’s specific agreement, that an AID loan of $10 million—but only $10 million would be available to help meet the August–September need, and that it would be negotiated after a U.S. review of the results of his talks with other creditors and subject to the general conditions governing U.S. aid to Indonesia, including Indonesian performance under the IMF agreement.

It is essential to the success of our effort in DAC that we make our contribution to the immediate Indonesian need; this will maintain the integrity of our overall position for substantial DAC member support for Indonesian stabilization in the standby year. Indonesian efforts have so far yielded $5 million in August and possibly an additional $5 million in September from France, and a little less than $4 million and other sums not yet specified from Germany. Aside from these and our $10 million, other credits appear to be linked to the second DAC/Indonesia meeting.

Our relations with Indonesia also require that we now proceed with negotiation of this loan. Further delay would invite questions in Djakarta as to U.S. intent, and would weaken the position of the First Minister and the few other strong proponents of stabilization.

The Indonesian stabilization program, initiated May 27, 1963, has proceeded successfully to date. It enjoys the rabid opposition of the Indonesian Communist party, and it suffers from persistent criticism of some Indonesian leaders. According to our latest information President Sukarno is adhering firmly to his position of support for the stabilization program. First Minister Djuanda, who led the effort for its adoption, is said to be a little stronger in his position.

We are of course limited by Indonesian behavior on Malaysia. We do not propose a firm date for a second DAC meeting until the UN Secretary General has made his report on the popular will in North Borneo and Sarawak. At present it appears that this question may be disposed of in about three weeks, which would permit a second DAC meeting as early as the last week of September. We estimate that the procedural steps involved in making the $10 million loan will take two to three weeks, which should put the time of signature of the loan after the Malaysia settlement.

We are cognizant of the sensitivities of the Congress on aid to Indonesia. Roger Hilsman and I have appeared this month before the House Foreign Affairs Committee and explained the position taken in Paris. We are avoiding current actions which, if misunderstood by the public, could adversely affect the national interest and the course of legislation. In view of the possible intent of Congress as expressed in the Broomfield amendment,2 I believe it essential that you be informed of the course of action now proposed and trust that you will, if you deem it appropriate, inform the President informally of our intention to negotiate this $10 million loan. While the authorizing bill of the House of Representatives on Foreign Assistance for 1964 is not yet law, the provision it contains on Indonesia may be construed by the President as an expression of the intention of the Congress. Hence, the specific approval by the President would remove any possible future doubt that our proposed action is consistent with his determination, that it is in the national interest of the United States that this action is taken.

S. J. Janow

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. IV. Confidential.

1 Attachment to Document 312.

2 On August 7, the House Foreign Affairs Committee adopted an amendment introduced by William S. Broomfield (R–Michigan) to the Foreign Aid Bill cutting all economic assistance to Indonesia unless the President determined that continued aid was in the U.S. national interest.

314. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 314. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, September 19, 1963, 6 p.m.

590. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 568; Deptel 319.1 I have just come from two hour session with Pres Sukarno and his Cabinet with result summarized reftel: Sukarno assured me situation was under control, promised issue public expression regret, said he “deplored” damage that had been done, assumed responsibility and would compensate victims in full. With aid Ministers Leimena, Saleh and Djuanda, he drafted statement while I was present, did not read it to me but assured me it would satisfy us. I asked him to be certain it did not “take away with one hand what it gave with the other”; he couldn’t pat his people on back for their intentions and expect his expression of regret to be taken seriously.

Sukarno, sitting with several of his Ministers, was in savage mood when I arrived at 7:00 am. There were no exchanges of courtesy. None of usual banter. Operating perhaps on theory best defense was offense, in response my question as whether situation was now under control, Sukarno entered into tirade on subject Tunku’s actions. “When did head of state ever grind his heel into state seal of another nation?” he demanded. He referred to his own photos having been torn down and stamped on. “My people are angry,” he wound up. “This is Asia, 1963. I too am boiling inside.”

We had a hot exchange for a few moments. I told him in effect two wrongs don’t make a right. Further, Brit in Djakarta could hardly be held responsible for what Tunku did in Kuala Lumpur. This kind of action and reaction made no sense among civilized human beings. He made a few remarks about Brit no longer ruling world but finally calmed down somewhat when I said I had come to see him in three capacities this morning: first, as Dean of Diplomatic Corps; second, as American Amb; third, as friend of him and his country.

I then proceeded to make all points in reftels, expanding on them as seemed useful. For example, I asked him how any members of Diplomatic Corps could feel safe if policed mob could get out of hand as mob did yesterday. He reminded me that no American property had been damaged. While acknowledging this, I took opportunity to protest painting of hostile signs on Chancery gates previously reported, said American people found this very difficult to understand when we were exerting all effort to help Indonesia. This, however, was not point. Every time govt disagreed with GOI, was its property to be damaged or destroyed?

Sukarno did not like this. He took refuge in repetition of statement his people were very angry, then quickly changed subject to President’s statement endorsing Malaysia. “Why did Pres Kennedy have to make statement so soon?” he asked. “He knows how we Indos feel.” We then had an unprofitable exchange in which I again reviewed our position on Malaysia issue, told Sukarno I had given Subandrio ample advance notice of President’s intention to issue statement. By this time, Sukarno was cooling down and by end of conversation he had recovered some of his usual bounce. Meanwhile, as we talked, conversation was being continually interrupted by new arrivals until all principal members of Cabinet were present except top military chiefs. Finally, Gen Umar, Djakarta Army Commander and Police Chief arrived, faces splashed with fatigue. They had been up all night. Sukarno asked them for report whereupon they certified situation was now completely under control.

Sukarno whose earlier response to my request for assurances had been, “I will do my utmost,” now apparently removed implied qualification as he turned to me and said, “You see, everything is under control now.” He then proceeded to prepare statement.

I then requested series of specific actions to facilitate evacuation, such as clearances for planes, passage through immigration of people whose documentation had been burned, guaranty my security for Brit planes evacuating personnel, both in air and on ground, etc. With entire Cabinet present, Sukarno was able to rip off instructions to official concerned on spot.

Gloomy atmosphere prevailed among Cabinet Mins throughout session, their smiles at Sukarno’s occasional sallies somewhat forced. It was obvious most of them (left-winger Sudibjo an exception) felt ashamed and disturbed at events previous day. As I left, Gen Sumarno, Gov of Djakarta, who also had been up all night, took my arm and asked me to present his deep regrets to Brit Amb for outrageous events.

Comment: I have attempted to give a little of flavor of meeting because it was good illustration of problem of dealing with Sukarno. Question remains unanswered as to Sukarno’s complicity in events. At one point during conversation, he told me he had given order to Army to stop the rioting yesterday afternoon. I replied, “Yes, Mr. President, but by time your order was issued much of the damage had been done. Why did you not issue order earlier?” Question was left hanging in midair. Also, even after order was issued, Umar was slow in response. Shell properties in suburb were burned during evening.

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files; POL 25–3 INDON. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated immediate to Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, Singapore, USUN, Canberra, and CINCPAC.

1 On the afternoon of September 18, a mob of 5,000 burned and sacked the British Embassy in Djakarta. Indonesian police made no effort to prevent the violence and firefighters were unable to get through the crowds to put out the fire. (Telegram 563 from Djakarta; ibid.) In telegram 568 from Djakarta, September 18, Jones proposed that, as Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, he should protest the hooliganism and demand assurances (“for what they are worth”) that nothing of this kind would be allowed to happen again. In telegram 319 to Djakarta, the Department concurred fully and suggested that Jones ask for a public apology, “unmodified by claptrap about aroused feelings of Indonesian populace.” The Department suggested that Jones, at his discretion, drive home the point that mobs under PKI direction were a blot on Indonesia’s reputation. (Both ibid.)

315. Memorandum of Conversation 315. Memorandum of ConversationSource

New York, September 24, 1963, 10 a.m.

SecDel/MC/36

SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, September 1963

SUBJECT

Indonesian Relations with British and Malaysians

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. Secretary of State

Ambassador Yost

Robert L. Kinney, Regional Adviser on Far Eastern Affairs

Foreign H.E. Subandrio, Foreign Minister of Indonesia

H.E. Dr. Zairin Zain, Ambassador of Indonesia to the U.S.

The Secretary said that the Department had become increasingly concerned over recent developments in Djakarta. He specified the disturbances against the British and Malaysian representation, the flagrant disregard by the GOI of British legation rights (and, since Ambassador Jones is Dean of the Diplomatic Corps in Indonesia, we feel a direct responsibility in this matter), the illegal take-over of British enterprises and, most recently, the GOI’s break in trade relations with Malaysia.

The Foreign Minister promptly deplored the mob actions and emotional reaction which had led to excesses. He said, however, that much of what had taken place had occurred after his departure from Djakarta, and he pleaded lack of full detailed information.

He maintained that much of what had happened was due to “emotionalism” rather than reason.

He agreed with the Secretary that the break in trade relations would harm Indonesia more than Malaya. He suggested, somewhat uneasily, that perhaps the Indonesians had no choice except to take the initiative. He said that he understood that the Tunku, in announcing a break in diplomatic relations had indicated that this would include trade.

Minister Subandrio volunteered that Indonesia would not raise the Malaysian question in the UNGA except to refer to GOI posture in the delegate’s speech.

He said that he was sure that the GOI take-over of British enterprises was purely protective in nature and not a move toward nationalization, which he termed “not in Indonesian interest.” However, he said that he had been away and could not assess fully from this distance whether there was now a “political” mood for nationalization.

In response to the Secretary’s question as to when the British firms might be returned to their regular operators, the Minister said the GOI would have to “go slow” due to “strong” domestic pressures.

The Secretary inquired whether the Indonesian people wouldn’t follow the lead of Sukarno if he chose to rectify that situation promptly. The Minister said “Sukarno can’t take a straight path.”

The Secretary said that he was rather surprised that the Indonesians were so antagonistic toward the British in relation to their efforts to withdraw from their former colonial holdings. He asked if the Indonesians had ever expressed territorial interest in British Borneo.

The Minister denied that Indonesia had any Borneo ambitions. He said that Indonesians had been “humiliated” by British treatment of them in relation to implementation of the Manila agreement. He said that emotional reaction was a major factor.

The Secretary asked about the strength of the PKI within Indonesian Army ranks. The Minister indicated that this is negligible, especially since most troops now are quartered in barracks rather than in Kampangs (villages) where the PKI previously had better access to them. He said that the PKI is becoming split and that while 90% of the Party previously supported Peking, the Soviet line adherents were increasing in strength.

The Secretary said that recent developments such as the economic break with Malaysia, which would inevitably dry up the economy, cripple the balance of payments and stifle trade, appear to be just the reverse of what is called for in the light of Indonesia’s national interest. He said that if the area is kept in turmoil this can have very serious results. The integrity of Indonesia with her 3,000 populated islands depends upon peace and stability. He said that no one nation in the region has a greater stake in peace than Indonesia.

However, the Secretary pointed out, the decisions on these questions are Indonesia’s. He repeated our concern about recent developments and took occasion to remind the Minister that the United States feels special concern about the status of legation rights. He said that we would be taking an active interest in this subject both through the Embassy in Djakarta and internationally.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Kinney on September 25 and approved in S on September 30. The meeting was held at USUN.

316. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 316. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, September 24, 1963, 3:51 p.m.

363. Interagency group today agreed on following interim position re US aid programs to Indonesia, subject to your comments: 1. Negotiation or other action with GOI on proposed $10 million stabilization loan to be deferred.

2. IMF will be informed of USG opinion that Fund should be in no hurry adjust credit ceilings and reinstate GOI eligibility under standby arrangement. IMF will be encouraged to raise with GOI questions as to Indonesian ability to meet conditions of stabilization program as result their recent actions.

3. AID and Agriculture are undertaking to identify and segregate those PL 480 deliveries considered to meet existing commitments as opposed to those attributable to stabilization effort.

4. MAP deliveries will be considered as previously committed assistance and will be continued, with exception weapons and ammunition now in pipeline or scheduled for early shipment. Latter shipments will be halted pending review.

5. All scheduled shipments weapons and ammunition for MOBRIG be deferred. Other program assistance to MOBRIG will be continued.

6. Other ongoing AID activities will be continued for present, including DG and PL 480 local currency loan actions.

7. License applications for all categories items to be purchased by Indonesian Military through US commercial channels will be subject careful scrutiny. Some will probably be deferred on ad hoc basis.

Request Country Team comments foregoing, and Country Team recommendations other actions which might be taken.1 None of foregoing should be disclosed to GOI at this time.2

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) INDON. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham; cleared in substance by AID, Treasury, and Agriculture, and in draft by OSD/ISA; and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Manila, Kuala Lumpur, Canberra, London, Singapore, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 In telegram 773 from Djakarta, September 28, the Country Team responded that it would be a “serious mistake” to publicly attack or isolate Sukarno. While the team anticipated that the situation in Indonesia would worsen, its principal short-term goal was to retain the U.S. position in Indonesia, maintain contact with key Indonesian leaders, and stall for time when the situation and leadership would make stabilization and development possible. As for the specific recommendations in paragraphs 1–7, the Country Team concurred. (Ibid.)

2 In a press conference on November 14, President Kennedy stated that the United States had suspended aid to Indonesia. Following the press conference, the Department of State spokesman pointed out to correspondents that the President was referring to suspension of current consideration of U.S. contributions to long-range multilateral stabilization; existing bilateral programs were continuing. (Telegram 566 to Djakarta, November 14; ibid.) For the transcript of the press conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 845–853.

317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, October 24, 1963, 4:32 p.m.

503. Eyes only for Ambassador from the Acting Secretary. We are all very conscious of the tremendous burden you have carried since you became Ambassador to Indonesia and especially over the past few critical months. As there now appears to be a momentary lull in Indonesia-Malaysia dispute, it would seem a good opportunity for you to get a well-deserved rest. I want you to know of my personal appreciation of the tremendous job you are doing under very difficult circumstances. We all were greatly impressed with resourcefulness and judgment that you used on your own initiative at the time of the lamentable events of mid-September.

I am sure you share our confidence that Frank Galbraith could carry on for a few weeks. Would you prefer to take a month in Baguio or to come to U.S.? In any event you should take Marylou with you at Government expense. If you decide to come here, I know we would all benefit from a direct report from you on your view of the future of Indonesia and the Maphilindo area. We would limit your consultations to a short period and insist that you take a rest to refresh yourself for the difficult task you will face when you return to Djakarta.

It has occurred to us that because of your special relationship with Sukarno your recall for consultations might be a useful way to bring home some truths to him. If you decide to come here, an approach to him along following lines might be useful. Tell him you are being called home for consultations; that you know only that I want to confer with you at this moment on Indonesia-U.S. relations. You might speculate that you will be asked to advise on problems with which U.S. Government is faced, i.e. our desire to maintain cordial relations with Indonesia and to help create a strong viable state working for stability in the area and the dilemma which we face because of his current policies. In short, that you will be faced with task of explaining what Indonesia wants and where it is heading. You should say that you are sure you will be asked to explain why, if Indonesia really follows an active independent policy, it is deliberately creating instability in the Maphilindo area. You might ask Sukarno what he would say if he had the opportunity personally to explain (and justify) present Indonesian policy to the highest officials in the U.S. Government. You might mention that the “neo-colonialism” argument is not convincing here and that we do not believe 100 million Indonesians are being “surrounded” by ten million Malaysians. We know that Indonesia can be a forceful influence for the principles of “Pantjasila”, with which we agree. Can Sukarno reconcile his current policy and actions with the principles of “Pantjasila”?

If you believe a different approach to Sukarno would be more effective, please let me know.1

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Bell; cleared by Harriman, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration William J. Crockett, and in draft by Hilsman; and approved by Ball.

1 In telegram 965 from Djakarta, October 26, Jones agreed that his recall could prove productive by allowing him to have a serious talk with Sukarno in long-range terms before leaving. Jones suggested a departure of November 5, with a stop-over at Manila and Honolulu for consultations. He would arrive in Washington on November 9–10. (Ibid.)

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, October 28, 1963, 3:03 p.m.

509. Your 973 and 975.1 Agree fully your proposed approach to Sukarno. You may tell him President still hopes make trip to Asia in first part 1964. He should be left under no illusion, however, that Presidential visit possible while Indonesia in state hostile confrontation against Malaysia and UK.

In addition, should be stressed that future prospects as well as current behavior must be taken into account in determining feasibility Presidential visit early 1964. Visit could not take place if there were any indications Sukarno temporarily refraining from belligerent acts and had engineered makeshift settlement with Malaysia simply to provide suitable climate, while intending resume confrontation afterwards. To contrary, there would have to be reasonable assurance that Sukarno would not cause embarrassment by engaging in provocative actions (either against Malaysia or in other field) within few weeks or months after visit.

This would require enough solid progress in resolving Indonesia-Malaysia dispute to demonstrate that Sukarno really committed so thoroughly to peaceful settlement that any reversal unlikely. Would also require achievement fairly clear understanding among Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines as to means they intend follow in reaching final settlement. In addition, there could be no signs any imminent Indonesian moves against Timor, foreign enterprises in Indonesia, etc.

We recognize that foregoing will not be easy to get across to Sukarno, but believe it essential that he be aware of these conditions both to dispel illusions and to derive maximum leverage from his strong desire for visit.

We have no objection text proposed press release (your 975). Dept does not plan issue statement re your return but will respond press inquiries by drawing on text your release. Please advise date and time its issuance.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA. Secret; Immediate; Eyes Only. Drafted by Ingraham, cleared in draft by Forrestal and Cuthell and by Sullivan, and approved by Rice.

1 In telegrams 973 and 975, October 28, Jones suggested that he be authorized to inform Sukarno that President Kennedy would only be able to visit Indonesia if tensions were eased with the United Kingdom and Malaysia, and if Indonesia began to assume constructive leadership in Southeast Asia as befitted its status as the largest and richest nation of the area. Otherwise, Jones proposed to tell Sukarno, the U.S. Congress and public would not understand the trip. Such an approach would exploit Sukarno’s intense desire for a Kennedy visit and put him on notice that continued confrontation would make the trip impossible. Jones also submitted a draft press release explaining his visit. (Ibid.)

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of State 319. Telegram From the Embassy in Indonesia to the Department of StateSource

Djakarta, November 4, 1963, 7 p.m.

1012. Pres Sukarno during farewell talk with him today denied categorically that he had expansionist designs or ambitions, was Communist or controlled by Indo Communist Party, or was considering embarking on military adventure.

Sukarno was upset over report of Zablocki1 which was summarized in Antara this morning, commented on and seemed genuinely hurt by fact committee had reached conclusions re Indonesia without visiting country and referred to successful visit of West German Pres Luebke as illustration extent to which visit here changed people’s views of Sukarno and Indonesia.

Sukarno also raised question of CIA activities in Indonesia and said he had been given evidence of CIA plan to topple him and his govt [1-1/2 lines of source text and footnote not declassified]. I denied this categorically and asked Sukarno what evidence consisted of, pointing out likelihood of provocation.

[8-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] I pointed out that Sukarno had had ample evidence that Pres Kennedy and present administration in Washington were interested in helping, not hurting GOI. If there were such activities, I would be aware of them. There were none, I repeated. Sukarno acknowledged he was convinced that Pres Kennedy and US Amb were not working against him. However, he was aware from the past that CIA often participated in activities of which the Amb was not aware and which even perhaps the White House was not aware. I replied that this was not true in Indonesia, indeed, if it ever had been true, it was no longer true under present administration. [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

I told Sukarno I was glad to hear his positive denial of any expansionist ambitions because, as he would appreciate, I would be faced with the task of explaining Indonesia and where it was heading when I returned to Washington. Indeed, I desired to ask him to share frankly with me his short-range and long-range objectives in order that I could present his views clearly upon my return. I emphasized that many people in Washington were genuinely puzzled about Sukarno’s intentions and that the US Govt faced a real dilemma because while on the one hand we wanted to help Indonesia, on the other he was making it extremely difficult for us to do so. I said that I would like to see the next two months bring about an easing of tensions and an alteration in the situation such as to permit Pres Kennedy to visit Indonesia, something I knew he wanted very much to do but which was unfortunately impossible at the present time.

Sukarno said his long-range objectives I know perfectly well—to establish a just and prosperous society in Indonesia—to develop his country. The Pantjasila, which he had written himself, was the basis of his philosophy. As for short-range objectives, he had two in current situation: (1) to insure implementation of Manila agreements2 and (2) to reorient Indonesia’s trade pattern so that most of services rendered in Singapore in the past would be handled by Indonesia itself. Regarding the first, he was quite willing to recognize Malaysia if UN survey in accordance with procedures agreed at Manila came out favorably to Malaysia. I reminded him that he had been talking about crushing Malaysia ever since (and before) UN survey had been completed and that this was not conducive to reduction of tensions in area. He admitted this but referred to his Jogjakarta speech and said that this was the position on which he stood—he was ready to accept Malaysia on this basis. He emphasized his position was not the product of expansionist designs but that as always he took the part of people who were struggling for freedom and unless he was convinced that people of Kalimantan wanted Malaysia, it would be difficult for him to accept it. UN survey, curtailed as it was and not in accordance with Manila agreements, could not be accepted as genuine ascertainment of will of people.

I had argued this with him so many times before that it seemed unprofitable to pursue this further, and I turned to another topic, that of internal affairs. I asked him whether he was planning to reshuffle his Cabinet in the near future and whether I could be sure he would not include Communists in the new Cabinet. Sukarno replied that he was not planning to reshuffle his Cabinet in the near future although he would of course have to do so some time. When he did, he could assure me there would be no Communists in the Cabinet.

I adverted to basic questions of policy in area and said it seemed to me that both our countries had everything to gain and nothing to lose by close relations with each other. I pointed out that since Pantjasila was in harmony with American philosophy and that our basic regional interests should be identical (mutual interest in containing ChiComs), it seemed to me that over the years relationships between our two countries should grow ever closer. This, I emphasized, made it of great importance to ease current tensions and resolve problems which created them. Sukarno said in effect that he was ready but how about Tunku. I replied I was hopeful that Kho initiative would succeed.

I referred to Indonesian show of force on Kalimantan border, said I would undoubtedly be asked about Sukarno’s intentions with respect to use of this force, and asked him frankly to tell me what he had in mind. He assured me that he did not plan any military action. If he continued to oppose Malaysia, he would do so through peaceful means, he indicated.

Interview ended with statement by Sukarno that he was counting on Pres Kennedy coming to Indonesia. He repeated that he would give him “the grandest reception anyone ever received here.”

Jones

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 INDON. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

1 Reference is to a mission report by the Chairman of the Far East and Pacific Subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Clement J. Zablocki, which noted Sukarno was “emotionally unstable” and motivated by crowd reaction. The report also noted that Sukarno’s reliance on the PKI limited his freedom of action and decision and that his success in obtaining West Irian encouraged him to regard Borneo as another West Irian. The report suggested Sukarno’s expansionism was a way of masking Indonesia’s sagging economy and questioned continuing U.S. aid to Indonesia, no matter how small. (Telegram 591 to Djakarta, November 22; ibid.)

2 As a result of the “summit” meeting of Sukarno, Philippine President Macapagal, and Malaysian Prime Minister Abdul Rahman in Manila, July 31–August 5, 1963, the three agreed to ask U.N. Secretary-General U Thant to send teams to the Borneo territories of the prospective federation of Malaysia to appraise the wishes of the inhabitants on self-determination. Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia also sent observers with these teams.

320. Memorandum of Conversation 320. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 19, 1963, 5–5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Visits: The President to Indonesia; General Nasution of Indonesia to Washington

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Howard P. Jones, American Ambassador to Indonesia

Roger Hilsman, Assistant Secretary, Far Eastern Affairs

Michael Forrestal, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Ambassador Jones reported that President Sukarno set great store by the prospect of a visit by the President to Indonesia and that this represented our best leverage in the current situation. The Ambassador suggested that we tell Sukarno a visit would be impossible without an easing of tensions in Southeast Asia and that Ambassador Jones propose a package deal to re-establish a political climate in which a visit would be possible. (Mr. Hilsman could follow up on this approach in Indonesia and Malaysia during a December trip.) The package might encompass the following:

Request assurances from Sukarno of (a) willingness to settle the Malaysian dispute peacefully and engage in tripartite discussions for that purpose, and (b) agreement to withdraw his military forces from the Kalimantan border (except such as could be regarded as reasonable for defensive purposes) and to cease active support of guerrilla actions in Malaysian territory.

In return for this, the U.S. Government would (a) use its influence to bring about a tripartite meeting to settle the Malaysian dispute and restore normal relations between the nations concerned, (b) assuming a settlement is reached, resuscitate the multilateral program for aid to the stabilization of the Indonesian economy, (c) in connection with b provide up to 150,000 tons of rice to Indonesia, (d) plan for a visit of the President as soon as practicable.

The President inquired what Sukarno would accept by way of a settlement. Ambassador Jones replied that no one knew what formula the three Asian leaders could agree upon, that the limits of the politically possible within each nation and the outlines of a viable solution could only be determined by discussion among representatives of the nations concerned. The thing was to get them talking to each other again. However, he suggested there were various possibilities that might meet the situation, particularly when all concerned had everything to gain and nothing to lose. One possibility was to follow the West Irian precedent. Tunku Abdul Rahman might suggest that he hold a plebiscite in Borneo after five or six years to determine whether the people wanted to remain in Malaysia. The Indonesians could hardly turn this down. It would have the virtue of saving Sukarno’s face without giving him a victory.

The President indicated agreement with the general line of reasoning and approach. He said he would be willing to go to Indonesia if a political settlement were obtained. In response to a question by Assistant Secretary Hilsman, he said he was thinking about April or May. The President thought he could be gone a total of 16 days.

There was some discussion of alternatives if the Indonesian situation did not improve. Ambassador Jones pointed out that Sukarno would take it as a personal snub if Indonesia were passed up and reminded the President of the difficulties which followed President Eisenhower’s failure to visit Indonesia. The President said he might limit his Asian visit to Japan, possibly including Korea, under these circumstances.

General Nasution’s Visit to Washington

Ambassador Jones urged the President to receive General Nasution when he comes to Washington the week of November 24, pointing out that he was a likely successor to President Sukarno and one of the most powerful men in Indonesia. The President agreed to do so on Tuesday, November 26.

Summary of Action:

Presidential authorization to Ambassador Jones to approach Sukarno pursuant to the discussion with the President in paragraphs 3 and 4 to be sent by cable to Djakarta, coincident with the Ambassador’s return. The authorizing cable to be prepared by the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs shortly before the Ambassador’s departure and sent with White House concurrence.1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 10/63–11/63. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The times of the meeting are taken from Document 321 and the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) The source text is labeled “Part I of Two Parts”; Part II is printed as Document 321:

1 Such a cable has not been found. In telegram 590 to Djakarta, November 22, Jones asked Galbraith to pass on a personal message to Sukarno. Jones’ message stated that the Ambassador had explored the question of independent CIA activity with Rusk, McCone, and President Kennedy. Jones could give categoric assurances both officially and personally that there was no truth to the allegations that the CIA was out to topple Sukarno. In this telegram, Jones stated that he would discuss with Sukarno the conversation with the just assassinated Kennedy when Jones returned to Indonesia. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 INDON)

321. Memorandum of Conversation 321. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 19, 1963, 5–5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Indonesia: PL 480 Rice; Lockheed Contract to Service Hercules Aircraft (C–130)

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document 320.]

P. L. 480 Rice

Ambassador Jones said the Indonesians, due to a poor harvest as a result of drought, needed rice badly. They had asked for 60,000 tons. The President asked how much money this represented and was informed about $8,400,000. Ambassador Jones urged that this be approved in principle but suggested it might be easier to work out in two stages—approximately 40,000 tons under the existing three-year agreement, the balance under a new agreement to be subsequently negotiated. The President approved this arrangement, provided that the 40,000 tons under the existing agreements could be supplied without giving the impression we had reached a new judgment and provided the additional agreement be conditional on our making some progress on the political front. He further suggested that this matter be handled with a minimum of publicity.1

Lockheed Contract to Service Hercules Aircraft—(C–130)

A problem had arisen, Ambassador Jones reported, in connection with renewal of the Lockheed contract for training, repair, servicing and supplying of spare parts for the Hercules aircraft. The contract would involve the sum of $5,500,000. Because these aircraft had been used in transporting troops to the Borneo border, some questions were being raised in Congress. Mr. Hilsman added that the matter had also been raised in the British Parliament. The question arose because Lockheed had approached the State Department to sound out whether approval of export licenses for spare parts might be anticipated if the new contract were to be negotiated.

Ambassador Jones urged that we informally approve the contract for these reasons: (1) this was a commercial transaction, with no government aid involved; (2) if we withheld approval, future sales of American equipment to Indonesia would be seriously affected; (3) we would not be denying this type of equipment to Indonesia since Russian, French and British aircraft of similar capabilities were available; (4) Indonesian use of our equipment gives us some measure of control.

The President wondered whether the matter could be postponed a month or two or whether we could proceed by simply amending the existing contract. Either of these courses of action would be preferable. It was agreed to explore these possibilities further. The President requested that the matter be brought back to him again before final disposition.

Summary of Actions:

FE to consult with Agriculture and other offices and agencies concerned in implementation of decision, paragraph 1;

FE to consult with Lockheed representatives re paragraph 4 to determine whether the decision can be postponed or, alternatively, whether contract could be amended with minimum of publicity.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 10/63–11/63. Secret. Drafted by Jones. The ending time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part II of II Parts”; Part I is printed as Document 320.

1 President Johnson subsequently approved this arrangement. (Memorandum from Read to McGeorge Bundy, November 29, with notation that the President approved; Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 15–8 INDON)

322. Editorial Note 322. Editorial Note

General Nasution visited Washington November 24–30, 1963, primarily to attend the funeral of President Kennedy, who had been assassinated in Dallas, Texas, on November 22.

In telegrams 1050 and 1053 from Djakarta, November 9, Galbraith provided background for the Nasution visit. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 INDON) The Department of State recommended that President Johnson see Nasution, offering the following assessment:

“Aside from Sukarno himself, Nasution is the most influential person in Indonesia, and one whom we have come to rely on as the chief counterweight to Sukarno’s more extreme policies. He is by far the most likely successor to Sukarno, either as President or as the power behind a civilian figurehead. While he is a strong nationalist and has taken a hard line in Indonesia’s dispute with Malaysia (which we are trying to modify during this visit), he is the closest thing we have to a friend in Sukarno’s court. We are anxious to strengthen our influence with him at this particular time in Indonesia’s development. If Indonesian public order were to deteriorate sharply, he would control the power necessary to contain the communists and would use it.

“He has come to Washington from a week in Moscow, where he was given red-carpet treatment including a dinner hosted by Khrushchev.” (Ibid.)

The Department of State also submitted to Bundy talking papers for the President’s discussion. (Ibid.) The Central Intelligence Agency prepared a Special Report, SC No. 00618/63C, November 15, entitled “Indonesia’s General Nasution.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 10/63–11/63)

Nasution met with Under Secretary Ball on November 26 to discuss the dispute with Malaysia. (Memorandum of conversation, November 26; Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA) On the same day, Nasution met with Harriman and discussed Malaysia, overseas Chinese, spare parts for the Indonesia Air Force, and the civic action program. (Memoranda of conversation, November 26; ibid., POL INDON–MALAYSIA, DEF 12 INDON, and DEF 14 INDON) On November 28, Nasution met with Deputy DCI Lieutenant General Marshall S. Carter, William Colby, and other CIA officials. During this conversation, Nasution gave a frank and detailed exposition of Indonesian paramilitary training of Dayak, Chinese, and Malay refugees in Sarawak. Carter assured Nasution that reports of CIA attempts to overthrow Sukarno were baseless. (Memorandum of conversation, November 28; ibid., POL 7 INDON) On November 29, before meeting at the White House with President Johnson (see Document 323), Nasution talked briefly with Harriman about Malaysia. (Memorandum of conversation, November 29; Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–MALAYSIA) Nasution discussed the civic action program and the dispute with Malaysia with Robert McNamara at the Pentagon on November 29. (Memorandum of conversation, November 29; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 66 A 4567, Indonesia 092–333, 1963)

323. Memorandum of Conversation 323. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 29, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Call on the President by General Nasution

PARTICIPANTS

Indonesia General Abdul H. Nasution, Minister of Defense

Dr. Sudjarwo, Second Deputy Foreign Minister

Dr. Zairin Zain, Indonesian Ambassador to the U.S.

United States The President

Under Secretary of State W. Averell Harriman

Ambassador Howard P. Jones

The President greeted General Nasution cordially, said he knew President Sukarno well, having met him several times. He recalled that he had had luncheon with Sukarno at the executive mansion. He said he would never forget what Sukarno had said during one of his visits to Washington, that it was vital to ensure “that the free remain free”.

General Nasution outlined the purpose of his mission to the United States. He was, of course, representing President Sukarno at the funeral services for President Kennedy, and he expressed the deep condolences of his President and the Indonesian people over the tragic death of President Kennedy. He explained that his trip had been planned originally as an acceptance of General Taylor’s invitation to visit the United States and, particularly, to provide an opportunity for an exchange of views to achieve a better understanding between the leaders of the two nations. During the course of his conversations here, he had explained the Indonesian position on Malaysia and had discussed U. S. military aid to Indonesia, especially as related to the civic action program of the Indonesian military. He felt satisfied that an increase in mutual understanding had resulted from these discussions.

The President inquired as to whether the Malaysian dispute was being settled.

General Nasution replied that he saw no immediate prospect of a settlement. He said Indonesia would welcome a meeting of representatives of the three nations concerned to work out a formula for a settlement. But he pointed out that the Malaysian government had not been responsive to the desires of both the Philippines and Indonesia to start talking. Malaysia is insisting on prior conditions. He blamed the British for the basic difficulties which had originated when, in the midst of the United Nations survey of opinion in North Borneo to determine whether the people wanted to join Malaysia or not, the British had announced that Malaysia would be established September 16 whether the people of Borneo liked it or not. This had put Indonesia in an untenable position. There had been trouble over the observers as well as differences over the procedures which had been followed. In brief, neither the spirit nor the letter of agreements as to procedure reached at Manila had been adhered to and the Indonesian government could not accept the result. Nevertheless, the Indonesian government was always ready to meet to discuss differences with other Nations. The Foreign Minister had gone to the Colombo Plan meeting at Bangkok recently in the expectation of talking informally with the Foreign Minister of the Philippines and Malaysia. Unfortunately, the Malaysian Foreign Minister had left Bangkok as soon as he was informed that Dr. Subandrio of Indonesia would be coming. The Indonesian position now was that a tripartite meeting should be arranged as soon as possible, in accordance with the principles of Maphilindo.

The President told General Nasution that we had a great and continuing interest in Indonesia, and reminded him of our role in the West New Guinea settlement. He referred to the Indonesian military buildup on the Borneo border and the support to guerrillas and told General Nasution that we might be able to help if he could pull his troops off the border and stop supporting the guerrillas. The President expressed the strong hope that this military action would not go too far and made clear his disquiet at the situation.

General Nasution replied that the military buildup was defensive. He said that he had less than one-fourth the number of troops on the border that the British had on the other side. “I have one battalion, the British one brigade”, he said, pointing out that the latter were largely Gurkhas.

The President pointed out that this type of situation could become quite explosive and that this was not in the interest of Indonesia or the Free World. He urged that the three nations get together to solve this problem and expressed the hope that this could be one of the results following upon General Nasution’s visit to this country. The President said that a solution to this problem would enable us to help Indonesia more instead of less. He said he felt strongly that the Malaysian dispute was an Asian problem to be settled by those concerned but we were, of course, very much interested in seeing a solution develop. He told General Nasution that the policies of the United States Government toward Indonesia would continue unchanged.

Secretary Harriman pointed out that President Sukarno had felt a very special relationship existing between President Kennedy and himself.

The President said that he wanted President Sukarno to feel that the same friendship existed between himself and President Sukarno as had been true in the case of the late President, and he asked General Nasution to bear that message to President Sukarno.

The meeting concluded with a reiteration by the President of his conviction that a tripartite meeting should be held as soon as possible to explore the possibilities for a political settlement and that this settlement should be an Asian settlement worked out by representatives of the nations concerned.

General Nasution expressed his appreciation for the time the President had given him when he knew the extraordinary pressures under which the President was laboring in this difficult period.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON–US. Drafted by Jones and approved by the White House on December 4 and in M on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House.

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, December 7, 1963, 2:26 p.m.

626. Embtels 1207, 1172.1

Nasution Conversations.

In talks here, Nasution, as expected, concentrated on explaining Indo side of Malaysian dispute. He repeated familiar arguments: Malaysia under British domination and not truly independent; UN survey not carried out in accord with Manila Agreements and therefore invalid; Malaysia not a viable state but would fall under domination of resident Chinese and thus provide Communist Chinese beachhead. Nasution frankly admitted Indonesians were training anti-Malaysian guerrillas in Borneo (“about 3000”) but claimed that only a few of them Chinese. He conceded that Indo nationals had participated in guerrilla penetrations into Sarawak but asserted that they acting as individual volunteers and that no organized Indo military forces involved. We expressed our deep concern over Indo military actions, adding that we might be better able extend help to GOI if it pulled its troops out of border areas and stopped aiding guerrillas. Nasution said Indo military had no intention engage British forces since it realized British too strong.

Nasution not optimistic re peaceful settlement in short run but saw ultimate settlement possible through tripartite meeting in context Maphilindo. Emphasized Indos willing start talks with Malaysians at any time but would insist no preconditions, which he knew Tunku would not accept now. Gave no indication Indos prepared ease confrontation so as to improve climate for negotiation.

We told Nasution we wanted see dispute settled by Asian countries involved. We willing help in background to this end but precluded from doing so by current Indo posture. We pointed out our mutual interest in defense against Chicoms. We expressed hope that Indos would work toward peaceful settlement through tripartite talks and would create conditions permitting such talks by halting its military and propaganda activities against Malaysia.

Memcons other discussions being forwarded by pouch.2

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 INDON. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Freeman, cleared by Bell, and approved by Rice.

1 In telegram 1207, December 7, Jones stated he planned to meet with Subandrio to discuss U.S. aid. In telegram 1172, Jones asked for a summary of Nasution’s discussions in Washington, especially with President Johnson. (Ibid., AID (US) INDON and POL AUSTINDON)

2 See Document 322.

325. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 325. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President JohnsonSource

Washington, December 16, 1963.

Appointment with Ambassador Howard P. Jones

You have scheduled a brief meeting with Ambassador Jones at 12:30 p.m. on Wednesday1 just prior to his return to Djakarta. Jones has been our Ambassador to Indonesia for six and a half years. Not only is this an unusually long time, but also it spans a period during which U.S.-Indonesian relations have fluctuated from the all-time low, following our involvement in 1958 in an anti-Sukarno revolution, to the high of last summer when it looked as though we had Sukarno’s interest directed toward internal economic problems rather than foreign adventures.

In September, however, the Indonesians started their policy of “confrontation” against Malaysia, broke relations and suspended trade with Singapore. This has knocked the Indonesian stabilization program into a cocked hat; and we have temporarily given up our efforts to organize Free World assistance to the Indonesian economy. We are, however, continuing and even increasing our PL 480 sales of rice because of the food shortages which have recently developed. We are also continuing the civic action aspects of our military aid program.

Our present policy is to maintain as much contact as we can with the Indonesians and Sukarno in particular, while we try to damp down the incipient fighting between the Indonesians and the British which is developing on the North Borneo border. As part of this program, we have been alternately warning Sukarno of the dangers to his country of allowing hostilities to escalate, reminding him at the same time that any prospect for increased economic assistance from the Western World will depend upon his abandoning his policy of confrontation.

I attach a draft of a letter for you to give to Ambassador Jones, if it meets your approval.2

Ambassador Jones will probably ask for authorization to tell Sukarno orally that you are aware of President Kennedy’s hopes for a visit to Indonesia early in 1964, and that while you obviously cannot under present circumstance contemplate a trip to the Far East this year, you do have hopes for 1965—national and international politics permitting.

President Kennedy, at one of his last appointments, asked Ambassador Jones to stay on in Djakarta until next fall; but the Ambassador and the Department of State understand completely that you may wish to review this decision.

MV Forrestal3

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Correspondence with Ambassadors. Confidential.

1 December 18; see Document 326.

2 Harriman sent President Johnson a briefing memorandum for his discussion with Jones. Attached to it was a draft personal letter from Johnson to Sukarno assuring Indonesia that U.S. policies toward it would not change and encouraging settlement of Indonesia’s dispute with Malaysia. The draft was slightly revised and signed by Johnson on December 18 and carried back by Jones to Indonesia for delivery to Sukarno. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

326. Memorandum of Conversation 326. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, December 18, 1963, 12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Call on the President by Ambassador Jones

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Governor Harriman, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

The Honorable Howard P. Jones, United States Ambassador to Indonesia

Mr. Michael Forrestal, The White House

The President opened the conversation by stating that he had signed the letter to President Sukarno, a draft of which had been submitted to him, and handed Ambassador Jones the letter. The President observed that he remembered President Sukarno very well and his famous phrase regarding keeping the free free. Sometimes he wondered whether the closer we get to Sukarno the more difficult he becomes.

Ambassador Jones said that in his opinion the extent of our influence in Indonesia was likely to be measured by the rapport to be established between President Johnson and President Sukarno. He referred to President Sukarno’s frequent reference to “international relations being personal relations” and urged that President Johnson arrange to meet President Sukarno as soon as possible.

President Johnson said that although he, of course, could not visit Indonesia in 1964 and thus follow up the plan which the late President Kennedy had under consideration, he was hoping to visit Indonesia in 1965.

Ambassador Jones pointed out that the Malaysia situation had reached an impasse and that he felt we should take some action to resolve the deadlock, recognizing, however, that Malaysia was primarily a British responsibility and our initiative should be limited to bringing the representatives of the three countries together. The Ambassador suggested that he be authorized to say something to Sukarno orally along the lines incorporated in the attached paper. The President read the memorandum and said he would like to consider it and might wish to make some revisions. He said he would ask Mr. Forrestal to follow up this matter and communicate with Ambassador Jones through the Department of State.

Ambassador Jones said there was one other question with which we might be faced sometime within the next few months. That was the prospect of Sukarno making another world tour and the certainty that he would wish to come to Washington for at least a day or two to confer with President Johnson. The Ambassador urged that the President receive Sukarno, at least for a working visit.

The President said that, subject to the recommendations of Governor Harriman, he would be willing to receive Sukarno.

Summary of Actions:

1. Ambassador Jones to carry signed letter from the President to be delivered to Sukarno.1

2. FE to follow up with Mr. Forrestal the President’s reaction to FE memorandum (copy attached) and communicate with Ambassador Jones.

Attachment2

U.S.-Indonesian Relations

Ambassador Jones to make following points to Sukarno: 1. President Johnson wants to visit Indonesia, but cannot do so in 1964, both as it is an election year and as there is no Vice President. He hopes to, make a visit to Indonesia and Southeast Asia in 1965.

2. The current situation in Southeast Asia has become extremely serious, and President Johnson believes that we and Indonesia must work together to settle it. We both are interested in containing the southward expansion of Communist China which would be facilitated by a split in Southeast Asia.

3. If a political settlement is to be worked out, it is essential that Indonesia end at least the political and military elements of confrontation, and especially that Indonesia stop its support for the guerrillas in Borneo.

4. If Indonesia cooperates as step one by taking demonstrable action to stop the raiding and subversion in Borneo, we will be willing to assist in bringing the three parties together to work out a political solution acceptable to all, and can specifically help Indonesia with: a) an additional 65 to 100 thousand tons of rice in 1964 depending on availability, and

b) renewed consideration of American support for Indonesian stabilization.

5. If present tensions continue, and if Indonesia-supported military and paramilitary activity in Borneo continue, it will be virtually impossible for us to provide significant assistance to the GOI. Indeed, as I have already pointed out, a military explosion in the area would call into play our obligations under the ANZUS Treaty.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-US. Confidential. Drafted by Jones and cleared in the White House on December 31. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 See footnote 2, Document 325.

2 Confidential. Prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs.

MalaysiaMalaysia

327. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 54/59–62. Secret; Noforn. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency; Department of State’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research; and the intelligence organizations of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate with the exception of the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

328. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 24, 1962, 5–5:25 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 11/61–11/62. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and approved in the White House on August 2. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Ambassador Dato Ong Yoke Lim was presenting his credentials to the President. A separate memorandum of this conversation records discussion of the problem of the falling price of tin due to congressional discussion of sale of the U.S. tin stockpile that was equal to three times the annual world production. Kennedy replied he was aware of the problem, and that it was U.S. policy to avoid a substantial depression of tin prices. The President asked Bell to study the matter. (Ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 11/61–11/62)

329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 17, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Harriman on February 15. In a covering memorandum to Rusk, drafted by Rice and concurred in by Deputy Assistant Secretary Richard Davies of EUR, Rice wrote that this memorandum to the President represented the U.S. position as stated in the quadripartite talks held earlier that week with representatives of the British, Australian, and New Zealand Governments. Accounts of the quadripartite talks are in telegrams 342 and 348 to Singapore, February 13 and 16. (Ibid., POL 2 INDON and POL 3 MALAYSIA)

330. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, February 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 54/59–63. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A note on a cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency; the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, and the Air Force; and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with it with the exception of the Representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and Federal Bureau of Investigation who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction. An accompanying 2-page map is not printed.

331. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 24, 1963, noon–12:15 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 12/62–8/63. Confidential. Drafted by Baldwin and approved in the White House on May 5, according to the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 MALAYA) The ending time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 2, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham and cleared in substance by Buffum and Thomas M. Judd, Officer in Charge of United Kingdom Affairs.

333. Telegram From President Kennedy to Prime Minister Macmillan

Washington, August 3, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State for Harriman and Hilsman. The source text is the Department of State copy. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received in the Department of State at 7:40 p.m.

334. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 10, 1963, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Judd and approved in M on September 12. The meeting was held in Harriman’s office.

335. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 9/63. Secret.

336. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Tacoma, Washington

Washington, September 27, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 9/63. Secret; Eyes Only. The telegram was sent to Captain Tazewell Shepard for the President who was on a trip to the American west.

337. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 2, 1963, 10–10:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Hilsman and approved by the White House on October 14. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

338. Memorandum for the Australian Ambassador (Beale)

Washington, October 4, 1963.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy–Johnson Administrations, Subject Files, Quadripartite talks re Indonesia and Malaysia. Secret. There is no indication that Harriman drafted this memorandum, but there are revisions in his hand. It was apparently not given to Beale because Harriman wrote “hold” on it.

339. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 4, 1963, 10:30–11:25 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-US. Secret. Drafted by Judd and cleared by the White House on October 15. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) This is one of six memoranda of conversation prepared for this meeting.

340. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, October 4, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Kinney. The meeting was held at USUN.

341. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 9, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Secret. Also sent to Forrestal.

342. Memorandum From the Department of State to President Kennedy

Washington, October 14, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Top Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text, but another copy of the memorandum has Harriman’s extensive handwritten revisions. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy-Johnson Administrations, Subject Files, Malaysia) A Department of Defense paper listing possible U.S. military actions in the case of an overt attack by Indonesia on Malaysia was attached but is not printed. On the covering memorandum to Bundy, Read noted that this memorandum and the Defense paper, in the form of a single one-page paper, served as the basis of discussion for a meeting with the President by representatives of the Departments of State and Defense and CIA on October 9. At that meeting, the President approved the policy outlined in the combined paper. According to the President’s Appointment Book, the meeting on October 9, described as “off-the-record,” lasted from 11 to 11:55 a.m. (Kennedy Library) No other record of it has been found.

343. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 16, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Forrestal.

344. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 17, 1963, 9:45 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation, 9/63–10/63. Secret. Drafted by Hilsman and approved by the White House on October 28. According to Kennedy’s Appointment Book, the meeting lasted from 10:07 to 10:27 a.m. (Kennedy Library) A memorandum for the President containing talking points and biographic material was prepared by the Department of State and sent to Bundy on October 16. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA)

345. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 18, 1963, 8:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA, Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell and approved in S on October 23 and M on October 25. According to Rusk’s Appointment Book, his next meeting took place at 9:52 a.m. (Johnson Library)

346. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, October 30, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 54/55–63. Secret. A note on the cover sheet states that this estimate was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency; the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; and the National Security Agency. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate with the exception of the representatives of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Atomic Energy Commission, who abstained because the topic was outside their jurisdiction. Forrestal sent an advance copy of this NIE to McGeorge Bundy for President Kennedy. He also noted that the full NIE would be available for the President’s weekend reading. (Memorandum from Forrestal to Bundy, October 31; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63) A Special Article prepared by the CIA’s Office of Current Intelligence, “Britain’s Malaysia Policy,” SC No. 00615/63B, October 25, was also included in the President’s weekend reading for October 27. The article concluded that the British Government considered itself obligated and able to protect Malaysia from Indonesia. Because of its long-term policy of reducing military expenditures in Southeast Asia, the British Government would explore every avenue for a peaceful settlement before resorting to force. (Ibid.)

347. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 18, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, MV Forrestal, 11/62–11/63. Secret.

348. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 7, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Malaysia-Indonesia, 1963–1964. Secret. Copies were sent to Hilsman, Harriman, Forrestal, and Alexander. The source text is Hilsman’s copy.

349. Memorandum of Conversation

London, December 19, 1963, 10:30–12:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by E. T. Lampson and approved in S on January 3, 1964. The meeting was held in the Foreign Office. The source text is labeled “Part I of XIII.”

327. National Intelligence Estimate 327. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 11, 1962.

NIE 54/59–62

PROSPECTS FOR THE PROPOSED MALAYSIAN FEDERATION

The Problem

To estimate the prospects for achievement of the proposed Federation of Malaysia1 and for its political and economic viability.

Conclusions

A. The Federation of Malaysia will probably be formally established within a year; agreement on general principles may be announced as early as 31 August 1962. The chief threat to achievement of the merger comes from the pro-Communist Barisan Sosialis Party (BSP) of Singapore which is seeking an opportunity to upset the precariously situated Singapore Government and to halt further progress toward federation. (Paras. 5–8)

B. The projected merger is essentially the incorporation into Malaya of the four other territories. Although these areas will retain a considerable degree of local autonomy, the central Federation government in Kuala Lumpur will assume control of internal security, foreign policy, and defense. Tunku Abdul Rahman’s moderately conservative and pro-Western coalition, known as the Alliance, will probably dominate the government of the new Federation in its early years. The new state will have the benefit of the proven stability of the governmental and economic structure of Malaya, and the support and protection of Britain, Australia, and New Zealand. (Paras. 4, 9–10, 16, 20)

C. The chief threats to the new Federation will be communal antagonisms, easily aroused because of the ethnic diversity found in each of the component states, and the opposition of Communists and other radical elements. The leftists will probably find additional support within the Chinese communities, in Singapore and elsewhere, which are resentful of the political discrimination in favor of the Malays as announced in the proposals for the new Federation. Similar resentments may emerge among the non-Malay indigenous peoples of the Borneo territories. The future of Malaysia will be largely influenced by whether the Tunku continues successfully to control these various frictions. It will also depend in large measure on the economic progress of the new Federation and its component territories. (Paras. 10–15, 17–19)2

[Here follow a 6-page Discussion section and 3 maps.]

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 54/59–62. Secret; Noforn. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency; Department of State’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research; and the intelligence organizations of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate with the exception of the representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 The proposed Federation of Malaysia is to be made up of (a) the Federation of Malaya, which became independent in 1957; (b) Singapore, which was granted partial self-government in 1959; and (c) the three British dependencies on the island of Borneo: the Protectorate of Brunei and the Crown Colonies of Sarawak and North Borneo. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 In a July 10 memorandum to INR Director Hilsman, the Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for the Far East, Charles N. Spinks, recommended that Hilsman concur with the estimate subject to two revisions. Spinks’ office did not agree with a conclusion in the discussion portion that “the vitality of the Tunku’s coalition has flagged.” Spinks suggested that CIA’s Office of National Estimates (ONE) would challenge his objection. The final assessment of the Tunku coalition was a compromise between INR’s and ONE’s points of view. Spinks also stressed that the Philippine claim to North Borneo “was a serious matter in their eyes.” INR’s estimate that it could prove troublesome to the formation of the Federation of Malaysia was incorporated in the discussion section of the estimate. (Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 54/59–62)

328. Memorandum of Conversation 328. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 24, 1962, 5–5:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Greater Malaysia

PARTICIPANTS

Dato Ong Yoke Lim, Ambassador of the Federation of Malaya

The President

Mr. Duke, Chief of Protocol

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

The President inquired as to the relations between Malaya and Singapore and as to the communal problem in Malaya. The Ambassador replied that in recent years there had been no racial trouble in Malaya and he believed things were proceeding satisfactorily in this respect.

The Ambassador then recounted recent steps looking toward the formation of a greater Malaysia. He said that a recent commission which had investigated attitudes in Sarawak and North Borneo had concluded that 80 percent of the people favored joining the Federation of Malaya to form a confederation of greater Malaysia. [2 line of source text not declassified] The Ambassador went on to explain that the major problem was the Communist element in Singapore. He said representatives of the Singapore left wing were arriving tomorrow in New York to present their case to the Committee of 17. Singapore’s Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, is already in New York and has presented the Government’s case to the Afro-Asian group on the Committee. According to the Ambassador (United States information confirms), Lee Kuan Yew was well received and made a good case. Ambassador Ong said that they had no worries about the position of the Western powers on the Committee. With regard to the Communist opposition in Singapore, the Ambassador said that they did not oppose greater Malaysia in principle, but were fighting the only method by which it could be brought about according to the views of his Government.

The President inquired as to the degree of Communist influence in Singapore. The Ambassador said Singapore was about 80 percent Chinese and that the Communists exercised a good deal of influence through lies and deceit.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 11/61–11/62. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and approved in the White House on August 2. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Ambassador Dato Ong Yoke Lim was presenting his credentials to the President. A separate memorandum of this conversation records discussion of the problem of the falling price of tin due to congressional discussion of sale of the U.S. tin stockpile that was equal to three times the annual world production. Kennedy replied he was aware of the problem, and that it was U.S. policy to avoid a substantial depression of tin prices. The President asked Bell to study the matter. (Ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 11/61–11/62)

329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, February 17, 1963.

SUBJECT

U.S. Position on Malaysia

The British have been developing the Malaysia concept for the last three years. Last year Malaya and Singapore gave approval to the formation of Malaysia, and North Borneo and Sarawak have indicated approval in principle. The adherence of Brunei is still under negotiation.

The United States has not participated in the negotiations, nor have we been formally consulted. We have, however, followed these developments closely, and since we have not objected, the British have assumed our tacit approval. Several weeks ago, a Department spokesman publicly stated the United States considered that the Federation of Malaysia was the best available solution for the future welfare of the people in the area.1 This was confirmed by the President’s press conference, February 14.2

Earlier this week, we met with the representatives of the British, Australian and New Zealand Governments. The following represents our position as stated in these conferences: 1. The United Kingdom and Malaya are to have full responsibility for the formation of Malaysia.

2. The United States will assume no responsibility. We will, however, continue to inform the Philippine Government and the Indonesian Government as we have done so far that we consider Malaysia is the best solution, not only for the benefit of the area generally, but for the Philippines and for Indonesia.

3. If either the Philippines or Indonesia takes the subject to the United Nations, we have agreed to consult with the United Kingdom and attempt to minimize the difficulties which they may encounter.

4. We have warned the United Kingdom that they have a serious problem in assuring the United Nations and the world generally that the populations involved have been fully consulted. The United Kingdom feels they are on good grounds in Borneo, fairly good grounds in Sarawak, but on very weak grounds in Brunei.

5. If, as and when Malaysia comes into existence as a member of the United Nations, we have informed the British that we do not intend to give any military or economic assistance to this new State. This is a British responsibility. In addition, it is a British responsibility to protect the country against any internal subversion if outside assistance is needed. We will, of course, give to the new State of Malaysia as a member of the United Nations the protection against external aggression which we would give to any friendly United Nations member. We may find that it is desirable for us to make a public statement, giving this assurance, in order to forestall aggressive actions by other countries.

6. The British have already undertaken to expand their existing defense agreement with Malaya to include the Federation of Malaysia, when organized. This agreement includes the maintenance of their defense establishment in Singapore. The Australian and New Zealand Governments, who are now involved in the defense of Malaya, have not yet decided whether they will assume a broader responsibility for Malaysia.

Comment: The Indonesian and Philippine Governments have indicated strong opposition to the formation of the Federation of Malaysia. It is not clear whether either Government will be able to interpose difficulties serious enough to frustrate the formation of the Federation. The British intend to attempt to drive through their plan on schedule, the final date of which is now fixed for August 31, 1963.

Dean Rusk3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Harriman on February 15. In a covering memorandum to Rusk, drafted by Rice and concurred in by Deputy Assistant Secretary Richard Davies of EUR, Rice wrote that this memorandum to the President represented the U.S. position as stated in the quadripartite talks held earlier that week with representatives of the British, Australian, and New Zealand Governments. Accounts of the quadripartite talks are in telegrams 342 and 348 to Singapore, February 13 and 16. (Ibid., POL 2 INDON and POL 3 MALAYSIA)

1 Apparently a statement made at the Department of State press briefing. On February 13 in a press conference, Rusk stated in answer to a question about the effect of the West Irian settlement on Indonesian interests in North Borneo, “I think if those who are to take part in the Malaysia Federation do so on the basis of consent, as is now the case, and on the basis of arrangements which are in their own jurisdiction and control, that if anyone on the outside attempts by force or threat of force to interfere with those, this would create a very serious problem.” (Department of State Bulletin, March 11, 1962, p. 366)

2 On February 14, Kennedy stated, “we have supported the Malaysia Confederation, and it’s under pressure from several areas. But I’m hopeful it will sustain itself, because it’s the best hope of security for that very vital part of the world.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, p. 180)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

330. Special National Intelligence Estimate 330. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, February 20, 1963.

SNIE 54/59–63

PROSPECTS FOR MALAYSIA1

The Problem

To estimate the prospects for achievement of the proposed Federation of Malaysia2 and to assess its viability.

The Estimate

I. Prospects for Achievement of Federation

1. The proposed Federation of Malaysia was promoted by the UK and the Government of Malaya primarily as a means of: (a) checking the Communist threat in Singapore, whose population is overwhelmingly Chinese, and maintaining the Singapore base; and, (b) providing the UK with an acceptable alternative to its present colonial position in northern Borneo. Both within the areas which are to form Malaysia and in the neighboring countries, there are elements strongly opposed to the scheme which threaten to prevent its accomplishment and which make uncertain the viability of the new state, if it does in fact emerge.

2. In Malaya, the leftist parties, both Chinese and pro-Indonesian, and the extreme rightists oppose the creation of Malaysia. Although the Alliance Party has been somewhat shaken by the Brunei revolt, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman’s firm grip on governmental machinery and majority public support will probably not be upset before the target date for federation, 31 August 1963. In Singapore, there is powerful opposition from the predominantly Chinese, pro-Communist Barisan Sosialis Party (BSP). However, a number of its leaders have recently been arrested and pro-federation Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew can probably maintain his position by a combination of political acumen and an effective internal security apparatus.

3. In the Borneo territories, indigenous tribes, although trusting the British, have expressed their age-old fears of Malay domination and many would probably prefer independence to membership in Malaysia. Domination by Indonesia, however, would be a less attractive alternative than Malaysia. There are strong anti-federation forces, including elements in the Chinese-dominated Sarawak United People’s Party (SUPP) and the Party Rakyat of Brunei (PRB), which dominates political activity of the oil-rich protectorate. The PRB, stymied by the pro-merger position of the Sultan of Brunei, resorted to open revolt on 8 December 1962 under the leadership of Party Chairman A. M. Azahari. Although the revolt was quickly put down by British forces, it called attention to the widespread internal opposition to federation and provided an occasion for Indonesia and the Philippines to manifest their open opposition.

4. Indonesia is the biggest threat to the establishment of the Malaysian Federation. Sukarno is publicly committed to disruption of the scheme. His opposition is couched in terms of objection to neo-colonialism, claiming that the Federation will be merely a mask for continued Western domination. The Indonesians have also expressed fear of extension of Chinese Communist power into the area. Sukarno’s real motives, however, probably arise out of a desire to extend hegemony over Malay peoples and advance his ambitions for great power status. Whatever his motives, Indonesia has posed the challenge and has taken many steps to oppose federation, steps in which Sukarno has had the enthusiastic support of the armed forces and the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI).

5. Indonesia has provided political, financial, and limited military support to the Brunei rebels. Its intelligence forces have long been engaged in clandestine activities designed to establish Indonesian influence in Malaya, Singapore, and the Borneo territories. Its army is probably training guerrillas, and has called for Indonesian “volunteers.” The PKI is also active in the area. The long Borneo border provides many opportunities for infiltration and there are active Indonesian sympathizers in each of the three territories, principally among militant SUPP elements in western Sarawak (the so-called Clandestine Communist Organization), PRB activists in Brunei, and the 30,000 Indonesian migrants in North Borneo. Support of insurrection in Borneo is being coupled with a policy of direct “confrontation” of the Tunku, seeking to frighten him and the UK into reconsidering federation. “Confrontation” does not yet seem to imply an overt use of military force, although Indonesia has considerable capability for armed action, including the use of specialized regular units which could infiltrate by sea, land, or air.

6. The Philippines is an added though lesser threat to the establishment of the Federation. The Philippine Government allowed Azahari to operate from a base in Manila and gave him at least nominal aid in connection with his revolt in Brunei. Manila’s motives are not completely clear, but it is obvious that a genuine desire has arisen to secure North Borneo. The territory is seen as a buffer against both Chinese and Indonesian expansion into the southern Philippines. There is little confidence in the Tunku’s ability to restrain Chinese Communist subversives from moving into the territory and little confidence in the UK ability to defend it against Indonesian aggression. With concern over Indonesian expansionism, there is also a desire to act in concert with Indonesia, which many Filipinos see as the future dominant power in Southeast Asia. Indeed, it may be that there has already been an understanding between the two countries whereby, for tactical purposes, Indonesia has implied its respect for the Philippine claim to North Borneo to encourage Philippine opposition to Malaysia. The Philippine leadership is also motivated by a desire to appear anti-colonialist and fully independent of the West.

7. The USSR has actively opposed the establishment of Malaysia, but Communist China has indicated opposition only indirectly. Soviet officials in Djakarta are encouraging Indonesia in its course of action, probably as a method of further alienating Indonesia from the West and increasing its dependence upon the USSR. Peiping’s current caution probably reflects concern about the overseas Chinese and about possible conflicts between Indonesia’s ambitions and Communist China’s own designs in the area. Communist China almost certainly has ambitions to dominate the Malaysian area; its influence is probably largely exerted through the Chinese-dominated leftists in Malaya, Singapore, and Sarawak.

8. Despite these various opposition forces, we believe that the British and the Tunku will press on with the federation scheme since available alternatives appear to them even less promising. Opposition forces in Singapore and the Borneo areas are not likely to acquire sufficient power to frustrate the plan. Indonesia will actively oppose the establishment of the Federation, and will have Soviet support. It will probably continue to stir up trouble in Borneo, particularly in Brunei and Sarawak, and will continue the training and supplying of disruptive forces. It may hope to create enough trouble and disorder to bring the matter to the attention of the UN with the objective of postponing federation. We do not believe, however, that Indonesia will take sufficiently strong steps to prevent the establishment of Malaysia on schedule. At this time, Indonesia would be reluctant to face the UK directly and would hesitate to risk the damage to political and economic relations with the US which overt intervention might cause. In these circumstances, we believe it probable that Malaysia will come into being by the scheduled date of 31 August 1963.

II. Viability of the Federation

9. Even if the Federation is formed on schedule without further serious difficulty, it will at once be embarked on stormy seas. The internal elements which have opposed federation will continue to exist and, within an independent and untried country, may well gain in strength. The problems of operating these territories, with their great ethnic and cultural diversities, as a single administrative entity would be trying enough for a seasoned and mature government; for the new Malaysian government, they may be insoluble. Presumably the Federation will be a Commonwealth member with special relations with the UK, Australia, and New Zealand; its defense against external adversaries will largely rest on the UK.

10. In Singapore, BSP efforts to displace the Lee Kuan Yew government through strikes, riots, and parliamentary means will continue and have at least an even chance of success. The Tunku’s overwhelming domination of the present Malayan government can hardly be extended to the whole Federation and will lessen as new political elements are introduced into the Malaysian parliament. The most serious setback to Malaysia would be the death of the Tunku, who personally has provided the unifying force among the diverse groups comprising the ruling Alliance in Malaya. In Borneo, leftist Chinese and Brunei Malays will continue efforts to subvert the unity of the state, both seeking independence, but the former looking forward to eventual ties with Communist China rather than with Indonesia. Tribal disaffection may also become a factor of some importance. Without Indonesian support, it is unlikely that these disruptive elements could soon succeed in undoing Malaysia. The prospects in long-range viability would be enhanced if the Tunku is able to overcome initial suspicions and gain the general support of the major ethnic groups, particularly the Chinese and the indigenous non-Malays.

11. We believe that Sukarno will not relinquish his ambitions with respect to the Borneo territories and will persist in his efforts to dominate them through subversion and the promotion of internal disorders. The chances for survival of the Federation during its first few years are probably no better than even. The outcome will depend primarily upon the effectiveness and tenacity of the British and Malayan response to the internal security threat. Sukarno will probably persist in his campaign, hoping that British interest in the situation will lag, and then seek an advantageous accommodation. The sort of struggle that appears to be in prospect for this region resembles insurgency situations elsewhere. The key element will probably be the attitude of the region’s peoples toward the insurgents and their sense of identification with one or the other side. At present, the advantage is with the Malaysia forces because of the general loyalty of the indigenous non-Malays of northern Borneo to the British. On the other hand, the historic antipathy between these peoples and the Malays will be difficult to overcome. Furthermore, Indonesia will be able to count upon the Brunei Malays, many of the migrant Indonesians, and a fair sprinkling of tribesmen with ties in Indonesian Borneo, as well as upon deriving some advantage from disaffection among the Sarawak Chinese.

12. It is possible that intentionally or otherwise, Indonesia will press its Borneo activities and “confrontation” tactics to the point of open hostilities or that the insurgency it promotes could escalate info open fighting. In this event, the massive military buildup with Soviet arms, which has occurred in the past year, would make Indonesia a formidable opponent for the limited military resources which Malaysia is apt to have or for the limited forces which the Commonwealth will probably be willing to commit to the area. Once Malaysia is established, however, Indonesia will be contending with an independent Asian state which will have substantial international support, including some elements in the Afro-Asian bloc. In the event of identifiable Indonesian aggression, Malaysia could be expected to appeal to the UN and anticipate assistance.

13. There is some possibility that Malaya and the Philippines can arrive at an accommodation sufficiently reassuring to the Philippines on security grounds and gratifying on prestige grounds to permit Philippine cooperation with Malaysia. If such an accommodation is not reached, the Philippines will probably continue to harass the new state. It will pursue all available avenues to substantiate its territorial claim, probably focussing its activities in the UN.

14. Both the Soviets and the Chinese Communists will continue their interest in frustrating development of a viable Malaysian state. The former, as in the past, will press its interest largely through support of Indonesian expansionism. The Chinese, on the other hand, are likely to support the subversive efforts of internal, Chinese-oriented, leftist parties seeking control of the new state, and may become increasingly concerned over Indonesian expansionism.

III. The US Role

15. The new Federation will have a basis for a sound economy and, in the first instance, will look toward the UK for technical and administrative help. It will probably also seek some US contribution along these lines. In the military sphere, it is probable that indigenous forces with Commonwealth assistance will be capable of dealing with the limited operations Sukarno probably has in mind for the next few years, but their capabilities would be seriously strained by large-scale infiltrations. Some US counter-insurgency assistance may be requested should the situation deteriorate.

16. US political support for the Federation would tend to strengthen it by diminishing its sense of threat from hostile neighbors. In addition, such support might have some restraining influence on Sukarno who wants US economic aid and fears any US military intervention. While the US position might restrain Sukarno from a maximum effort against Malaysia, it would be unlikely to dissuade him from continuing subversion and infiltration. It is unlikely that the US could bring the Philippines to abandon its claims to North Borneo, but US encouragement might have some weight in persuading the Philippines toward an accommodation with an independent Malaysia.

IV. Consequences of Delay or Cancellation

17. A serious delay in meeting the August target for Malaysia would play into the hands of antimerger elements. The BSP would have an excellent chance of winning the Singapore elections scheduled for 1964. If the UK initiated the delay over the Tunku’s opposition, he could become disgusted with UK vacillation and might abandon the Malaysia project. A delay would injure the Tunku’s prestige, and his government’s prospects in the 1964 Malayan general elections would suffer. In Borneo, the embryo opposition parties would gain time for strengthening themselves and establishing contact with foreign elements. Following upon his success in West New Guinea, Sukarno’s prestige would be further increased through his apparent success in frustrating federation. Indonesian-Malayan antagonisms would not diminish and the Philippine-Malayan rift would widen.

18. Cancellation of the whole scheme would be a serious setback for the Tunku. His political position at home would be seriously weakened. Another step to the left would be likely in Singapore where the Lee government would probably fall. The UK would once again be caught in its colonial dilemma in Singapore as well as in Borneo. As Communist influence rose in Singapore, the UK military base would be placed in jeopardy. The failure to establish the Federation would rate as a major Sukarno victory, enhance his international stature, and encourage him in pursuing further territorial ambitions. The Borneo territories, whether retained by the UK or set adrift as an independent state, would remain a target for Indonesian ambitions. They might also become a prime target of Chinese Communist penetration or the cause of clashes between Indonesian and Philippine claimants.

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 54/59–63. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A note on a cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency; the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, and the Air Force; and the National Security Agency participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with it with the exception of the Representatives of the Atomic Energy Commission and Federal Bureau of Investigation who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction. An accompanying 2-page map is not printed.

1 NIE 54/59–62, “Prospects for the Proposed Federation of Malaysia,” dated 11 July 1962, outlines the background and early history of the Federation movement. [Footnote in the source text. NIE 54/59–62 is printed as Document 327.]

2 The proposed Federation of Malaysia is to be made up of: (a) the Federation of Malaya, which became independent in 1957; (b) Singapore, which was granted partial self-government in 1959; and (c) the three British dependencies on the Island of Borneo—the Protectorate of Brunei and the Crown Colonies of Sarawak and North Borneo. [Footnote in the source text.]

331. Memorandum of Conversation 331. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 24, 1963, noon–12:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Malaya and Malaysia

PARTICIPANTS

Tun Abdul Razak, Deputy Prime Minister of the Federation of Malaya1

Dato Ong Yoke Lim, Malayan Ambassador

The President

Mr. Hilsman, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Baldwin, American Ambassador to Malaya

Mr. Tonesk, Deputy Chief of Protocol

After an exchange of gifts, and greetings, the President said that he would be glad to hear from Tun Razak about conditions in his part of the world, particularly progress toward the development of the new Federation of Malaysia. In response, Tun Razak said that progress was being made but complications had developed in the form of opposition to Malaysia from Indonesia and, to a lesser extent, from the Philippines. He considered Indonesian hostility more serious than the Philippine attitude. In response to the President’s question about Indonesian motives, Tun Razak said that the Indonesians were seriously concerned about the contrast between the record of prosperity and success which Malaya had achieved since independence and the series of mistakes and difficulties which had beset Indonesia. This was a blow to Indonesian pride and he feared the Indonesian Government would continue its efforts to complicate plans for the formation of the Federation of Malaysia and the existence of the new Federation after it was formed.

The President inquired about the Philippine aspect of the matter. Tun Razak said he felt the Philippine attitude had changed considerably in recent weeks, partly as a result of talks between Malayan officials and President Macapagal. He referred to the successful outcome of the private talks between President Macapagal and Malaya’s Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman. He said the Philippine claim to a small part of North Borneo had a very flimsy legal basis and he was convinced that the Malayans and the Filipinos could settle the differences between them. He said that President Macapagal had been assured that the Government of the new Federation of Malaysia would give sympathetic consideration to the Philippine claim if the Philippine Government continued to press it after Malaysia was formed.

The President said that he had received a call the day before from Vice President Pelaez of the Philippines who seemed to feel that because of the proximity of North Borneo to the Philippines there was inherent danger to Philippine security in the formation of the new Federation. Tun Razak said that he did not consider the fear to be valid and cited the successful efforts which Malaya had made to contain Communism. He added that the Malayan Government is not endeavoring to force the peoples of Sarawak, Brunei and North Borneo into the new Federation. They had chosen Malaysia themselves and had indicated their choice in various ways, including elections.

The President then asked about the situation in Singapore, especially the racial composition of the Singapore Communists and the percentage of Communists among the Singapore Chinese. He asked what the Singapore Communists were trying to do. Tun Razak replied that most of the Singapore Communists were Chinese and he estimated that about 30% of the Singapore Chinese have Communist orientation. In his opinion the Communists are endeavoring to seize control of the city-state of Singapore and make it a Communist bastion in Southeast Asia—a sort of Cuba. He added that creation of the new Federation of Malaysia was the only effective means of fighting that Communist effort. He added that the Malayan Government was convinced that coexistence with the Communists was impossible and that it was necessary to fight them constantly.

The President asked Tun Razak if he believed the British were determined to give full support to Malaysia. He said that in dealings between the United States and Britain, the United States officials had considered it necessary to impress upon the British the importance of their responsibilities “east of Suez”, particularly in Southeast Asia which is an area of such critical importance. Tun Razak said the British had given the Malayans positive assurances of their protection and support. He intended to go to London and discuss the nature and extent of that support in more detail. The British had made certain offers of help which he hoped would be increased.

The President asked Tun Razak for his views about the position which the United States should assume with respect to Malaysia. Tun Razak replied that his Government and people were very grateful for United States support, including the statement which the President had made. He emphasized that the Federation of Malaya alone would have been able to continue its development without much outside help. The Government of the new Federation of Malaysia, faced with additional defense needs and the necessity of accelerating economic development in northern Borneo to prove to the people there the advantages of democracy and the new Federation, would overburden the financial resources of the Federation of Malaysia. The short-fall in resources between now and 1970 was estimated at about 600 million U.S. dollars which would have to be obtained from outside sources.

The President avoided a direct comment upon this observation but referred to the need of the United States to persuade other countries that they should relieve the United States of some of its burden of foreign aid. Tun Razak indicated that he was aware of the situation.

In conclusion, the President said that he was pleased to have an opportunity to talk with Tun Razak and was glad that he had visited the United States. He had publicly expressed the opinion that Malaysia was the best alternative to create stability in that part of Southeast Asia. He had considered the matter carefully since that time and saw no reason for a change in the United States position of continuing to encourage and support the Malaysia plan.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 12/62–8/63. Confidential. Drafted by Baldwin and approved in the White House on May 5, according to the Department of State copy. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–4 MALAYA) The ending time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 Tun Abdul Razak was visiting Washington April 22–25. In a March 12 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Executive Secretary Brubeck recommended that Abdul Razak be received by the President because of the tension over the creation of Malaysia and the potential for strengthening ties with “staunchly anti-Communist” Malaya: (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 MALAYA) Brubeck provided briefing papers for the discussion. (Memoranda from Brubeck to Bundy, April 18 and 23; ibid., POL 7 MALAYA)

Tun Abdul Razak met with Assistant Secretary for International Organization Affairs Harlan Cleveland on April 22 to discuss Malaysia and related developments. (Memorandum of conversation, April 22; ibid., POL 3 MALAYSIA) He met with Rusk for a similar conversation on April 23. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid.) On the same day, he and Secretary of Defense McNamara discussed the rural development program in Malaya, the “communist situation in Southeast Asia,” and Philippines-Malaya relations. (Memorandum of conversation, April 23; ibid., POL MALAYA) Also on April 23, Hilsman and Abdul Razak discussed Malaysia but with special emphasis on Malaya-Indonesia relations. (Memorandum of conversation, April 23; ibid., POL 3 MALAYSIA)

332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk 332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, August 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

Malaysia

You mentioned at this morning’s staff meeting1 that you expected Lord Home to raise the subject of Malaysia and the current tripartite “Summit Meeting” in Manila.2 If he does not, I would recommend that you raise it on your initiative.

It has been announced that the Summit Meeting will terminate on August 4 (August 3 in Moscow),3 so a discussion with Lord Home will be to some extent ex post facto.4 Since British cooperation will be necessary either in implementing agreements reached at the Summit or in picking up the pieces if the meeting ends in failure, it would still be useful to make our position known clearly to the British.

The Problem:

The primary issue at Manila is that of determining the attitude of the Borneo Territories toward their inclusion in Malaysia. Secondary issues are the United Kingdom defense agreement with Malaya (to be extended to cover Malaysia) and the Philippine proposal for the phased creation of a loose Malay Confederation (Maphilindo) comprising Malaya, the Philippines and Indonesia. While reports from Manila are sketchy, the current positions of the principals appear to be as follows:

Indonesia is “pressing for a referendum in the Borneo Territories under United Nations auspices, which would probably take at least six weeks and would require a postponement in the formation of Malaysia from August 31 perhaps to late October. Indonesian motives are probably mixed: Having strongly resisted Malaysia for the past eight months, any delay in its formation could be a face-saving device to cover Indonesian acquiescence in the formation. A delay could also provide further time to devise other means of blocking its formation. There may also be a certain element of sincerity in the Indonesian position, a belief that the Borneo populace deserves an opportunity to express its views. (As adept double-thinkers, they could honestly hold this belief despite their performance in West Irian.) On the United Kingdom–Malaya defense agreement, the neutralist Indonesians are apparently pressing for its abandonment and the removal of British bases from the region. They seem to feel some attraction to Maphilindo, but it is subordinate to their immediate goals.

The Philippines are lining up with Indonesia on the referendum issue. Their primary objective is to preserve and further their claim to parts of North Borneo, a claim to which Macapagal personally is deeply committed. Although in somewhat of a middle position, they are particularly anxious to build up their ties with Indonesia and rather overconfident of their ability to keep the Indonesians in check. Indonesian antagonism to the United Kingdom-Malaya defense agreement puts them in a difficult spot in view of their own arrangements with us. They are strongly promoting the Maphilindo concept, both for internal reasons and as an over-riding solution to the Malaysia issue.

Malaya’s position up to the time of the Summit Meeting was that there could be no delay in the August 31 date, although the Tunku was willing to agree to a test of opinion in the Borneo Territories by the Secretary General prior to that date. In the course of the Meeting, however, the Tunku has apparently softened somewhat on the referendum question and has indicated at least a tentative willingness to consider a delay in the formation of Malaysia. There is virtually no chance the Malayans would countenance a change in the United Kingdom-Malaya defense agreement, which they regard as their primary security against Indonesia. Their attitude toward Maphilindo parallels that of Indonesia.

The Secretary General is willing to carry out a pre-August 31 verification of electoral opinion in the Borneo Territories if requested to do so in specific terms by all three countries. He has informed them that a referendum could also be held but that it would require the full agreement of all parties concerned (including the United Kingdom), as well as a mandate from the General Assembly.

The United Kingdom adamantly opposes any delay in the August 31 date, and has reportedly informed the Tunku that it could not accept a referendum in the Borneo Territories under any circumstances, since this would call into question the validity of the elections already held (which, while rather inconclusive in Sarawak, did indicate a probable majority in favor of Malaysia). The British apparently have been putting strong pressure on the Tunku to hold firm against any concessions on this point and even to withdraw concessions already tentatively offered. The United Kingdom attitude is that Sukarno is entirely committed to destroy Malaysia in one way or another, and that any concessions to him for the sake of reaching agreement at the Summit would be fruitless appeasement.5

Most Recent Summit Developments

When we learned of the apparent British decision to reject any postponement of the August 31 date regardless of the Tunku’s views, Ambassador Bruce saw Lord Home on August 2 to urge that the British show greater flexibility and permit the Tunku to make his own decisions.6 From this meeting and from earlier conversations with Foreign Office officials we gained the impression that (1) the British might go along with a slight delay if there were a clear and evident gain to be derived; (2) a United Nations verification of opinion in the Borneo Territories prior to the formation of Malaysia would be acceptable to the British; but (3) the British would not accept a pre-Malaysia plebiscite under any circumstances because they believed that, quite apart from the Malaysia issue itself, a plebiscite would violate a fundamental tenet of British decolonization policy.

On August 2, Macapagal urgently passed on to us a written message stating unequivocally that Malaya, Indonesia and the Philippines were agreeable to a United Nations-conducted plebiscite in the Borneo Territories, which would require a delay in the formation of Malaysia. Malaya’s acceptance, however, was contingent upon United Kingdom agreement. Macapagal urged us to assist in overcoming British insistence on holding to the August 31 date, warning that this was the only way to keep the Summit Meeting from ending in failure.

United States Position:

By the time you see Lord Home in Moscow, the Summit Meeting will probably have terminated. While its outcome is still in doubt, we believe that there is a fairly good chance the participants will have reached an agreement embodying either postponement of Malaysia’s formation linked to a United Nations-administered referendum or the conditional formation of Malaysia on August 31 subject to confirmation by a post-independence referendum or plebiscite. We are informing the Secretary General of our efforts with the British.

Before seeing Lord Home, you may wish to check the most recent reports on the Summit Meeting and Malaysia. Depending on their content, you may wish to make the following points: 1. (If an agreement on Malaysia has been reached at the Summit): We urge the British to cooperate in carrying out the Summit agreement despite their reservations. In particular, we hope that they will permit the Tunku—who has the most of all at stake—to make whatever arrangements he believes necessary to proceed with the formation of Malaysia in a manner which will offer the new state at least a fair chance of viability after its formation.

2. (If the Summit Meeting fails to reach agreement): Prospects for bringing about the formation of Malaysia in a form which will offer it a real chance of viability are discouraging at best. Although the real opportunity appears to have been lost, we might still be able to salvage something if we leave it up to the regional powers to work out a solution. Our efforts from this point should be directed primarily at encouraging a further attempt to get them together for negotiations rather than injecting ourselves any deeper into the dispute.

Rationale

Mr. Barnett of FE met with Foreign Office officials on July 29 for an extended discussion of Indonesia and our rationale for encouraging support of Indonesia’s stabilization program by the United Kingdom and other DAC countries. This conversation revealed a good deal of the current British thinking on Indonesia and, in response, Mr. Barnett summarized our contrary views. Since Lord Home may raise the same points, a memorandum prepared by Mr. Barnett on the basis of this conversation is attached at Tab. A.7

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Ingraham and cleared in substance by Buffum and Thomas M. Judd, Officer in Charge of United Kingdom Affairs.

1 The minutes are ibid., S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary’s Staff Meetings.

2 President Sukarno and Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman attended a “summit” in Manila called by President Macapagal of the Philippines. The meeting began on July 31 and concluded on August 5. At the end of the summit, the three leaders issued a message to U Thant asking him to ascertain the wishes of the people of North Borneo and Sarawak prior to the establishment of the Federation of Malaysia. For an extract of that message, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 820–821.

3 Rusk was in Moscow August 3–7 for discussions and the signing of the Test Ban Treaty.

4 A report of Rusk’s and Home’s discussion on August 4 in Moscow is in Secto 4 from Moscow, August 5. Home denied that the United Kingdom had forbidden Tunku Abdul Rahman to accept a postponement of the August 31 date for the establishment of the Federation, but he did warn against slippage. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA)

5 Hilsman talked to British Minister Denis Greenhill on the telephone at 2:35 p.m. on August 3. Hilsman told Greenhill he was “very angry” about Malaysia and thought there was more evidence that Sukarno did not want the territories. Hilsman was shocked that British launching of Malaysia threatened to wreck U.S. relations with Indonesia and the U.S. strategic stake built up there. Hilsman continued that it was one thing to support Malaysia, another to launch it in a way as to make confrontation with Indonesia inevitable. (Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation)

6 Reported in telegram 591 from London, August 2. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA)

7 Attached but not printed.

333. Telegram From President Kennedy to Prime Minister Macmillan 333. Telegram From President Kennedy to Prime Minister MacmillanSource

Washington, August 3, 1963.

CAP 63419. I am quite concerned that hopefully successful Manila summit will be torpedoed unless 31 August date for Malaysia can be postponed briefly to give Sukarno a fig leaf.1 If in fact the Tunku is willing, and if there is a good chance Sukarno can be bought this cheaply, we would urge you give this an urgent look. I well realize that kowtowing to Sukarno is a risky enterprise, but a little give now may be worth the risk, especially if the likely alternative is a further step-up of subversive pressures. This is your show, but I feel we ought to place our worries frankly before you.2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA. Secret; Operational Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State for Harriman and Hilsman. The source text is the Department of State copy. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received in the Department of State at 7:40 p.m.

1 Macmillan responded on August 4 that he did not believe Sukarno could be bought off with a fig-leaf; “he would need something much bigger to cover him effectively.” Macmillan thought that delay might be an attractive face-saver only if one was dealing with a man of reason and good faith. Furthermore, it posed considerable difficulties after such painstaking preparations. Macmillan thought Sukarno wanted to sow confusion and suggested that Tunku, who was “battling hard” for a compromise, should be allowed to “play his hand in Manila,” (Telegram 042129Z from the White House to Department of State; ibid.)

2 At the end of the Manila summit, the three Asian leaders announced that the establishment of the Federation of Malaysia was being delayed until the U.N. Secretary-General could send teams to Sarawak and North Borneo to determine whether recent elections had properly taken into account the question of incorporation into Malaysia.

334. Memorandum of Conversation 334. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 10, 1963, 2:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

British request for public U.S. statement supporting Malaysia

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Denis Greenhill, Chargé d’Affaires, British Embassy

Gov. W. Averell Harriman, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Mr. James D. Bell, Director, SPA

Mr. William H. Sullivan, Special Assistant, M

Mr. Thomas M. Judd, EUR/BNA

Mr. Greenhill called at his request to ask that, assuming Secretary General U Thant’s report on Malaysia is favorable,1 the U.S. issue a public statement supporting that report.2 The British had in mind an American declaration to the effect that the Secretary General’s favorable verdict had removed all possible justification for objection to the creation of Malaysia on September 16, which the U.S. Government welcomed and invited others concerned to welcome. Mr. Greenhill stated that such a statement offered the best opportunity to avoid an open break between the British and the Indonesians. If the U.S. remained silent, Indonesian and Philippine intransigence would be encouraged. A prompt U.S. statement would serve as a deterrent. Once Malaysia came into being with the acquiescence, however grudging, of Indonesia and the Philippines, the worst obstacle to promoting the gradual development of some degree of mutual tolerance and understanding would have been removed. Mr. Greenhill stressed the importance of the timing of the statement. It should if possible come before Indonesia and the Philippines could react negatively to the Secretary General’s report.

Mr. Bell pointed out that the Secretary General’s report was to be made public on September 14. The interested parties would be given the substance of it on either September 11 or 12. He considered it possible that the Indonesians and Filipinos might make some adverse comment on the report after their advance briefing and before the report was made public. He suggested that we tell the two countries, as soon as they learned of the contents of the report, that we intended to make a public statement in its support.3 This might have a deterrent effect, particularly on the Filipinos.

Governor Harriman agreed that the U.S. would issue a public statement citing U Thant’s report and, assuming that the report was sufficiently clear-cut in favor of the creation of Malaysia, welcoming the creation of Malaysia. He thought that such a public statement would in the end save us trouble. Governor Harriman also concurred in Mr. Bell’s suggestion that the Philippine and Indonesian Governments be informed of our intention to make such a statement.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL MALAYSIA. Confidential. Drafted by Judd and approved in M on September 12. The meeting was held in Harriman’s office.

1 The report, made public on September 14, was favorable. For extracts, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 821–823.

2 The U.S. statement was issued at noon on September 14. For text, see ibid., p. 823. U.S. recognition of Malaysia was automatic because the joining of Sabah (North Borneo), Sarawak, and Singapore with the Malayan Federation was an enlargement rather than a new national entity. Charles F. Baldwin, who had served as Ambassador to Malaya, was accredited to Malaysia, maintaining the Embassy in Kuala Lumpur.

3 On September 13, the Philippine and Indonesian Governments were so informed by letters from President Kennedy to Presidents Macapagal and Sukarno. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA and POL 15–1 US/KENNEDY, respectively) The draft letters from the Department of State were described by Komer as “utterly anodyne.” Komer strengthened the letter to Sukarno, to use his own words, “to the point of saying that if they went down the wrong Malaysia road we simply would not give them aid (how much blunter can you get?).” Komer stated that, regarding the letter to Macapagal, “I beefed this up too in order to make clear we were signed on to Malaysia and [there would be] trouble ahead if Phils weren’t.” (Memorandum from Komer to Bundy, September 17; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 9/63)

335. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 335. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, September 25, 1963.

The oil negotiations were successfully concluded as of today.1 This is one of the very few bright signs that have come out of Djakarta in the past week. It might be appropriate for us to examine how it would be possible to create some further softening of feelings in the region.

The Manila meeting of Indonesia, Philippines and Malaya established, among other things, the spirit of Maphilindo.2 Talk of reestablishment of this spirit has subsided with the positive findings of the Secretary General’s survey team and the virtual rejection of same by both the Indonesians and the Filipinos. The approaches taken by the Philippines and Indonesia toward the new Malaysia have been different, despite the fact that they have reached the same conclusion, i.e., non-recognition. The Philippine position has been based, according to Macapagal, on the failure of the Tunku to assure the Philippines that their alleged claims to North Borneo territories will be negotiated by the new Malaysia. It is Macapagal’s position that the Tunku, speaking for Malaya at the Manila meeting, promised that the Philippine claims would be fairly adjudicated. Macapagal’s present “legal” position is that Malaysia is a new and separate entity and, therefore, it is required that the Tunku make assurances to the Philippines speaking for the new Malaysia.

The Philippines had some objections to the survey by the Secretary General which established that the majority of Sabah (North Borneo) and Sarawak were in favor of joining Malaysia but the Philippines did not fail to recognize Malaysia based on inadequacies of the UN survey. It has appeared that the Philippines wanted to appease the Indonesians but after the outburst of violence would like to have some face saving device which would permit them to recognize the new Malaysia. This face saving device would be for the Tunku to assure the Philippines that the new Malaysia will adhere to the promises of the old Malaya concerning the adjudication of Philippine claims in North Borneo.

Further, if the Tunku were to indicate that he would be willing to come to a summit meeting on some neutral ground in order to “reestablish” the spirit of Maphilindo, this would place Macapagal in a position of almost having to recognize Malaysia. The Tunku might suggest that a meeting of Macapagal, Sukarno, and himself be held on neutral ground, i.e., Thailand.

The Indonesian position appears to be formulated from day to day. The recent settling of the oil contracts perhaps indicates that Sukarno would like some form of face saver to be presented by the Tunku. Sukarno has now made his noises and indicated through his belligerency his strength in the area and perhaps he is ready to logically consider the economic consequences of breaking trade relations with Malaysia. Sukarno has indicated that he would be willing to come to a summit meeting. If the Tunku were to propose a summit meeting on neutral grounds and not set the precondition that Indonesia recognize Malaysia before this summit meeting, Sukarno might be placed in a position where he would feel it necessary to attend.

The breaking of trade relations with Malaysia will have serious economic consequences on both countries. It would, therefore, seem to be appropriate for the Tunku to swallow some pride and attempt to achieve normalcy. Malaysia is second only to Japan in the area as far as economic well being is concerned and any continued breach with Indonesia is bound to affect this position.

Any pressures we might place on the Tunku directly through Ambassador Baldwin or indirectly through the British, should logically take place now. Our major negotiating point with the British is the letter sent by the President to Macmillan yesterday where the President stated and did convey to Sukarno his “happiness” that Indonesia was successfully concluding negotiations with all three oil companies.3

In summary, we would want the Tunku to do the following things:

1. Tell Macapagal that pledges made at Manila re North Borneo were still applicable.

2. Express to Macapagal and Sukarno a willingness to meet at the summit on some neutral ground.

3. Express the hope that the spirit of Maphilindo can move forward toward the goals outlined at the Manila summit meeting.4

Cliff Alexander

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 9/63. Secret.

1 Regarding the negotiations between the Indonesian Government and the Western oil companies, see Documents 306 ff.

2 See footnote 2, Document 332.

3 The text is in Tosec 42 to USUN, September 24. (Department of State, Central Files, PET 15–2 INDON)

4 Komer read this memorandum and told Bundy he agreed with it. “The problem,” according to Komer, “is to work out some face-saving compromise to give Sukarno, Tunku and Macapagal a way out. Logical way to do so would be ‘summit’ reconciliation meeting on neutral ground.” Komer thought “the guts of the matter” was to press Tunku Abdul Rahman “hard enough now to bend now that he had won.” Komer suggested Baldwin and Macmillan should be urged to do so with the Tunku. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaya and Singapore, 8/63–9/63)

336. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Tacoma, Washington 336. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy, at Tacoma, WashingtonSource

Washington, September 27, 1963.

CAP 63542. From Bundy: Following is text of outgoing cables to Jakarta 3791 and 384,2 and incoming from Jakarta 745.3 [The texts of the cables were to be inserted at this point.]

These show that Presidential message to Sukarno has produced opportunity for standstill.

Next step is to get British to agree to joint pressure on the Tunku, and what we need is President’s agreement to the following draft message to the Prime Minister, which has approval here and in State Department up through George Ball.4 We would ask Secretary Rusk to make similar approach to Lord Home, and I would speak to David Ormsby Gore in the same sense. The Prime Minister has more influence with the Tunku than we do, and if we go in together we may get at least a breathing spell and perhaps a revival of Maphilindo.

Draft message to Prime Minister follows: [The text of CAP 63544 was to be inserted here; see footnote 4.]

Following is a draft brief holding message to Macapagal to prevent Sukarno from confusing him while we get organized with the Tunku.5 [The text of telegram 480 to Manila was to be inserted here; see footnote 5.]

I need President’s judgment this evening so that delivery can be arranged for opening of business on Saturday.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Indonesia, Vol. V, 9/63. Secret; Eyes Only. The telegram was sent to Captain Tazewell Shepard for the President who was on a trip to the American west.

1 Telegram 379 to Djakarta, September 26, contains a personal message from Kennedy to Sukarno, which reads as follows:

“It seems to me that the most important thing to be done at the moment is to prevent matters going from bad to worse. I cannot believe that you, the Tunku, or anyone else really desires to permit the momentum of events to carry us all to a point which would among other things imperil the entire relationship which you and I and our countries have been working toward for the last few years.

“Therefore, I urge on the strength of this relationship that all concerned stand down for a few days until communications can be restored and the art of statesmanship can perform its function of healing wounds. If you are agreeable I am sure I can persuade the others to join in a standstill.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-UK)

2 In telegram 384 to Djakarta, September 26, the Department of State provided Jones with background information to support the President’s message. Jones was to stress that Indonesia’s confrontation with Malaysia and the United Kingdom would cause economic dislocation and isolation in Indonesia as well as encourage political instability in Southeast Asia. There must be a “cooling off period,” or the issue would end in the United Nations whether or not Indonesia wanted it there. Sukarno must understand that his belligerent statements received wide circulation in the United States and United Nations. (Ibid., POL INDON-MALAYSIA)

3 In telegram 745 from Djakarta, September 27, Jones reported that Sukarno was prepared to “stand down,” but not “back down,” as long as the Tunku also did so. Sukarno promised to join in a “temporary standstill,” and would attend another Manila summit without preconditions. (Ibid.)

4 In the message transmitted on September 27, Kennedy informed Macmillan of his message to Sukarno and Sukarno’s response. The President stated, “so our problem is to ensure that no one else rocks the boat. Since Tunku is in a pugnacious mood, here is where we might both apply some balm.” (Telegram CAP 63544 from Kennedy to Macmillan, September 27. ibid., POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA) A Presidential message to Tunku Abdul Rahman was transmitted in telegram 307 to Kuala Lumpur, September 30. (Ibid., POL INDON-MALAYSIA)

5 Telegram 480 to Manila, September 27, contained the President’s message to Macapagal informing him of the Sukarno démarche and the favorable response. The message asked Macapagal to prepare for a summit and to recognize Malaysia. (Ibid., POL 16 MALAYSIA)

337. Memorandum of Conversation 337. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 2, 1963, 10–10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

1. Malaysia and Indonesia

2. ANZUS Treaty

3. Australian Defense Budget

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Harold Holt, Australian Treasurer

Sir Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador

Mr. Roger Hilsman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

After an exchange of courtesies, the discussion turned to Malaysia and Indonesia. Mr. Holt mentioned Prime Minister Menzies’ guarantee to Malaysia, characterizing it as the strongest guarantee that Australia had ever issued.1

In response to a question from the President, Ambassador Beale described the guarantee as unconditional and pointed out that it referred to subversion as well as overt aggression. He volunteered the view that we must be “firm with Sukarno.”

Mr. Holt interjected that whatever we do about Indonesia we must do together. The Indonesians have been behaving like juvenile delinquents, although they could turn on the famous Malay charm with individual visitors. But in spite of the delinquency there were 100 million Indonesians and we must somehow live with their existence. They could, of course, be a great asset. To accomplish this he felt US firmness was needed.

The President said that we have attempted to retain some influence with Sukarno through our aid and so on—although there might come a time when our policy might have to change. However, we have one guerrilla war on our hands and did not relish the prospect of another. Recently we have worked with the Philippines to help keep Sukarno in line or at least to isolate the Indonesians in their opposition to Malaysia.

The Ambassador noted that Barwick had detected an ominous note in his recent meetings with Sukarno and Nasution.

The President asked about the status of our discussions on ANZUS. Was there disagreement between us as to the meaning of the treaty or was it clear?

The Ambassador stated that the Harriman statement on the occasion of his visit to Australia covered the matter.2

Mr. Hilsman pointed out that, although we had agreed that the ANZUS treaty covered an attack on Australian forces in the treaty area, the discussion between the President and the Prime Minister had, first, specifically excluded guerrilla warfare and subversion and, second, established the need for consultations on specific circumstances in which the treaty might be applicable.

The President posed the following question: “If under the Australian agreement with Malaysia Australia moved troops into North Borneo who were then attacked by Indonesian guerrilla units, would the United States automatically be engaged?”

[2 paragraphs (5 lines of source text) not declassified]

Mr. Holt said that his understanding was that the United States would not be obligated in the case of subversion, but, if the Australian troops in North Borneo became massively engaged, then the United States would have to come in.

The President asked Mr. Hilsman why the consultations to clarify the circumstances under which the United States would be obligated that he had requested at the time of Mr. Menzies’ visit had not taken place.3

Mr. Hilsman replied that, immediately following Mr. Menzies’ visit, we had requested consultations with the Australians. Later we had sent another message, but had still received no answer.

The Ambassador said that the Foreign Minister was coming for a visit and he could drop in and chat with Dean (Rusk).

(Later Mr. Hilsman, referring to this point, suggested that the broad outlines had already been established in the conversations between Menzies and the President; what was needed now was not a chat between the two Foreign Ministers but detailed joint staff studies of various specific contingencies.)

Mr. Holt said that the Australians had been stimulated to take this course of a strong public commitment to Malaysia as a result of Mr. Harriman’s statement on his visit. Mr. Harriman had made it quite clear that the United States was with Australia and this had stiffened the Australians up. He wished to stress that this was a historic announcement and that the Australians were not given to making declarations of this nature. The statement had been largely influenced by Mr. Harriman’s position.

The President asked what it was that Mr. Harriman said that had “largely influenced” Australia in this direction. Mr. Holt said that it was his statement about the ANZUS treaty and his view that it was up to the Australians to take up some responsibilities in Southeast Asia.

The President said that there was probably no disagreement between the two countries but he wanted to be sure that they understood each other and that the Australians wouldn’t turn around some day and say “where is the United States?” He was willing to go along, but he wanted to know where we were going.

Mr. Holt said that it was in the United States interest to see some stability in the area.

The President reiterated his desire for consultations on specific circumstances and contingencies in which the treaty would be applicable. He said that it was possible that Sukarno would push his confrontation policy to a dangerous point. He felt, however, that we must be clear where we are going and at what point we will get into a war. He agreed that the ultimate deterrent to Sukarno was probably the United States, but, if the United States got into a war over the Borneo Territories, it would take some explaining.

The Ambassador said that in his opinion the only thing that would work would be to make it plain to Sukarno that he would have to reckon with United States power as well as UK and Australian power.

The President said that the United States had not said anything like that. We have been working on an entirely different track and with considerable success—bringing Sukarno along to an oil agreement, to a stabilization program and recently, to a standstill of provocative statements and actions. We have not said “if you do so and so the result will be war with the United States.” Right now something like that would not, in our opinion, be helpful. He felt that we have done the right thing with Sukarno through persuasion. The suggestion of cutting off aid was implicit, he supposed, but he did not think an overt threat to cut aid would be helpful.

Mr. Holt asked if it was our opinion that the Soviets would supply aid if the United States withdrew theirs, adding that in his opinion the Soviets did not have the resources to do so.

The President said that we could play that card only once, for cutting aid would also cut off our influence.

The Ambassador asked if Congress would permit the Executive to continue aiding Indonesia, to which the President replied that it would be a mistake if they didn’t.

The President then asked about the Australian defense budget.

Mr. Holt replied to the effect that they felt their efforts to build roads, railroads and airfields in a country of continental size which had only 11 million people was a contribution to joint defenses; that the Defense Minister feels that the Australians are moving as fast as training, etc., will permit.

The meeting ended with Mr. Holt describing his conversations with Secretary Dillon. As the party took their leave the President repeated that he did not want the Australians to think that the United States was not with them, but he did want some idea of the direction we were going and what specific commitments the Australians understood we had made.4

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Hilsman and approved by the White House on October 14. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 On September 25, Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies told the Australian Federal House of Representatives that Australia would give military assistance to defend Malaysia in the event of any armed invasion or of subversive activity supported, directed, or inspired from outside Malaysia.

2 See Documents 338 and 340.

3 Prime Minister Menzies and President Kennedy had met on July 8. During their discussion, Menzies asked for clarification of U.S. support of the ANZUS Treaty. Menzies stated that Australia was contemplating a commitment to Malaysia, but hesitated to do so unless he was sure that “the United States would back them if they got into trouble.” Menzies specifically asked if Australian troops stationed in North Borneo were attacked, would the ANZUS Treaty take effect? Kennedy “agreed that the Australians should know the exact commitment under the ANZUS Treaty and that Sukarno and others should also know it. The President directed Mr. Hilsman to look into the question as to whether an attack on Australian forces stationed in the treaty area would invoke the ANZUS Treaty. If it turned out that the ANZUS Treaty did apply in such circumstances, Mr. Hilsman should discuss with the Australians means of consultation between Australia and the United States in advance of Australian forces being stationed in such places which would invoke the ANZUS Treaty if they were attacked.” (Memorandum of conversation, July 8; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 18–3)

4 In a memorandum for the President, August 8, Acting Secretary Ball suggested that under ANZUS the United States was only committed to consult and to act in the event of an attack on a treaty member’s forces in the Pacific. “Act” covered a broad range of measures from diplomatic support to the use of troops. The Department of State did not want to give Australia a “blank check” for support of their troops anywhere in the Pacific. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS)

338. Memorandum for the Australian Ambassador (Beale) 338. Memorandum for the Australian Ambassador (Beale)Source

Washington, October 4, 1963.

This memorandum sets forth the record of recent conversations involving the United States and Australia concerning the applicability of the ANZUS Treaty with respect to Malaysia.

1. At the ANZUS Council meeting held on June 5, 1963, Mr. Harriman told the Council that if Australian or New Zealand forces stationed in Malaysia were attacked, United States obligations under the ANZUS Treaty would come into force.1

2. In the meeting with the Australian Cabinet held in Canberra on June 7, 1963, Mr. Harriman, in speaking on the subject of Australia’s role in Malaysia, said that the United States would wish Australia to extend to Malaysia its present defense commitments to Malaya. Mr. Harriman added that if there should be an overt attack on Australian forces stationed in Malaysia, the ANZUS Treaty would come into operation.

3. Later on at the same meeting Mr. Holt asked Mr. Harriman whether he might clarify his earlier observations about United States participation in support of Australian forces in Malaysia. Mr. Harriman said that if it were a problem of internal security, the responsibility belonged to Malaysia and the British countries. But if there were an overt attack on Australian forces stationed in Malaysia, the ANZUS Treaty would, on the legal advice given to him, come into force. This would be irrespective of the source of the aggression since ANZUS was not, as SEATO was, related specifically to communist aggression.

4. Still later at that meeting the Prime Minister commented that the dividing line was between overt attack with the troops engaged and ANZUS effective, and subversive activities. Mr. Harriman said that in addition he would expect that the United States would play a role apart from its ANZUS commitment, e.g. in accordance with a United Nations initiative. He asked that this reference to the UN should not be taken as a commitment, but he felt that it would be the policy which the United States Government would follow.

5. Mr. McEwen2 thereupon brought up the question of subversion arising from organized infiltration into Malaysia from Indonesia. He referred to it as a kind of aggression but not formally or legally identified as such. He stated that in this situation Australia would wish to have the support of the United States, not necessarily the fighting support, but public verbal support and an unambiguous attitude. Mr. Harriman said that a reply would require a careful choice of words which he would not wish to attempt on the instant. However, he felt that the United States attitude would be much affected by the seriousness with which Australia itself was taking the situation. The United States had assumed extensive obligations abroad and had not yet turned away from an appeal by its friends. If there were a commitment on Australia’s part, Mr. Harriman said he did not think that the United States would let Australia down but he could make no commitments. Mr. Harriman added that this was a grey area between the two countries.

6. At a meeting between President Kennedy and Prime Minister Menzies on July 8, 1963, in Washington, the Prime Minister stated that Australia did not now have a commitment to Malaya but was contemplating making one. He said that he was hesitant to undertake commitments north of Indonesia unless he could be sure that the United States would back Australia if it got in trouble. He put the question thus: since the language of the ANZUS Treaty concerns an attack on Australian forces stationed in the treaty area as distinct from Australian territory, does this mean that if Australian forces stationed in North Borneo were overtly attacked, the ANZUS Treaty would take effect. The Prime Minister emphasized that he was not thinking of guerrilla warfare or subversion but an overt attack by regular armed forces. He said that Mr. Harriman, on the advice of his legal experts, had assured him that the treaty would take effect in the circumstances outlined above. The President agreed that Australia should know the exact commitment under the ANZUS Treaty and that Sukarno and others should also know it. The President directed in the presence of the P.M. Assistant Secretary of State Hilsman to look into the question as to whether an attack on Australian forces stationed in the treaty area would invoke the ANZUS Treaty. The President and the P.M. agreed that if the treaty applied in such circumstances discussions should be held in advance and discuss means of consultation between Australia and the United States in advance of Australian forces being stationed in such places which would invoke the ANZUS Treaty if Australian forces were attacked.

7. Following the meeting referred to above between the President and the Prime Minister, the President addressed a communication to the Australian Prime Minister proposing that consultations be held between the two Governments with a view to clarifying the nature of the commitments of the two countries towards each other under the ANZUS Treaty.

8. The foregoing represents an accurate and complete account of the exchanges of views which have taken place between the two Governments over the period June-July 1963. [9 lines of source text not declassified] The kind of action that would be appropriate would depend on the circumstances of any given situation.

9. In addition in light of this record, it seems in order to institute immediately consultations as already proposed by the United States so that there be no disagreement between the United States and Australia as to the meaning of the treaty.

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy–Johnson Administrations, Subject Files, Quadripartite talks re Indonesia and Malaysia. Secret. There is no indication that Harriman drafted this memorandum, but there are revisions in his hand. It was apparently not given to Beale because Harriman wrote “hold” on it.

1 An account of the June 5–6 discussions at the ANZUS Council meetings in Wellington are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2213.

2 John McEwen, Australian Deputy Prime Minister.

339. Memorandum of Conversation 339. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 4, 1963, 10:30–11:25 a.m.

SUBJECT

Indonesia

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary European Affairs

Thomas M. Judd, EUR/BNA

UK Lord Home, Foreign Secretary

Sir David Ormsby Gore, Ambassador to the U.S.

Oliver Wright, Foreign Office

The President inquired about the Indonesian situation. Lord Home said the last thing the British wanted was a conflict with the Indonesians. It was difficult to tell what Sukarno would do. He lived on excitement. The U.S. would have to put the squeeze on him.

The President said we were doing all we could. He considered the firm Australian declaration of support for Malaysia helpful. We had some imprecise connection with Malaysia through ANZUS. The President asked if the British considered that hostilities would develop. Lord Home thought there would probably be guerrilla warfare but not an open conflict. The Indonesians were vulnerable. For instance Sumatra could be pinched off quite easily.

The President asked Lord Home what the British would like us to do. Lord Home said what we were doing was just about right. Of course Duncan Sandys1 would like the Americans to put on more economic pressure. The President then went over our current policy on aid to Indonesia. He thought we should be very careful about cutting off all aid. This was a card that could only be played once. Sukarno quite obviously did not want to burn all of his bridges with the U.S. We should wait and see how the situation developed. The President noted that he had sent several personal messages to Sukarno. He thought what we were doing in the current difficult situation was correct. Lord Home expressed gratitude for what the U.S. had done but thought that we underestimated what we could do with economic pressure.

Lord Home said it might be advisable for the Americans, British, Australians and New Zealanders to have a quiet look at the situation.

The President agreed. He considered that we should start up again the consultation we had had earlier. A contingency plan might be worked out. Someone from Defense Department should be present at these talks. The President asked Mr. Tyler to follow up on this matter in the State Department.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-US. Secret. Drafted by Judd and cleared by the White House on October 15. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) This is one of six memoranda of conversation prepared for this meeting.

1 Duncan E. Sandys, British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations.

340. Memorandum of Conversation 340. Memorandum of ConversationSource

New York, October 4, 1963, 5:30 p.m.

SecDel/MC/106

SECRETARY’S DELEGATION TO THE EIGHTEENTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, September 1963

SUBJECT

Indonesian Posture Toward Malaysia and Timor

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary of State

Robert L. Kinney (Reporter)

Foreign Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister of External Affairs, Australia

Mr. J. R. Rowland, Assistant Secretary, Department of External Affairs, Australia

The Minister said that he had received a disturbing message indicating that the Indonesians might be up to something on Timor. He said that it would create a difficult situation for Australia if Indonesia took over Portuguese Timor. Australia would not be in a position to defend colonialist Portugal in the world arena, but on the other hand Australian public opinion would be aroused, and “our New Guinea people” would be particularly concerned. He wondered whether there might be some way of “subtly introducing” this into the United Nations prior to any Indonesian move. He hastened to say that he recognizes that the United States can’t do anything about this. He said that Under Secretary Harriman while in Australia had suggested that they talk to Salazar about developing plans for independence for the territory, but independence does not seem to promise a practical answer. The Prime Minister has addressed one letter to Salazar without any result. However, he may send another.

The Secretary asked about the people of Portuguese Timor. Barwick noted that they were the same as those in Indonesian Timor.

The Secretary asked whether there had been any evidence of Indonesian activity in East New Guinea. Barwick replied in the negative but noted Indonesian reluctance to agree to participate in photographing the border; their demand for a Consulate in Port Moresby in return for allowing the Australians to continue an office in Kota Baru; and that Subandrio had raised a complaint about an alleged illicit radio in Australian territory broadcasting to West Irian. On the latter point, Barwick said that his people had been unable to locate such a radio. When so advised, Subandrio had offered to provide tapes of broadcasts but has not to date furnished them.

The Secretary expressed the hope that Australia would immediately and strongly react to any moves by the Indonesians toward East New Guinea.

The Secretary asked what fighter planes are stationed in Malaysian Borneo. Barwick said that there are no Australian aircraft there. The Secretary inquired if Australia’s aircraft carrier were in the region. Barwick said that he believed this to be in Australian waters; he noted that there were two Australian frigates in Malaysian waters, however.

Barwick noted that Lord Home [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] had reassured him that the British would not reduce their troops in Borneo. Barwick pointed out that sending more than a couple of companies to Borneo would involve either calling upon the Australian reserve or transfer from the battalion now stationed at Penang.

The Secretary said that it appeared to him a question of whether, if there were trouble in Borneo, the important place for troops would be Borneo or Sumatra. He noted that it might not be best to play on the wicket chosen by the Indonesians, if action were necessary.

Barwick expressed some confusion about ANZUS in the Indonesian/Malaysian context. He said that when Under Secretary Harriman had been in Canberra he had, in the course of urging Australia “do our bit” for Malaysia, said to him that if Australian troops were sent to Borneo and were attacked by the Indonesians, the ANZUS commitment would come into effect.1 He said that Governor Harriman had repeated this at an Australian Cabinet meeting, after which he was asked whether, if the Australians were involved in a police action against local subversion, Australia would receive United States support. The reply had been “no,” which had caused some minor disappointment, since Mr. McEwen, who had asked the question, had meant to” enquire whether they could expect diplomatic and political support in the propaganda fuss which the Indonesians might raise even against Australian involvement in a local police action. The account of the meeting was adjusted later to reflect a proper interpretation of the question and reply.

Barwick noted that the Prime Minister subsequently had spoken to the President about ANZUS in relation to Malaysia, and he understood that the President had said that the United States wished to have a fully clear view of the matter and that it should be studied.2 The President then had written to Prime Minister Menzies in somewhat the same vein and suggested consultation.3 Barwick apologized for the delay in the Prime Minister’s response. He said that it had been his initial view that on the “broad” question of ANZUS application there was no disagreement and that detailed study and clarification therefore was not particularly necessary. Now, however, the Prime Minister has responded to the President’s letter, and he believed that the official discussions which will ensue will be directed not to the broad question but to studying the several contingencies which might develop in the context of Australia’s commitments to Malaysia against Indonesia. Accordingly, he did not feel that there was any question about the firmness of the United States commitment to ANZUS.

The Secretary agreed that there is no question about United States response under ANZUS terms to an Indonesian attack on Australia. The problem requiring study is one of what will happen if Australian troops in Malaysia are attacked there by the Indonesians. He noted that the ANZUS Treaty is not specific in defining “action” as this might relate to Australian involvement in assisting Malaysia.

Barwick said that there are several possible contingencies:

1) Overt aggression against Australian troops in Borneo amounting to a practically open state of war (Under Secretary Harriman had given a clear assurance of United States intentions in this case);

2) Insurgency clearly identifiable as directed from Indonesia;

3) Insurgency involving attacks on Australian troops in Borneo but without clear identification of external direction.

He said, however, that he felt the main point to be that a discussion of the “width” of ANZUS is not a suitable matter for “officials.”

The Secretary agreed. He reminded Barwick that he previously had mentioned the importance of consultation on this point between President Kennedy and the Prime Minister, since decisions involved were of such importance as to require the judgment of the President.

Barwick noted that “contingency planning” was, however, a suitable subject for exploration by “officials.” He indicated that he planned to be in Washington after another week in New York.

He expressed some concern about stationing troops in Borneo because of the difficulties imposed by the terrain. The Secretary noted that it seemed possible that the troops should be placed elsewhere. He indicated that further discussion of this question on an entirely secret basis might be in order. He noted that he had reminded Subandrio that Indonesia consists of several thousand islands and that Indonesia has the greatest stake in peace of any country in the area. He said that he assumed that Subandrio understood the implication.

Barwick noted that Rolz-Bennett had told him earlier in the day that the UN Secretariat was encouraging the Thanat moves to arrange a conference of Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia to be followed by a summit conference of the heads of state. He said that he had advised Rolz-Bennett that this should not be pressed. He said that [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] the Indonesians had made their real design to assert themselves in Asia—he referred to Indonesian Ambassador Palar’s statement in the General Assembly that Indonesia wished to replace a Pax Britannica in Asia with a “Pax Indonesiana”—clear. Barwick said that he had cautioned Thanat against haste in bringing the parties together again.

The Secretary did not agree. He suggested that much depended upon whether the Indonesians took action in Borneo before Thanat’s efforts could be tested. Barwick indicated doubt that the Indonesians would make any overt moves for the present. However, he thought that there was little that the Tengku could give Sukarno in the way of concessions without strengthening Sukarno at Malaysia’s expense. Barwick said that he thought that one crisis after another would have to be expected if the Indonesians succeed in this. He noted that a recent report from Australian Ambassador Shann had been quite pessimistic. Shann had expressed the view that Sukarno has become the captive of Indonesian “public opinion” and that any successor leadership now in sight would be equally captive of the public mood.

The Secretary doubted that Sukarno is the captive of public opinion; he suggested that the reverse appeared to be the case.

Barwick said that he had come around to Shann’s view.

The Secretary observed that he did not see how the United States could be expected to continue aiding Indonesia in view of the break in trade with Malaysia. This had cost Indonesia some 150 million dollars which the American tax-payers could not be expected to compensate.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by Kinney. The meeting was held at USUN.

1 See Document 338.

2 See footnote 3, Document 337.

3 The text of the August 19 letter was transmitted in telegram 186 to Canberra, August 20. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA)

341. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 341. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, October 9, 1963.

I’ve planted the seed with Harriman that he might consider whether he shouldn’t go out personally to try and damp down Malaysia affair.1 Sukarno is the key, only the US has the leverage in this situation to have any influence on Sukarno, the Bung will only listen to the President, and only a Presidential envoy like Harriman would have the requisite combination of toughness and understanding to deal with characters like Sukarno, Macapagal and the Tunku.

To me, it’s worth every resource of preventive diplomacy to forestall the kind of blow-up over Malaysia in which our very success in blocking Sukarno may lose us Indonesia. Obviously, we must support Malaysia. But if we let things drift to the point where Sukarno’s continued subversive build-up forces us to enter the lists against him, we may practically push him into Communist hands. I do not believe the Soviets could afford to let Sukarno down, if he appealed to them for aid. They could, of course, send him all sorts of aid unless we blockaded Indonesia. If they did so, he could hardly keep the PKI out of the government, and this would make Aidit Sukarno’s logical successor. At a minimum we’d end up with a major anti-Indonesian effort on our hands, on top of Laos and Vietnam. At the maximum we’d lose Indonesia to the Bloc.

Best way I see to avoid such risks is to utilize some more Presidential diplomacy. I’d follow up the President’s “stand still” messages with a further round calling all concerned to account and asking them to lay off till he can send a personal envoy to talk with them. Harriman agrees that such an envoy is desirable, but bridles at going himself. However, who else could do the job? Wilson Wyatt just doesn’t carry the punch. Rusk or even Ball would be both too big and too unsympathetic to the Bung. Only Harriman can convey firmness plus understanding, and I claim it is well worth ten days of his time to hit Manila, Djakarta and then Kuala Lumpur.

RWK

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Secret. Also sent to Forrestal.

1 According to a telephone conversation, October 9, 5:35 p.m. Harriman was very reluctant to go, but Komer was very insistent. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy-Johnson Administrations, Telephone Conversations)

342. Memorandum From the Department of State to President Kennedy 342. Memorandum From the Department of State to President KennedySource

Washington, October 14, 1963.

SUBJECT

Malaysia Dispute

The following paper is divided into four parts. Part I deals with recommended steps to prevent a further deterioration of the situation. Part II describes steps contemplated if these efforts to halt deterioration fail. Part III is an analysis of our obligations under ANZUS. Part IV contains suggested guidelines for the up-coming consultations with the Australians. A separate Department of Defense paper, attached as an annex, is concerned with possible United States military actions in case of overt attack by Indonesia on Malaysia.

I. To prevent a further deterioration of the situation, we intend to take the following immediate steps:

A. Urge Thanat Khoman to intensify his efforts to bring ministerial level representatives of the three countries together in Bangkok. We will also suggest that he make brief personal visits to each of the three capitals to promote an early meeting. Instructions have already been sent to USUN to approach Thanat along these, lines (Tab A)1

B. Inform the Tunku of our dismay at the belligerent anti-Indonesian tone of his recent statements and make it clear to him that he must stop these irresponsible broadsides if he is to count on our continued support. We are also suggesting that Ambassador Jones (scheduled to visit Singapore briefly around October 10) meet privately with the Tunku to counteract his wishful thinking about the internal situation in Indonesia. (Tab B)

C. Warn Subandrio in clear terms that if Indonesia undertakes either overt or intense covert hostilities against Malaysia, the United States may well become directly involved through the ANZUS Pact and through our obligations under the United Nations Charter. We believe a warning to Subandrio, which he could convey to Sukarno in his own way, would be more effective than a direct warning to Sukarno in his present truculent mood. A draft cable conveying these instructions is attached. (Tab C)

D. Make another attempt to detach the Philippines from Indonesia by emphasizing to Macapagal the grave risk to Philippine security that would result from continued association with a nation committed to the elimination of U.S. and UK bases and, increasingly, to armed aggression against Malaysia, its Commonwealth partner and (through ANZUS) perhaps even the United States.

E. Enlist the support of the UK and Australia for our efforts to move Malaysia and Indonesia back from the brink by restoring direct Malaysia-Indonesia-Philippine contacts. Both the UK and Australia are cool to these efforts, and are counseling the Tunku to hold out for concessions before permitting these contacts to begin. (Draft telegram, Tab D)

II. If the foregoing efforts fail to halt deterioration and bring about a resumption of contacts, we suggest the following steps:

A. Suggest to the Secretary General that he name a representative to mediate the dispute through personal diplomacy in the respective capitals.

B. Explore the possibility of other UN involvement, including the feasibility of a UN peace-keeping mission to head off armed clashes.

C. Use our remaining leverage in Indonesia (primarily our continuing aid programs and Ambassador Jones’ special relationship with Sukarno) to exert maximum pressure on the Indonesians, making clear to them the impending severance of all ties with the Free World unless they reverse their course toward aggression. Measures to exert this leverage would include the progressive cancellation of aid programs (including PL 480), the withdrawal of American dependents and surplus personnel and the recall of Ambassador Jones for consultation.

III. Obligations and actions under ANZUS:

The ANZUS Treaty in Articles IV and V, provides that in the event of an armed attack in the Pacific area on any of the parties, including on their armed forces, each party would “act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.”

All of the parties understand that this commitment relates only to overt attack and not to subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression. What constitutes “armed” or “overt” attack is a matter for joint determination under the treaty and cannot be unilaterally decided by any of the parties to invoke the treaty obligations. The question of when subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression matures into an armed or overt attack so as to invoke the treaty is especially difficult. For this reason alone continuing consultation under the treaty would seem to be desirable and even essential.

In the context of Malaysia, it should be noted that an attack on Malaysia per se would not trigger the treaty. It is only in the event of an armed attack on the armed forces, public vessels or aircraft of Australia or New Zealand that the United States would be under an obligation to act under the treaty While the stationing of Australian forces in Malaysia was not contemplated at the time the ANZUS Treaty was concluded, the treaty clearly envisages such possibility anywhere in the Pacific area. The treaty does not, however, give any party a carte blanche to engage in activities which might involve the other parties under the treaty. The treaty provides for consultations among the parties and is based on the assumption that such activities would be undertaken only after there had been appropriate consultations.

The treaty does not define the kind of action the parties must take in the event of an armed attack. There is a whole range of measures which might be appropriate depending upon the circumstances. They could involve anything from a diplomatic protest to an appeal to the United Nations to the use of armed force. Here again is a subject which seems suitable for periodic consultations under the treaty.

In addition the treaty requires the parties to act “in accordance with their constitutional processes.” In the case of the United States, this may involve either the President acting alone or the President with the Congress whether formally or otherwise, depending on legal and policy considerations.

A more detailed statement of the legal aspects of the ANZUS problem is contained in the annex to the Acting Secretary’s memorandum for the President on ANZUS dated August 8, 1963.2

IV. Suggested guidelines for consultations with Australians

A. Primary responsibility for the defense of Malaysia rests with the British and the Commonwealth.

B. We wish to continue to encourage Australia to assume a greater role in the defense of Malaysia. We must insist that the Government of Australia consult with us before Australia makes further military commitments in the Pacific area outside Malaysia.

C. We should encourage Australia (and the UK) to refrain from any action or statement which would tend to provoke Sukarno to more belligerent action. They should at the same time use their influence with the Tunku to the same end. The Government of Malaysia must be made to understand that this is a time that calls for statesmanship and that any further provocative statements such as those made by the Tunku on October 5 must be stopped. We cannot put ourselves in the position of being dragged into the military defense of Malaysia if our diplomatic efforts are undermined by others.

D. We should insist that Australia and New Zealand consult in advance with us on the nature and timing of any statement which they feel obliged to make re U.S. assurances of support of their involvement in Malaysia.

E. In our view guerrilla warfare and subversion in which there are involved only indigenous personnel from Sarawak, North Borneo or Brunei, even though trained by the Indonesians, would not constitute overt aggression within the meaning of the ANZUS Treaty and would be a problem for Malaysia and her Commonwealth partners. If substantial numbers of Indonesian troops were committed, the Treaty would come into force.

F. If the situation deteriorates further short of overt aggression, we anticipate the matter might go to the United Nations with an effort to seek agreement on a peace-keeping operation by the UN. The U.S. would support a UN peace-keeping mission.

G. In the case of an overt attack against Australian forces in Malaysia, the U.S. would meet its obligations under the ANZUS Treaty. The kind of action which the U.S. might take would depend upon the particular circumstances and on the need for assistance from us. We would not become involved in the military sense until our ANZUS partners, Malaysia and the UK, were fully committed. The form of action we would take would have to be a matter for consultation at the time the contingency arose. In any case, we would limit our help to logistic, air and naval support.

H. In the case of subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression, no obligation under the Treaty would arise for the United States. While we consider the problem of subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression in Malaysia to be a British and Commonwealth responsibility, we would, of course bring U.S. influence and pressure to bear on Indonesia. (See Sections I and II above.)

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Top Secret. There is no drafting information on the source text, but another copy of the memorandum has Harriman’s extensive handwritten revisions. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy-Johnson Administrations, Subject Files, Malaysia) A Department of Defense paper listing possible U.S. military actions in the case of an overt attack by Indonesia on Malaysia was attached but is not printed.

On the covering memorandum to Bundy, Read noted that this memorandum and the Defense paper, in the form of a single one-page paper, served as the basis of discussion for a meeting with the President by representatives of the Departments of State and Defense and CIA on October 9. At that meeting, the President approved the policy outlined in the combined paper. According to the President’s Appointment Book, the meeting on October 9, described as “off-the-record,” lasted from 11 to 11:55 a.m. (Kennedy Library) No other record of it has been found.

1 None of the tabs was attached and they are not further identified.

2 See footnote 4, Document 337.

343. Memorandum of Conversation 343. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 16, 1963.

PERSONS PRESENT

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Sir Howard Beale (Australian Ambassador) and Michael V. Forrestal

SUBJECT

ANZUS Treaty and Malaysia

At 5:15 pm today Ambassador Beale came to Mr. Bundy’s office for a discussion of U.S. obligations under the ANZUS Treaty with respect to Australian armed forces stationed in Malaysia.

Mr. Bundy handed to Sir Howard a paper (copy attached) outlining the United States interpretation of its obligations under the ANZUS Treaty. Mr. Bundy explained that the President desired that the information contained in the paper be conveyed to Prime Minister Menzies, so that there would be no misunderstanding between allies who were so close and intimate as the United States and Australia. Mr. Bundy emphasized that the paper was not an official communication and did not require formal acceptance by the Australian Government, although he would certainly wish to hear any comments the Ambassador or the Minister of External Affairs might have.

Sir Howard said that he understood completely; and that the paper would surely reach the Prime Minister, since it would be carried back to Canberra by Sir Garfield Barwick. The Ambassador said that, speaking personally, the paper accurately reflected his understanding of the situation; and that he would show it to Sir Garfield this evening and drop by in the morning before the meeting with the President to Mr. Bundy’s office if the Minister, for External Affairs had any comments. Mr. Bundy observed that in the midst of a political campaign in Australia, there might well be occasions where allusions were made to U.S. obligations under the ANZUS Treaty in connection with Malaysia. It would be helpful to us if we were informed of the nature and scope of any such statements before they were made.

Ambassador Beale replied that he was certain that responsible members of the Australian Government were fully aware of the problems and would act with great discretion. He could not, however, speak for all of the campaigners. He agreed that consultation in advance would be wise.

The meeting was extremely cordial and appeared to give the Ambassador a chance to correct any impression that the Australian Government had pushed its interpretation of the ANZUS obligations too far.

MVF

Attachment1

Paper Presented to the Australian Ambassador (Beale)

The ANZUS Treaty provides that in the event of an armed attack in the Pacific area on any of the parties, including their armed forces, public vessels or aircraft, each party would “act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.” In view of the present situation with respect to Malaysia, it is deemed desirable to set forth the nature of the obligations of the parties to the Treaty as defined in recent discussions between representatives of the United States and the Commonwealth of Australia.

Conversations held between the Prime Minister of Australia and the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs on June 7, 1963, between the Prime Minister and the President of the United States on July 8, 1963, and between the Minister of External Affairs and the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs on October 14, 1963 dealt with the possibility of armed attack against Australian forces stationed in Malaysia. In the context of those conversations it was confirmed that the United States would act under Articles IV and V of the Treaty in the event of an armed attack by Indonesian armed forces on the armed forces, public vessels or aircraft of Australia in Malaysia. In those conversations it was also understood that the Treaty relates only to overt attack and not to subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression. It was agreed that it was not feasible to define in advance when subversion, guerrilla warfare or indirect aggression becomes armed or overt attack, but that this matter would be decided jointly by the parties to the Treaty.

The United States understands that Australia has its own honorable obligations but would consult with it before Australia makes further military commitments in the Treaty area. The Minister of External Affairs of the Commonwealth of Australia assured the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs on October 14 that Australia would consult with the United States before stationing armed forces in Sarawak or Sabah.

Since the Treaty does not define the kind of action the parties must take in the event of an armed attack, the response of the United States would be determined in consultation with the other parties to the Treaty. It was agreed that there was a whole, range of measures which might be appropriate including political and diplomatic activities and in an extreme situation, the use of armed force. In view of the extensive commitments of the United States throughout the world, however, further consultations would be necessary before any United States armed forces were committed. In case it was decided that such forces were necessary in support of Australian forces engaged in the defense of Malaysia, the United States would be prepared to commit air and sea forces and to provide logistic support. It was understood that any of the foregoing actions would be subject to the constitutional processes of the United States.

It was recognized that the interests, commitments and responsibilities of the ANZUS partners in the Pacific area require that all parties concerned in the Malaysia controversy avoid political actions or statements which might lead to precipitate military action involving one or more of the ANZUS partners. The United States therefore wishes to stress the need to use all available diplomatic and political means to prevent any provocation, real or imagined, which would lead to an acceleration of hostilities. To this end the United States urges that there be the closest consultation among all parties concerned with respect to political and military actions taken and statements made so that the United States will be continuously in a position to give prompt consideration to the action it should take in support of its partners under the Treaty.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Forrestal.

1 Secret. Forrestal and. Harriman discussed this paper in telephone conversations at 3:30 and 6:30 p.m. on October 16. (Memoranda of telephone conversations; Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy-Johnson Administrations, Telephone Conversations)

344. Memorandum of Conversation 344. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 17, 1963, 9:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

1. Australian Elections

2. Malaysia

3. Indonesia

4. ANZUS

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister for External Affairs of Australia

Sir Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador

Mr. Roger Hilsman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Michael V. Forrestal, Senior Staff Member, National Security Council

The President opened the discussion by observing that Sir Garfield was about to enter an election campaign. He inquired about the issues.

Sir Garfield replied that the Conservative Party’s platform embraced three foreign policy issues: (1) the agreement between the United States and Australia on the VLF station in northern Australia; (2) Malaysia; and (3) nuclear free zones. He said that the opposition had taken an illogical position on the VLF station contending that unless Australia had joint control of its operation, there was the possibility that the country might get dragged into war by the United States. The answer to this was that it would be impractical to have two fingers on the telegraph key, and that in any event, the worst that the United States could do would be to cause Australia to violate the principle of neutrality, which was hardly a cause for war. On the question of Malaysia, Sir Garfield pointed out that the Labor opposition had retreated from their original position against any involvement in Malaysia; their position now was that no Australian troops should be sent to Malaysia without a mutual defense treaty. Sir Garfield said that this was an irresponsible argument, since Malaysia was unaligned and could not very well enter into such a treaty, and that Australia’s obligations toward Malaysia were that of a fellow member of the Commonwealth. On nuclear free zones, he observed that the opposition’s position favoring such a zone in the Southern Hemisphere was tantamount to national suicide for Australia.

How could any nation faced by an uncontrollable and enormous aggressor in the north surrender its primary means of self defense?

The President inquired whether Sir Garfield had encountered any problems during his talks here in Washington. The President was particularly interested in the Tunku’s position in Malaysia. He inquired whether the Malayan Chinese disliked Sukarno and what sort of threat would they really pose to the Tunku.

Sir Garfield said that he had met no particular problems in Washington. He said that the political position of the Tunku was such as to put severe limits on his diplomatic freedom. The Singapore Chinese disliked Indonesia [4-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. This would be disastrous for Western interests, since eventually the Malay people of Malaysia would break away leaving Singapore in the hands of the Chinese and susceptible to domination by Mainland China. Such a loss of Singapore would gravely threaten Australia and would undermine the whole structure of free world defenses throughout the Southeast [Asia] area.

In response to a question of the President, Sir Garfield said that the whole purpose of Malaysia was to provide a way of satisfying Chinese economic interests while maintaining Malayan political preeminence in the area comprising Malaysia.

[1 paragraph (4 lines of source text) not declassified]

The President asked what the ratio was between the Chinese and Malay people in Malaysia. The Minister replied that it was approximately 1/2 Malayan, 1/3 Chinese, and the remainder mixed non-Chinese in Malaysia as a whole; and approximately 1/3 Malayan, 1/3 Chinese, and 1/3 mixed in the old Federation of Malaya.

The President inquired how one could discourage Sukarno’s expansionist aspirations in view of the apparent support he received from the major power groups in Malaysia. Sir Garfield replied that it was important not to give Sukarno any major diplomatic success and in particular not to press Malaysia into entering diplomatic negotiations with him at this time.

The President asked what the military situation was in Sarawak and North Borneo. The Ambassador and Sir Garfield replied that the balance of forces appeared to be favorable to Malaysia at least until 1964.

The discussion then turned to the aide-mémoire on ANZUS handed to Sir Garfield by McGeorge Bundy.1

Sir Garfield indicated that the United States position as described in the aide-mémoire was satisfactory with the addition of the words he had proposed and which were included in the paper actually handed to him.

The President said that he had wanted to make sure that the record was straight. People have forgotten ANZUS and are not at the moment prepared for a situation which would involve the United States. Australia and the United States should, however, keep in close touch so that, if a situation should develop that would call for our assistance, we could show our people that our views had been given consideration.

Sir Garfield agreed, mentioning that the United States, through Harriman, had encouraged Australia to support Malaysia.

The President added that the Prime Minister had then brought the matter up and that they had agreed on the necessity for consultation. The aide-mémoire represented our view.

Sir Garfield said that as Foreign Minister he had tried to avoid antipathy with Indonesia, although this had caused him to be called an appeaser. Australia, however, now was going into an election and they must have a more robust criticism of Sukarno. He did want to assure the President, however, that he would not be bellicose, only critical. The President said that the United Kingdom and Australia have made their position clear and Sukarno understands this. In the case of West New Guinea, the Dutch were unwilling to do anything, but because of the UK and Australian stand the Malaysia situation was different. Sukarno may try to “play the United States” in this situation. The President did not object to this since it would give the United States leverage. But the time might come when the United States would have to change its policy toward Indonesia, and the President wanted to make sure that our position throughout had been reasonable. Our policy toward Indonesia had been deliberately ambivalent—not to face Sukarno with a white trio and to avoid a polemic between Sukarno and the United States.

Sir Garfield said that he did not think that the United States should publicly slap Sukarno down—at least not yet. But he did feel that we should avoid giving Sukarno a success or building him up. Sukarno had told him quite frankly that he would support a dissident movement in East New Guinea. He did not feel that Indonesia had a plan for East New Guinea but that they were generally ambitious. Sir Garfield felt that they would have a dissident movement in East New Guinea, however, and that Sukarno would try to support it.

The President then read the substance of Djakarta’s 888 of October 16th to the Department giving Ambassador Jones’ analysis of the situation in Indonesia and the consequences of alternate policies.2 The President commented that he believed Jones’ judgment to be sound.

Sir Garfield said that he was inclined to believe that Ambassador Jones was excessively hopeful. A tripartite meeting at any level would only serve Indonesia’s ends at this time. Sir Garfield said he did not believe that the Indonesians would be influenced to soften their present policy by such a meeting. He recalled that shortly before the publication of the UN Report on the elections in the former colonies, he had discussed the Indonesian position with President Sukarno. At that time President Sukarno had said that he knew that his policy would lead him into a confrontation with the British and the Australians and probably even the United States, but that he was willing to take them all on. Sir Garfield suggested that the United States find means of not treating Indonesia visibly better than Malaysia since this would weaken the will in Malaysia to resist and strengthen Sukarno’s desire to destroy Malaysia.

The President emphasized that the United States had made it clear to President Sukarno that we supported Malaysia. He said that he felt it was worthwhile maintaining and using U.S. influence in Indonesia to damp down their wilder actions. He also felt that we should work more through the Philippines.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Memoranda of Conversation, 9/63–10/63. Secret. Drafted by Hilsman and approved by the White House on October 28. According to Kennedy’s Appointment Book, the meeting lasted from 10:07 to 10:27 a.m. (Kennedy Library) A memorandum for the President containing talking points and biographic material was prepared by the Department of State and sent to Bundy on October 16. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA)

1 Attachment to Document 343.

2 In telegram 888, Jones suggested that the alternatives were: 1) staying the course and preserving U.S. leverage to influence Indonesia toward a moderate negotiated settlement with Malaysia, or 2) withdrawing all aid to Indonesia and increasing economic pressure on Sukarno so as to bring about a change of leadership or the breakup of Indonesia. The second alternative could be exploited by the PKI, would abandon and embitter U.S. friends in Indonesia, and was based on the possibility of a secessionist movement that was, in fact, completely lacking. Jones felt that time and economic difficulties would cool Indonesia on confrontation. The second course would only ignite tempers and make matters worse. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 INDON)

345. Memorandum of Conversation 345. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 18, 1963, 8:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Quadripartite Talks on Indonesia-Malaysia Problem

PARTICIPANTS

Australia Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister of External Affairs

Sir Howard Beale, Ambassador

Mr. J. K. Waller, First Assistant Secretary, Department of External Affairs

Great Britain Sir David Ormsby Gore, Ambassador

Mr. Frederick A. Warner, Southeast Asia Department, Foreign Office

Mr. Anthony A. Golds, Far East and Pacific Department, Commonwealth Relations Office

New Zealand Mr. George Laking, Ambassador

Mr. Alistair McIntosh, Secretary, Department of External Affairs

United States The Secretary.

Governor Harriman, Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Mr. Hilsman, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

The Secretary suggested that the paper presented for consideration seemed to lack balance and suggested an opening paragraph on the primary U.K. responsibility for Malaysia. It was agreed that the paper should be amended. (A new paragraph was drafted at the working level and has been approved by the Secretary.1 We are informed that the U.K. and Australia have also agreed to the new draft. At this writing we have not heard from New Zealand. Copy of agreed paper attached.)

The question of what the Tunku should be told about the quadripartite meetings was raised by the Secretary. The British Ambassador said that he was still being pushed by the Foreign Office on this subject and they were quite insistent that the Tunku be informed of the quadripartite meetings. It was finally agreed that the British would inform the Tunku that during the course of Sir Garfield Barwick’s visit to Washington matters relating to Malaysia and the Indonesian policy of confrontation had been discussed and the British and New Zealand Ambassadors had been invited to participate. The Secretary expressed the view that anything passed to the Tunku should be presented in a way which did not lead him to believe that he had a blank check. The British agreed to emphasize that our discussions were purely informal. They also would not give the Tunku any reason to believe that the current talks were part of any formal or regularly continuing procedure. It was further agreed that any information on measures which the United States might take should be passed to the Tunku by the U.S. However, we did not at this time plan to give the Tunku a run-down on what we were prepared to do.

It was agreed that the British would pass the substance of paragraph 5 to the Tunku and possibly discuss paragraph 6.

The Secretary asked at what point this dispute might go to the United Nations. Mr. McIntosh said his Government did not want the matter brought to the UN at this stage. Mr. Warner said there had been rather brief mention of this on the working level but no conclusions reached. The Commonwealth countries seemed to feel that the time had not come to get the matter before the UN. The Secretary did not disagree but did remark that we might want to go to the UN before we get actively involved.

Governor Harriman said the group had agreed that Thanat should pursue his present efforts and that we hoped Thanat could get something moving. If Thanat were to be successful in getting some movement, we all should stay out of it and let him handle the matter.

Governor Harriman mentioned that General Nasution had a standing invitation to visit the United States and that we had recently had indications he might decide to pay us a visit. Mr. Hilsman remarked that we hoped General Taylor and others would be able to exercise a moderating influence on Nasution (the British had earlier stated they did not think a Nasution visit to the U.S. would be useful but appeared to have modified their position on this).

Governor Harriman said that although there was no definite plan yet, consideration was being given to having General Taylor return to the U.S. from his scheduled visits to CENTO, Pakistan and India via Singapore.

Attachment2

QUADRIPARTITE MEETING ON INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA

Washington, October 16–18

Representatives of Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States met in Washington from October 16th to 18th and reviewed the present situation arising from Indonesian confrontation of Malaysia.

1. The Australian, New Zealand and United Kingdom representatives reaffirmed that military and economic support for Malaysia was primarily a Commonwealth responsibility. The United Kingdom representative described the military measures being taken by the British Government to deal with armed Indonesian subversion in the Borneo territories, and informed the meeting of their intention to maintain these efforts at such a level as the situation might require.

2. All sides agreed that the time was not yet ripe for a tripartite meeting among Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.

3. The United States side agreed to consider various measures which would indicate a positive U.S. support for Malaysia: a) The sale by the U.S. of military equipment to Malaysia on credit terms.

b) Invitations to Malaysian leaders to visit the United States and visits to Malaysia by U.S. leaders.

c) U.S. naval visit to Malaysia.

4. The United States agreed that: a) Should an appropriate opportunity arise, it would publicly reiterate its support for the independence and integrity of Malaysia.

b) It would further encourage U.S. investment by announcing the extension of the investment guarantee agreement to the whole of Malaysia and by conducting investment feasibility surveys.

5. The United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand agreed to continue to urge on the Tunku a policy of restraint and moderation in his public statements and actions.

6. It is considered that the time is not yet ripe for a tripartite meeting among Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines. Against a backdrop of steady, quiet support for Malaysia, we should all express the hope that Thanat should continue his initiative with care and precision, if he considers it advisable, looking toward the establishment of conditions mutually agreed among Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines which would permit the holding of a meeting as soon as practicable. In the course of his efforts, Thanat should strive to achieve whatever measures might alleviate the current impasse. We would appreciate his analysis of the situation as it develops, including any usefulness of Maphilindo, and would be receptive to suggestions for whatever support he might desire from any of us. The substance of this paragraph would be passed to Thanat by the Australian Government.

7. It was agreed that quadripartite meetings to follow closely developments in the Indonesia-Malaysia dispute should be held in Washington or London as events seem to make them appropriate.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 MALAYSIA, Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell and approved in S on October 23 and M on October 25. According to Rusk’s Appointment Book, his next meeting took place at 9:52 a.m. (Johnson Library)

1 Working-level discussions, held October 16–17, are summarized briefly in telegram 2552 to London, October 19. (Department of State, Central Files, POL INDONMALAYSIA)

2 Secret. Commenting on the agreed paper, a copy of which he sent to McGeorge Bundy Forrestal wrote in a note of October 18: “This is the dismal result of three days with the Malaysian allies. Komer will be depressed.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63)

346. National Intelligence Estimate 346. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, October 30, 1963.

NIE 54/55–63

THE MALAYSIAN-INDONESIAN CONFLICT1

Conclusions

A. President Sukarno appears to be set upon eliminating Western influence from the Malaysia area and replacing it over the long run with Indonesian dominance. To these ends he has set out to suffocate at its birth the new state of Malaysia, which he apparently regards as an unacceptable scheme to perpetuate Western influence and rob Indonesia of territories which it believed would fall under its hegemony with the end of British colonial rule. Sukarno probably counts upon a US willingness to play a mediating role and upon Soviet political and material support. (Paras. 1–2, 10, 20–21)

B. The policy of “confrontation” appears designed to undermine Malaysia and to upset constituted authority in Sarawak, and, later, Sabah (North Borneo), to a point where a settlement favorable to Indonesia can be subsequently worked out. Sukarno will continue harassment of the northern Borneo territories plus subversion and economic activities against Malaya and Singapore, expecting to make the continuance of Malaysia unworkable and the British position there untenable. (Paras. 5–8)

C. We anticipate no significant domestic threat to Sukarno’s continued authority. Inflationary pressures are certain to be generated by the military expense of the “confrontation” campaign, and the heavy, though possibly temporary, costs of the break in trade relations with Malaysia. The Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) will exploit economic discontent but will be limited in this by its strong support of the anti-Malaysia campaign. On the whole, we believe that domestic pressures are not likely to impose restraints on the “confrontation” policy. (Paras. 14–18)

D. Basically, the Malaysian position in the conflict is to stand firm against Indonesian demands under the cover of Commonwealth protection, waiting for Indonesia to weaken and retreat because of political and economic strains at home. As long as Indonesia’s stance remains unchanged, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman will be under strong pressure from his people and party to maintain an uncompromising position. Indonesian “confrontation” has for the moment rallied potentially conflicting forces behind the regime. (Paras. 25–28)

E. The Philippines will probably continue to play a secondary role in the conflict, seeking to establish itself as a genuine force in Asian politics, but careful not to alienate Indonesia on any major question concerning Malaysia so long as the US does not take stronger measures to dissuade Sukarno from his anti-Malaysia actions. Other than the Philippines, Indonesia has almost no non-Communist support for its campaign among the Afro-Asian states. The USSR will probably encourage the Indonesians to continue the campaign against Malaysia, hoping to increase Indonesia’s dependence on the USSR and to profit generally in the Afro-Asian world from having once more aided the struggle against “imperialism.” However, the Soviets will probably not encourage the Indonesians to enter upon open hostilities with Western forces; if such a development occurs, the Soviets would almost certainly not assume serious risks of their own involvement. (Paras. 19–21, 23)

F. The outlook is probably for a rising Indonesian level of efforts to subvert Malaysia. The British are confident that they can contain Indonesian paramilitary activity. While Sukarno will seek to avoid open hostilities, there is danger that, in pursuing his present course, he will miscalculate in responding to British countermeasures and that a direct military confrontation with UK and Commonwealth forces will occur. (Paras. 9, 31–32)

[Here follows the Discussion section.]

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 54/55–63. Secret. A note on the cover sheet states that this estimate was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency; the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; and the National Security Agency. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate with the exception of the representatives of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Atomic Energy Commission, who abstained because the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

Forrestal sent an advance copy of this NIE to McGeorge Bundy for President Kennedy. He also noted that the full NIE would be available for the President’s weekend reading. (Memorandum from Forrestal to Bundy, October 31; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Malaysia, 10/63)

A Special Article prepared by the CIA’s Office of Current Intelligence, “Britain’s Malaysia Policy,” SC No. 00615/63B, October 25, was also included in the President’s weekend reading for October 27. The article concluded that the British Government considered itself obligated and able to protect Malaysia from Indonesia. Because of its long-term policy of reducing military expenditures in Southeast Asia, the British Government would explore every avenue for a peaceful settlement before resorting to force. (Ibid.)

1 Previous papers covering problems in this area include: NIE 54/59–62, “Prospects for the Proposed Federation of Malaysia,” dated 11 July 1962; SNIE 54/59–63, “Indonesia’s International Orientation,” dated 10 April 1963. [Footnote in the source text. NIE 54/59–63 is printed as Document 327; SNIE 54/59–63 is printed as Document 330. NIE 55–63 is in the Johnson Library, National Security Files, National Intelligence Estimates, 55, Indonesia.]

347. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 347. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 18, 1963.

SUBJECT

Thoughts on the Situation in the Far East

I have become increasingly concerned at what appears to be a developing stalemate in our diplomatic activities in the Far East. I have the sense that events are overtaking our own actions, and that consequently we will find ourselves on the defensive in the coming months unless we exercise some more vigorous and preventive diplomacy.

Over the past few weeks we have been obsessed by the problem in South Vietnam, but elsewhere in the area situations are developing which can become quite nasty if allowed to take their course.

[Here follows information on Cambodia.]

Malaysia/Indonesia

We have allowed the Indonesian confrontation with Malaysia to rock along without any initiative on our own part. Despite hopeful talks between Lopez, Thanat and Subandrio in Bangkok, the Indonesians continue to build up their forces in Kalimantan; and the Tunku shows no signs of being allowed any flexibility by his British advisors. Recently there have been ominous indications that the military forces of the two countries are coming into closer contact—Indonesian airplanes over Kuching and patrols within sight of each other over the ill-defined border.

This is a situation where coordinated initiatives are required in four capitals: Manila, K.L., Djakarta and London. I’m not sure that the United States has to get out in front publicly in coordinating an approach; but I feel that unless we stimulate the situation, it may slide off into real unpleasantness. I attach a cable from Djakarta (1094) which suggests a Harriman visit.1 I think the White House has got to do some stronger pushing on this.

[Here follows information on Laos, Korea, and Japan.]

Our Allies

On the Malaysian confrontation we have lost London and Canberra. In Indo-China, the French are still playing dog in the manger. Personnel have changed in Paris and London, and the elections may have an effect in Canberra. Here again we need to make a bigger push to get our allies on board.

Conclusion

If all this sounds like a plea for more action by Forrestal outside of Washington, it is. Since Harriman has left FE, Roger has let himself get bogged down in the red tape of his Bureau. We don’t have available in State the personnel at the intermediate levels who can pick up the ball on any of these problems. Basically State has only Harriman and Roger.

What we need to do is to develop a scenario of specific actions and visits during the coming weeks to get some of these stalemates unfrozen. We can’t send Harriman everywhere; but we can start setting up situations where a high level visit will eventually be useful. To do this we need to get the groundwork done by our embassies and by some lower level visits from Washington.

I think you should let Roger and myself alternate on some of this and prepare to do one or two of the higher level jobs yourself. It looks less and less as if the President will be able to make a Far East trip this winter. This is all the more reason to increase the tempo of our diplomatic activities. A trip may be possible this spring if we do manage to get some of these problems on the way to resolution.

MVF

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, MV Forrestal, 11/62–11/63. Secret.

1 Dated November 16. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 INDON)

348. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 348. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, December 7, 1963.

McGB:

I am more convinced than ever that inertia, plus the nationalistic emotionalism of Sukarno, the Tunku, Macapagal, and the British, is carrying us inescapably toward a big Malaysia flap. The intelligence certainly points this way. So with a Presidential trip now out of the question,1 I am also more convinced than ever that some other exercise in personal diplomacy is called for, if we’re not to slide past the point of no return. Someone with clout just has to say privately to Sukarno that if he pushes too far, we’ll have to enter the lists against him (this sort of thing is obviously better said orally than in writing).

To me, Averell or you are the only logical candidates with both the sympathy and the steel. Roger knows the drill but lacks the stature.

I’m sure we could do a good brief. We don’t need a clear solution just yet, as much as the necessary mood music to buy time for one to emerge. A quick ten-day swing around would give time to tell (1) Macapagal the score as we see it; (2) the Tunku that we won’t back him unless he bends; (3) Sukarno that we will back the Tunku unless the Indos lay off.

As an added starter, if we don’t want a Cambodia conference we’d better send some high level messenger with private reassurances to Phnom Penh now. Acheson couldn’t do the other jobs, so why not combine them under someone else.2

R. W. Komer3

* Source: Kennedy Library, Hilsman Papers, Malaysia-Indonesia, 1963–1964. Secret. Copies were sent to Hilsman, Harriman, Forrestal, and Alexander. The source text is Hilsman’s copy.

1 Because of President Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, Texas, on November 22.

2 Komer added the last sentence by hand.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

349. Memorandum of Conversation 349. Memorandum of ConversationSource

London, December 19, 1963, 10:30–12:50 p.m.

US/MC/12

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary of State1

Ambassador Bruce

Mr. Tyler

Mr. Manning

Minister Jones

Mr. Lampson

United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Butler

Colonial and Commonwealth Secretary Sandys

Sir Harold Caccia

Sir Patrick Reilly

Sir Geoffrey Harrison

Mr. Henderson

Sir Bernard Burrows

Mr. Cheetham

Mr. Crawford

Mr. Peck

Mr. Hadow

SUBJECT

Indonesia/Malaysia

Butler said that the chief British anxiety about Indonesia was the need for a common front. The British were faced with a direct confrontation with the Indonesians about Malaysia. This was not generally understood. He had found German President Luebke incredibly naive and full of praise for Sukarno. Even Schroeder was not deeply interested in the question and wished to put off talks until later.

Rusk said there was no doubt about US solidarity with the British in the face of attacks against Malaysia by the Indonesians. We had informed the Australians that we recognize that if the Australians are attacked while they are helping to defend Malaysia, this would fall within the scope of the ANZUS Pact and we would fulfill our obligations under the Pact. However, we consider our role in Malaysia a secondary one. We prefer to play a supporting role, because of the primary responsibilities which we carry in Vietnam, Thailand, Laos and Cambodia. We have stopped sending arms and ammunition to Indonesia but are reluctant to stop the supplying of spare parts. We likely would lose all influence with the Indonesian Government if we cut off all supplies. However, the next installment of the spare parts program will begin in February and before authorizing its continuation we will examine it very carefully. Rusk also recommended the fullest exchange of intelligence information on Malaysia and Indonesia. Another important question was how to surface the issue so that Indonesian subversive and aggressive actions would be brought to world attention. Was it advisable to bring the question into the UN? This question should be studied. We had conducted a training program in the hope that our influence could be strengthened within the Indonesian army. But Rusk recognized there were special problems about training in guerilla warfare techniques. We would reexamine this question. However, it must be taken into consideration that the complete loss of any Western influence in Djakarta might increase the scale of the “confrontation”. We did not intend to interrupt the shipment of food to Indonesia.

Mr. Duncan Sandys said that it was vitally important to apply all possible types of pressure to Sukarno to bring him to his senses. The British were worried about the scale of Indonesian training of guerilla fighters. The British were satisfied they had sufficient forces to preserve the general military situation in Malaysia but guerillas caused great difficulties. It was a terrain of heavy forests almost vertical in contour. A few guerillas could immobilize a considerable number of troops. This did not constitute a serious military threat but the successes of the guerillas greatly encouraged the Chinese organizations in Malaysia. He did not see how the UK could stand by and watch Indonesians being trained a few miles from the frontier. This action was becoming more and more provocative. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

Rusk said that he had impressed upon Foreign Minister Nasution that Indonesia was highly vulnerable. If they resorted to armed action they would find themselves with almost impossible defense problems. They had more than three thousand islands to protect. He asked whether the British thought that some deterrent advantage might be derived by making it clear that the West would deny Indonesia any support or haven if it invaded Malaysia.

Butler confirmed that the British had cancelled radar facilities in Indonesia. This was reported in the House of Commons on December 17. (See London’s 2837 of December 18.)2

Butler and Rusk agreed to keep in touch on the Indonesian/Malaysian problem.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 INDON-MALAYSIA. Secret. Drafted by E. T. Lampson and approved in S on January 3, 1964. The meeting was held in the Foreign Office. The source text is labeled “Part I of XIII.”

1 Rusk was in London for discussions after the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Paris December 16–17.

2 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL INDON-UK)

PhilippinesPhilippines

350. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, May 18, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-JO/5–1861. Secret; Limited Distribution.

351. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy)

Washington, June 9, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9741/6–961. Official Use Only. Drafted by McFarland. McConaughy wrote on the source text: “Noted—thanks. WPMcC, 6/9.”

352. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 28, 1961, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.966/6–2861. Official Use Only. Drafted by Emmons and approved in S on July 12. A separate memorandum of conversation covers the discussion between Rusk and Romulo on the Zablocki Bill on war damage claims. Rusk informed Romulo that the United States was anxious to settle this long-standing claim. Romulo indicated that his discussion with Congressman Walter Judd led him to believe that Judd was ready to support the bill. (Ibid., 211.9641/6–2861)

353. Memorandum From President Kennedy to His Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 10, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Secret. Bundy wrote the following note in the top margin: “File, done.”

354. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 13, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Confidential. A note by Bundy on the source text indicates that the memorandum was sent to Hyannis Port as part of the President’s weekend reading for the weekend of July 21. In a July 17 covering memorandum, Bundy suggested that Kennedy might want to take advantage of a lunch he was having with retired General Douglas MacArthur on July 20 to elicit his views on the current situation. No account of the luncheon discussion has been found.

355. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, July 14, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Secret

356. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 28, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/7–2861. Official Use Only. Drafted by Bell on July 29. Cowen also met with U. Alexis Johnson, McConaughy, and Bell on August 7. Johnson expressed concern about the corruption problem and asked for Cowen’s advice. Cowen provided similar suggestions to the ones he had given in this meeting and suggested that Johnson meet with Jose Yulo. (Ibid., 796.00/8–761) Regarding the Yulo–Johnson meeting, see Document 358.

357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines

Washington, August 5, 1961, 3:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/8–561. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell; cleared by McConaughy and Joseph W. Scott, INR’s Deputy Director for Coordination; and approved by Johnson.

358. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 12, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/8–1261. Confidential. Drafted by Bell on August 14 and approved in G on August 28.

359. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, August 28, 1961.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, NSC, T-624–71. Secret.

360. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 7, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/9–761. Confidential. Drafted by McFarland and cleared by Emmons, Steeves, and John P. White, Legislative Management Officer, Bureau of Congressional Relations.

361. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, September 18, 1961, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/9–1861. Secret; [distribution indicator not declassified].

362. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, December 9, 1961, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/12–961. Secret. Repeated to CINCPACPOLAD, Commander 13th Air Force, and Commander, U.S. Navy, Philippines.

363. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, December 12, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.11/12–1261. Confidential; Priority.

364. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 16, 1962, 11:40–11:52 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.9611/1–1662. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and approved in S on January 17. The time of the meeting is from Rusk’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

365. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting

Washington, January 19, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Meetings. Top Secret. A note on the cover sheet indicates that this was a State draft not cleared with the Department of Defense.

366. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East (Rice) to the President’s Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman)

Washington, February 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/2–762. No classification marking. Drafted by McFarland and cleared by Bell:

367. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 20, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 896.235/2–2062. Secret. Drafted by Bell and approved by the White House on February 22. A separate memorandum of conversation covers the discussion between the President and Abello of a potential Corregidor-Bataan memorial. (Ibid.) Another memorandum of conversation contains a brief account of the discussion on the question of the Philippines’ prohibition of importation of U.S. tobacco, Abello suggested if the Philippine Supreme Court did not rule favorably on the question, President Macapagal would make proposals to solve the issue satisfactorily for American business interests. The President said that the War Damage Bill and the tobacco issue should not be tied together. (Ibid.) Abello also discussed the issues of sugar, a Corregidor-Bataan memorial, and tobacco with Bell on February 21. (Memorandum of conversation, February 23; ibid., 896.235/2–2162)

368. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, May 10, 1962, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/5–1062. Secret; Niact.

369. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 5/62. Confidential. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by McFarland, cleared by Rice, and cleared in draft by Bell, Dutton, and Samuel L. King, Assistant Chief of Protocol for visits and ceremonies. (Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/5–2362)

370. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, June 8, 1962.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Apparently dictated by Harriman.

371. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 8, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/6–862. Confidential. Drafted by McFarland on June 12.

372. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, June 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62. Official Use Only. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates it was drafted by Matilda L. Milne (Officer in Charge of Exchange Rates and Systems, Bureau of Economic Affairs) and Jarvis of SPA, and cleared by Bell, Peterson, Leonard Weiss (Director of the Office of Trade and Finance, Bureau of Economic Affairs), Isaiah Frank (Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs), Heyl of AID, Diehl of Treasury, Irvine of the Federal Reserve Board, U.S. Executive Director of the IMF Southard, and Houston of the Export-Import Bank. A note on the memorandum indicates it was signed by Rusk. (Department of State, Central Files, 896.10/6–1165)

373. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 26, 1962, 4–4:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.96/6–2762. Secret. Drafted by Harriman and approved by the White House on July 25. The source text is dated June 27; the June 26 date and the time of the meeting are taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) A briefing memorandum from Brubeck for the President, June 25, is ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62.

374. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Manila, July 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, S. Confidential; Personal; Official–Informal. A note in Harriman’s handwriting indicates that he discussed this letter with Bell.

375. Editorial Note

376. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 7, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Forrestal, 6/62–10/62. Secret.

377. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 29, 1962, noon.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 8/62–12/62. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and cleared by Forrestal for the White House on November 2. The meeting was held at the White House. The President’s Appointment Book indicates it was held from 12:15 to 12:25 p.m. Separate memoranda of this conversation cover a possible State visit by Macapagal and Laos. (Both ibid.)

378. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 14, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 PHIL. Secret. Drafted by Ballantyne and cleared by Bell and Rice.

379. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 20, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 PHIL. Secret. Drafted by Ballantyne; cleared by Bell, Barnett, Rice, Colonel William B. Robinson of the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs, and Harriman; and cleared in draft by Martin M. Tank, Director of the Military Assistance Division of AID, William Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and Admiral Riley, Chief of the Joint Staff of the JCS.

380. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part I of IV”; for Parts II–IV, see Documents 381–383.

381. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part II of IV”; for Parts I and III–IV, see Documents 380 and 382–383.

382. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part III of IV”; for Parts I–II and IV, see Documents 380–381 and 383.

383. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Official Use Only. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part IV if IV”; for Parts I–III, see Documents 380–383.

384. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Manila, May 6, 1963.

Source: Department of State, EA/Phil Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damages. Confidential; Official–Informal.

385. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, May 29, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Philippines 200.0–680.1, 1963. Secret.

386. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Manila, June 8, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL PHIL–US. Confidential; Official-Informal.

387. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, June 14, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, President’s Proposed Trip to the Far East, 3/63–6/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s June 15–16 weekend reading.

388. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, July 16, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 7 PHIL–US. Confidential. A copy was sent to McNamara. The source text is a copy sent to Alexis Johnson; see Document 389.

389. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)

Washington, August 2, 1963.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 7 PHIL–US. Personal and Confidential. A draft by Bell, dated July 27, was substantially revised by Johnson. This draft is attached to a July 29 memorandum from Hilsman to Johnson, in which Hilsman stated that he felt strongly that Lansdale should not go to the Philippines because he was “a symbol of the policy we have abandoned.” Hilsman noted that since Lansdale’s past affiliations were known, his mission would raise questions of U.S. interference in Philippine domestic affairs. Hilsman noted that there was a competent Embassy staff in Manila to report on Philippine developments. (Ibid.)

390. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 12, 1963.

Source: Department of State, EA/Philippines Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damage. No classification marking.

391. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, September 21, 1963, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 PHIL. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

392. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 26, 1963, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL PHIL–US. Confidential. Drafted by Hilsman and approved in the White House on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House.

393. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, November 27, 1963.

[Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 PHIL. Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

394. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 10, 1963.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4565, Philippines 200.6 to 680.1, 1963. Secret.

395. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, EA/Philippines Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damage. Confidential. Drafted on December 17 by Ballantyne; cleared in draft by Czyzak; John P. White, Legislative Officer; Verne B. Lewis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Budget and Finance; Donald L. Ranard, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Programs, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs; and Heyl of AID; and cleared by U. Alexis Johnson. A handwritten note indicates that the memorandum was sent to the White House on December 26.

350. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 350. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, May 18, 1961, 6 p.m.

1352. In general terms of stated objectives of Vice President’s trip,1 i.e. creation of good will and provision of high-level personal reassurances of US intentions to stand behind regional commitments,2 Manila stop can be recorded as “mission accomplished”. VP’s impact on officials was for most part favorable with Garcia reportedly pleased with substance of speech to Congress. VP’s personality also made excellent impression on most individual officials. His faculty for making personal contact and practice of handshaking very much in line with Phil customs and viewed with warm approval. Mrs. Johnson and Mr. and Mrs. Smith made a fine impression and had excellent press treatment.

Popular reaction to visit was good, if only moderately enthusiastic, observers and editorials alike agreed that reassurances which Johnson supplied were accepted at face value by public. Although probable that officials received statements on economic aid without reservation, statements defining US intentions in military field were swallowed with liberal portion of salt. Some Senators at post joint-session reception raised question whether American people would really back up VP’s assurances.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] FonSec Serrano made acid off-record comments what he called “empty and worthless trip”.

FonSec claimed his reaction stemmed from inability to extract from VP specifics on US position on Laos, Fourteen Nation Conf, offshore islands and ChiRep issue. Serrano said he thus led believe US writing Laos off. Emb believes FonSec disappointment probably resulted, in part, from pique over fact Pres Garcia excluded Serrano from his substantive talk with VP.3

Somewhat jaundiced view taken by certain members of press not surprising in view pre-visit expectations VP would discuss Laos and his subsequent unwillingness to answer questions on Laos at press conf.

A reading of sentiment of labor leaders gathered for suffrage showed they welcomed visit and were glad to do what they could to contribute to its success.

The Vice Pres’s decision to accept hospitality at Palace was wise and informality of stay at Malacanang pleased household. It obvious that President and staff, and Filipinos generally, would have been deeply offended had Vice President declined official hospitality.

Circumstances surrounding the trip need to be taken into account if Vice Pres’s accomplishments are to be seen in correct proportions. International events, and their impact on Phil, made timing of trip as far as Phils concerned, unfortunate to say the least. Lack of lead time made effective build-up impossible and correspondingly limited extent of community contact. Brevity of visit placed sharp limitations on extent and depth of impact achieved. Unseasonably bad weather and VP late arrival (one hour behind schedule) cut welcoming crowd between Malacanang and airport. Tight schedule was also a drawback, witness enforced use of helicopter to Univ of Phils and consequent disappointment of many people along land route.

Emb considers visit was productive, despite trying conditions which imposed severe restrictions. Character of Filipino is such he instinctively extends warm welcome to any VIP especially American. In sum, visit resulted in plus for US-Phil relations; and given circumstances, accomplished as much as could reasonably be expected.

This message being sent only Dept.

Hickerson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-JO/5–1861. Secret; Limited Distribution.

1 Vice President Johnson and his party, which included Mrs. Johnson, Mr. and Mrs. Stephen Smith (President Kennedy’s brother-in-law and sister), arrived in Manila on May 13 as part of their trip to Asia. The Vice President stayed in Manila less than 24 hours. Despatch 732 from Manila, May 29, contains additional information on the brief visit. (Ibid., 033.1100-JO/5–2961)

2 In a May 8 letter to Johnson, Under Secretary Bowles suggested that the Vice President assure Philippine leaders who were concerned over developments in Laos. The Vice President could state that the United States realized that the threat of Communism must be met not only by military action, but also by programs of social and economic reform. (Ibid., 033.1100-JO/5–861) Johnson carried with him a May 8 letter from President Kennedy to President Garcia reiterating close U.S.-Philippine ties and stating his administration’s commitment to social and economic development. Kennedy noted the United States and the Philippines were negotiating for introduction into the Philippines of Peace Corps volunteers. The Philippines was the first country to receive Peace Corp volunteers. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61)

3 According to telegram 1361 from Manila, May 22, no one other than Johnson and Garcia, was present during their discussion. The Embassy had no record of the meeting. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100-JO/5–2261)

351. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy) 351. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy)Source

Washington, June 9, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Peso-Dollar Problem in Connection with Payment of the Balance of War Damage Compensation Under the Philippine War Damage Act

Background:

The Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946 (Public Law 370–79th Congress)1 appropriated $400 million to assist in the restoration of private property destroyed during World War II in the Philippines. Claims were originally stated in pesos when the Philippine peso was pegged at two to the dollar. Each approved peso claim was converted into dollars for United States accounting purposes. There is nothing in the law that requires payment in pesos. The United States Philippine War Damage Commission provided by regulation for payment in pesos as the currency most immediately useful to the majority of claimants. It was recognized in 1946 that $400 million might not be sufficient to pay off all approved claims and it was clearly understood that an additional sum would be appropriated to pay the balance. The final sum generally agreed upon and accepted is $73 million. In 1960 it was agreed that all claimants now residing in the United States should, as a matter of equity, be paid in dollars to relieve them of the hardship of converting pesos to dollars under the stringent currency controls prevailing in the Philippines. Since that time the Philippine peso has been devalued until the official free market rate is now three pesos to the dollar.

Present Position:

On June 1, 1961, Assistant Secretary Martin, testifying before the sub-committee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, presented the Executive Branch position recommending that all claimants, regardless of location, be paid in dollars. This would allow those resident in the United States to utilize payments immediately without loss due to exchange. This would also permit all claimants in the Philippines, both Americans and Filipinos to obtain pesos at the prevailing rate of exchange and not to be penalized for the action of the Philippine Government.

The Committee Chairman Mr. Zablocki indicated his approval of the Executive Branch position. Dr. Walter Judd, a member of the Committee,2 indicated his desire to pay off all claims at the original rate of two pesos to the dollar. This would require the appropriation and expenditure of only about $52 million instead of the generally accepted and unanimously anticipated figure of $73 million. Dr. Judd’s position, widely reported in the Philippine press, drew protests of poor sportsmanship, poor diplomacy and recriminations as to how such tactics revealed the contrast between United States treatment of allies and neutrals, with the advantage clearly on the side of the latter.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9741/6–961. Official Use Only. Drafted by McFarland. McConaughy wrote on the source text: “Noted—thanks. WPMcC, 6/9.”

1 60 Stat. 128.

2 The following phrase was crossed out: “supported by Mrs. Church.”

352. Memorandum of Conversation 352. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 28, 1961, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Sugar Quota for the Philippines

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Romulo, Philippine Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. Emmons, Acting Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

Ambassador Romulo called at his request upon the Secretary at 10 this morning to discuss the latest United States views on the question of the size of the Philippine sugar quota for the current calendar year. The Ambassador recalled that he had sent several notes to the Department on this subject, the latest of which was on May 24.1 In these notes the Government of the Philippines had taken exception to the proposed reduction of the Philippine sugar allocation for the current year and had pointed out that this reduction had been made without providing the Philippine Government with a chance to prove or disprove their ability to deliver to the United States the quantity of sugar which had originally been allocated. The Philippines placed great stress upon the restitution of the full, original quota which it had been allotted, this being a matter of utmost importance to its economy. The Ambassador added that he had discussed this question personally with Congressmen Cooley Poage and Miller.

The Secretary responded that further study had been given to the question of the Philippine sugar quota and that the matter was again under the most active consideration; the Secretary of Agriculture was even now being approached in an effort to secure his formal agreement to the restitution of the original quota and the Department was doing all that it could to get the earliest possible favorable decision. The Secretary very much hoped that a definitive answer could be given to Ambassador Romulo before his departure for the Philippines later this week.2

The Secretary then asked how matters stood with respect to the importation of American tobacco into the Philippines, since this question seemed to have been at least somewhat associated with the question of sugar.

Ambassador Romulo replied that he had every confidence that the licensing of United States tobacco imports would be promptly liberalized and that President Garcia is personally supporting such a policy.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.966/6–2861. Official Use Only. Drafted by Emmons and approved in S on July 12. A separate memorandum of conversation covers the discussion between Rusk and Romulo on the Zablocki Bill on war damage claims. Rusk informed Romulo that the United States was anxious to settle this long-standing claim. Romulo indicated that his discussion with Congressman Walter Judd led him to believe that Judd was ready to support the bill. (Ibid., 211.9641/6–2861)

1 The May 24 note is ibid., 411.966/5–2461.

2 On June 30, the Department of State informed the Embassy in Manila and Ambassador Romulo who was then in New York that an additional Philippine sugar allotment of 150,000 tons had been approved. (Telegram 1501 to Manila, June 30; ibid., 411.966/6–3061) According to telegram 2 from Manila, July 3, the response in the Philippines was enthusiastic and considered not just as a “correction of an apparent injustice,” but also an “act of generosity.” (Ibid., 411.966/7–361)

353. Memorandum From President Kennedy to His Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 353. Memorandum From President Kennedy to His Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 10, 1961.

We have been consistently attacked by the Filipinos for “our failure to stand up to the Communists in Asia.” This seems to be almost a campaign. It was particularly pronounced when Vice President Johnson was there and I notice that another statement is quoted by a Philippine Ambassador to Nationalist China.1 These attacks may be part of a pattern. I am wondering if anyone has any suggestions as to what counter we could make, whether we could indicate to Romulo, after we had collected all of them, with [sic] out [our] displeasure with them.

I would like to know how many troops the Philippines contributed to the Korean war. My recollection is they offered only 180 to planned 5 [SEATO Plan 5]2 for Laos. I think we should find out (1) why they are making these attacks, and (2) do something about them. The New York Times story about the discontent in Asia3 which mentions particularly Pakistan and Nationalist China, as well as the Philippines doesn’t make as clear as I would like the reason for the Nationalist China and the Pakistan attacks. This is a propaganda war against us and we ought to see how we could make that known. The only one that is somewhat more inexplicable is the Philippines.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Secret. Bundy wrote the following note in the top margin: “File, done.”

1 Not further identified.

2 See footnote 2, Document 405.

3 ”Doubts About U.S. Increasing in Asia,” The New York Times, July 10, 1961.

354. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 354. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Battle) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

Statements by Philippine Officials Critical of the U.S. and U.S. Policy

The President on July 10, in a conversation with Assistant Secretary Talbot (NEA), requested a list of statements critical of the U.S. made in recent months by officials of several countries, including the Philippines.1

Official Philippine criticism of the United States and U.S. policy during calendar 1961 has been largely a reflection of the fear of a fundamental change in U.S. Far Eastern policy with the advent of a new U.S. Administration. Much of if has been indirect or implied criticism, involving concern over what is regarded as undue French and British influence on the U.S. in SEATO and Laos.

1. At the beginning of the year Foreign Secretary Serrano on a number of occasions expressed doubts and misgivings concerning U.S. policy toward China and Laos. He bitterly characterized SEATO as a mere debating society and criticized the U.S. for failing to consult with the Philippines prior to supporting British initiatives with respect to the ICC. Serrano hastily convened an Asian Foreign Ministers Conference in Manila January 18 and 19, 1961 which was attended by the Foreign Ministers of the Republics of Korea, China, Viet Nam and the Philippines.

The Conference called for admission of Viet Nam and the Republic of Korea to the UN and reaffirmed the rightful representation of the Republic of China in that organization. It supported the Boun Oum Government and opposed the division of Laos and, with full realization of the weakness of SEATO, individual conferees sought to strengthen their own bilateral security arrangements with the U.S. One purpose of the conference was to attempt to strengthen the hand of the U.S. vis-à-vis the UK and France.

2. President Garcia in a major foreign policy speech February 23, declared that even if the U.S. voted for Red China’s admission to the UN that the Philippines would continue to oppose it.

3. In a public speech at Cebu in March just prior to the SEATO Conference Serrano stated that developments in Laos had cast doubt on the effectiveness of SEATO and on the continuing validity of the Philippine collective security system. In the same speech he declared that it would be a matter of profound concern to all the free peoples of Asia whether (1) in Laos the U.S. allows itself to follow the deceptive path of least resistance or will stand firm on its traditional commitment to freedom; (2) the U.S. bows to a false sense of the inevitable Chinese Communist admission to the UN or valiantly reasserts its leadership to prevent what is still a preventable evil; and (3) the U.S. breaks faith with Taiwan.

4. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Serrano on May 9 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that U.S. Far Eastern policy was changing and that the chief interest of the U.S. was shifting to Europe. He is said to have stated that the U.S. was trying to stop the war in Laos, to have Communist China admitted to the UN, and even to have Chinmen2 and Matsu sacrificed for a cease-fire agreement with the Chinese Communists. He reiterated that the Philippines would continue to oppose admission of Communist China to the UN.

5. Further, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] some acid “off-the-record” comments of Serrano with respect to the visit to the Philippines of Vice President Johnson which he is reported to have characterized as an “empty and worthless trip.” Serrano claimed his reaction stemmed from his inability to extract from the Vice President specifics on the U.S. position with regard to Laos, the offshore islands and the issue of Chinese representation in the UN. It was reportedly his view that the U.S. was writing off Laos. Embassy Manila is of the opinion that part of Serrano’s disappointment resulted from his pique at being excluded by President Garcia from his substantive talk with Vice President Johnson.

6. In an interview with the departing Manila AP Bureau Chief, President Garcia a week after Vice President Johnson’s visit, urged the U.S. to stand firm on the question of Communist expansion in Asia “before it’s too late. The question today is whether to let the Russians and their satellites overrun Asia or keep the area in the democratic camp. If the answer is the former, then give up the fight and let the Communists gobble (Asia) up. But if the idea is to keep Asia for the democracies, then do something now.” Garcia emphasized that the U.S. “should put out the fires (Laos and Viet Nam) now before they get too large.” He declared he is still prepared to send troops to Laos—“if it’s in accord with SEATO, we will do our part.” Regarding the Chinese Communist threat: “Red China will expand again in Asia. It’s on their agenda. Forces of the democracies should be on the move also. Democratic forces in Asia will need the stabilizing support of the U.S. This is the time for the U.S. to make a real decision.” Embassy Manila comments: Seldom has the President been so categorical in stating such views. The Embassy believes that Garcia thought it useful to emphasize to the U.S., one week after Vice President Johnson’s departure, that its Asian allies are looking for deeds to back up words, as well as to remind the U.S. of the views of at least one of its Asian partners at the onset of the Geneva conference.

7. Shortly before the Nacionalista Party Convention Vice Presidential aspirants, in a series of personal interviews with the Agence France Presse correspondent in Manila found occasion to criticize several aspects of U.S. policy. Senator Sumulong, who had stood up to Khrushchev at the XVI GA meeting and had been the target of the latter’s shoe pounding, described the U.S. position on the Communist threat as “hesitant, faltering and undecided.” He compared the timid U.S. approach in Asia with our determined anti-Communist stand in Europe. Senate Majority leader Primicias and Senator Puyat (the successful candidate for the Nacionalista Vice Presidential slot) echoed Sumulong. Puyat predicted that unless the democracies forge a more united front against the Communist danger “we will lose the South East Asian countries one by one.”

Senator Paredes joined Primicias in taking exception to America’s preferential treatment of neutrals over tried and tested friends on whom it would have to rely in time of crisis. Assistant House Majority Leader Montano declared it was time the Philippines “talked turkey” to America. He asserted that “the U.S. has taken the Philippines too much for granted. It gives more aid to neutral countries, but it has not yet settled our money claims.” (This reference is to the outstanding claim for $73 million war damage payments now pending before the U.S. Congress—H.R. 1129.)

8. Ambassador Hickerson reported a conversation with Serrano on June 13 in which the latter stated that any disposition by the U.S. Government to support the admission of Outer Mongolia to the UN or establish diplomatic relations would be viewed by the Government of the Philippines with the “deepest concern.” Either or both such actions would be regarded as another in a chain of developments indicating relaxation of U.S. policy toward the Soviet-Chinese Communist threat. Most disturbing to the Philippine Government are recent signs of a softening U.S. attitude, especially in Asia. Serrano stated the “faith or fear of the Asian peoples will rise or fall depending on how strongly or how weakly the U.S. Government responds to the Communist threat.” He stated further that if Asians see no other alternative but to depend upon their own means for maintaining independence they will have to revise their policies toward the U.S. Government. Serrano stated frankly that the Philippines had expected something more definite from the visit of Vice President Johnson than statements alone. It was the Ambassador’s impression that Serrano personally was beginning to think in terms of a transition toward neutralism of some sort.

9. The Philippine press of July 8 and 9 reports that the Philippine Department of Foreign Affairs shares the “grave” concern of Nationalist China over reports indicating that the U.S. may establish diplomatic relations with Outer Mongolia and support its admission to the UN.

In the case of the Philippines, criticism of the United States and its policies is not unusual. Regarding the U.S. Government and the American people as their mentors, Filipinos are quick to let us know when we appear not to measure up to the idealistic standards we have set for them and they for us. Despite an overwhelmingly friendly attitude toward the U.S. on the part of the general public, Filipino politicians have at times considered it useful to “tweak Uncle Sam’s whiskers” to demonstrate complete independence of U.S. influence. The Garcia Administration started off on this line but found it politically unprofitable. The 1959 Philippine Congressional elections demonstrated that an anti-U.S. line did not pay off at the polls. The spontaneous popular outpouring of goodwill toward President Eisenhower during his June 1960 visit and for Vice President Johnson in May 1961 further emphasized that the Philippine public rejects an anti-U.S. line. During the current Philippine Presidential campaign, which will culminate in a national election on November 14, 1961, the two principal parties are vying with one another to show the extent of their association with the United States. The present MacArthur visit, at the invitation of President Garcia, gives the public a chance to see its hero again, under sponsorship of the Nacionalista administration, and was undoubtedly considered politically beneficial.

In response to the foregoing statements by Philippine officials, our Ambassador has met frequently with Foreign Secretary Serrano and President Garcia. Consultation and liaison with the Philippine Government on SEATO problems and on the developing situation in Laos have been greatly improved. Secretary Rusk met personally with Secretary Serrano at Bangkok, Vice President Johnson met privately with President Garcia at Manila and Secretary Rusk gave Ambassador Romulo an extensive briefing on U.S. policies just before Romulo’s departure for Manila with General MacArthur, with the request that his views be conveyed to Secretary Serrano and President Garcia.

It is the view of the Department of State that a number of the remarks reported herein, while not unmotivated by personal political ambitions, also indicate natural concern of responsible officials of a country basically friendly to the U.S. It is believed that adequate efforts have been made to meet this concern through increased consultation, improved liaison and more frequent meetings between senior U.S. and Philippine officials. Further action is not recommended at this time.3

The Philippines contributed one Battalion Combat Team (averaging 1371 men) and one medium tank company consisting of 17 tanks to the Korean War.

The Philippines in the event of SEATO action to counter insurgency in Laos is committed to contribute 1 Ordnance Detachment of 2 officers and 48 enlisted men, 10 doctors, 2 dentists, an administrative and liaison group of 3 officers and 5 enlisted men, and, subject to U.S. logistic support, 1 Engineer Special Combat Company of 6 officers and 165 enlisted men. In the event of general aggression in Laos by Communist forces, the Philippines is prepared, again subject to U.S. logistic support, to contribute one BCT.

M.L. Manfull4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Confidential. A note by Bundy on the source text indicates that the memorandum was sent to Hyannis Port as part of the President’s weekend reading for the weekend of July 21. In a July 17 covering memorandum, Bundy suggested that Kennedy might want to take advantage of a lunch he was having with retired General Douglas MacArthur on July 20 to elicit his views on the current situation. No account of the luncheon discussion has been found.

1 The request was also made to Bundy; see Document 353.

2 Bundy wrote a note in the margin: “Chinmen=Quemoy”

3 Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff commented on this point as follows:

“I have been told orally by State that it does not consider a general démarche desirable because such a démarche would be likely to produce a nationalistic reaction from them that would aggravate the situation. It would be quite possible, for example, for Garcia to call in the press and advise it that he has been the object of such a démarche and that he does not intend to pay any attention to it. In any event, they would view such a démarche as a U.S. intrusion upon Philippine independence.” (Memorandum from Johnson to McGeorge Bundy, July 14; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61)

4 Manfull signed for Battle above Battle’s typed signature.

355. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 355. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, July 14, 1961.

SUBJECT

The Philippine Elections

In response to Ralph Dungan’s note to you and the copy of the letter that he sent along,1 I have talked to people in State and in CIA (DDI/ONE) about the forthcoming Philippine elections.

My discussion with State was with Jim Bell, the Office Director, and Mr. MacFarland, the Desk Officer. It is their view that the United States does not have a great stake in the outcome of the Philippine election and that therefore we ought to stay out of it. President Garcia has, of course, run a very corrupt administration. However, State argues that corruption is mostly at the top, that it is characteristic of Philippine politics and may be no worse than in a good many other countries. Because of the very free press in the Philippines, it gets a tremendous amount of publicity.

Bell did not think it likely that Garcia would feel himself so pushed against the wall that he would resort to a sort of desperation tactics suggested in the letter from Mr. Edwards to Ralph Dungan. He also believes that a coup by the military is unlikely if Garcia is elected and there is continued deterioration in his administration. My CIA(ONE) informant agreed on both scores. He believes that Garcia’s political organization will be the decisive factor in the election. Neither State nor CIA believes it likely that the military would intervene under presently foreseeable circumstances because of the strong apolitical tradition of the Philippine military. If the situation got so bad that the military does give serious consideration to intervention, the United States would probably have plenty of warning and could take actions to help remedy the situation.

While Garcia has in the past experimented with anti-American themes as a means of improving his political situation in the Philippines, he has in recent years avoided such a tack. Recently, Garcia had an interesting conversation with Myron Cowen (sp.?), a former U.S. Ambassador to the Philippines in which Garcia asked Cowen what he should do to get the support and sympathy of the United States.2 Cowen told him that the important thing was to eliminate corruption in his administration. (Recently Garcia has appointed two or three better people.) Garcia’s running mate, Puyat, is well regarded by State and is quite pro-American. Garcia’s term will run out four months before the next following election because of the fact that he succeeded to the Presidency upon the death of Magsaysay. It is expected that Puyat will succeed him at that time.

Macapagal, candidate of the opposition Liberal Party, is pro-American to the point where it is a source of some embarrassment to us. He would probably run a considerably cleaner administration though he is not considered an outstanding leader with charismatic qualities of the sort possessed by Magsaysay. His running mate is politically a liberal (in the 20th Century American sense) and is considered by Jim Bell, who knows him well, to be a good man.

State does not believe that there is a significant nationalist, anti-American trend in the Philippines at the present time. The primary proponent of such nationalism, Senator Recto, died in early 1960. The experience of the recent Senatorial elections has proved to Garcia and others that an anti-American line does not pay off politically because of the tremendous reservoir of good will for the United States in the Philippines.

[4 lines of source text not declassified] Ambassador Hickerson is presently on home leave from the Philippines precisely because he believes it desirable that he be absent from the Philippines for as much of the election as possible.

It was noted by CIA (ONE) that the Philippine population is very cynical about the subject of corruption in the government. My CIA informant also pointed out that we had for some time been chasing a rainbow—we have been looking for a successor to Magsaysay who would carry on in his tradition. He had become increasingly skeptical of the possibility that such a successor will develop. Moreover, there was some considerable tendency to romanticize Magsaysay who, at the time of his death, was beginning to face some very serious problems in his administration. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

In the course of my discussion with State, I raised the question of whether, without intervening, the U.S. could take any action that would help insure that the elections were reasonably fair. Bell indicated that this question had come up in his discussion with Ambassador Hickerson and that he (Bell) had mentioned the fact that in the last election we had seen to it that a large number of foreign newsmen were present. This action had had a salutary effect and he thought it might be repeated. He also thought that it might be possible [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to get some of the great number of civic groups in the Philippines interested in insuring that the elections were fair.

[6 paragraphs (22 lines of source text) not declassified] [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] I believe that, whatever we do with respect to the election campaign, it would be highly desirable to use such techniques as those suggested by Bell above to help insure that the elections themselves are as fair as we can help make them.

Robert H. Johnson3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 2/61–7/61. Secret

1 The note and letter have not been found.

2 See Document 356.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

356. Memorandum of Conversation 356. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 28, 1961.

SUBJECT

Corruption in the Garcia Administration

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Myron Cowen, Former Ambassador to the Philippines

Mr. James D. Bell—Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

Ambassador Cowen, during a visit to the Philippines about four months ago, held a long private conversation with President Garcia at Garcia’s request. Garcia was concerned about the image of the Philippines in the U.S. and asked Ambassador Cowen for his recommendations as to how to improve the U.S. attitude toward the Philippines and more specifically toward the Garcia administration.

Ambassador Cowen stated that he was brutally frank with Garcia and told him that he could not achieve the prestige which he would like to enjoy in the U.S. or in Asia until he was able to gain the respect and confidence of his own people. Ambassador Cowen went into some detail with respect to the graft and corruption in the Garcia Administration which he views as the principal cause for the low state of Garcia’s public image. He told Garcia that during his short visit to Manila he had found an atmosphere of unrest and uneasiness. Pressed for specific recommendations, Ambassador Cowen suggested that Garcia go to the IMF and ask for consultants to be placed in key ministries such as the Ministry of Finance, Internal Revenue, Central Bank, etc. Although these people would likely be technicians, their functions would in a sense be that of watchdogs to try and develop techniques of preventing graft and corruption.

During the past week Jose Yulo (Garcia’s opponent in the 1957 presidential election), who has been in Washington, has conveyed a message from President Garcia to Ambassador Cowen to the effect that he, Garcia, is prepared to accept this suggestion but that he cannot put it into practice until after the November elections because “Ambassador Cowen will understand that I need money for the elections.” Ambassador Cowen is convinced that it is worthwhile to try and persuade Garcia to institute such a program prior to the elections and has suggested to Yulo that he, Yulo, return to the Philippines (Yulo had planned to go to Europe and stay out of the Philippines until after the election) and persuade Garcia to hire such consultants immediately. Ambassador Cowen has discussed this matter with former Ambassador Merle Cochran of the IMF, who says that the IMF would be prepared to provide such consultants as Garcia requests. Ambassador Cowen asked Mr. Bell’s views.

Mr. Bell said that he believed almost any action which would cut down graft and corruption in the Garcia Administration is highly desirable and that of course it would be best if the initiative came from Garcia himself, as it would in this instance. Mr. Bell further observed that he had heard of no other suggestions which seemed to offer much hope of success, and that he felt this was certainly worth trying.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/7–2861. Official Use Only. Drafted by Bell on July 29. Cowen also met with U. Alexis Johnson, McConaughy, and Bell on August 7. Johnson expressed concern about the corruption problem and asked for Cowen’s advice. Cowen provided similar suggestions to the ones he had given in this meeting and suggested that Johnson meet with Jose Yulo. (Ibid., 796.00/8–761) Regarding the Yulo–Johnson meeting, see Document 358.

357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Philippines 357. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the PhilippinesSource

Washington, August 5, 1961, 3:14 p.m.

133. Department is gravely concerned with graft and corruption in Garcia Administration and particularly as to possible consequences with respect to future of democratic government. Until there is some improvement, there would appear to be little hope that Phils could assume role of leadership and influence in Asia. While we do not believe Communists are presently strong enough to seize power, nor that the military likely to do so, this rotting of the moral fiber of Phil public life constitutes a potential threat to best interest U.S. and free world in Asia. In attempt to meet this situation, Department has considered following possible measures:1

1. Placement of IMF consultants in strategic ministries and agencies of GOP, such as Central Bank, Ministry of Finance, Internal Revenue, Customs, etc. Consultants would serve as watchdogs and try to develop techniques for preventing corruption. We believe this might best be achieved through influence of private citizen rather than by U.S. Govt representative. Ambassador Myron Cowen and Jose Yulo have already discussed this with Garcia and we may ask Cowen pursue further.2

2. Elimination of some regulations and regulatory agencies which offer opportunities for graft by acceleration of economic decontrol. This would include devaluation of peso and revision of export and import regulations.3

3. Implementation of the Barrio Act to give local government units power to retain and spend some tax revenues, thus decentralizing government and freeing local authorities from manipulation by Manila politicians.4

4. Make funds available to the Community Development Program but only in conjunction with funds raised by local taxes. Explore possibility using Peace Corps in Community Development Program.5

5. Encourage U.S. and other foreign press cover Philippines campaign and election.6

6. Enlist civic organizations in effort to form civic group for sole purpose of assuring honest elections. Possibly through USIA find specialists for such a campaign.7

Embassy comments requested.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/8–561. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Bell; cleared by McConaughy and Joseph W. Scott, INR’s Deputy Director for Coordination; and approved by Johnson.

1 In telegram 178 from Manila, August 11, the Embassy noted that it shared the Department’s concern but believed that any endeavors to combat corruption would have to await inauguration of a new administration in January 1962. (Ibid., 796.00/8–1161) The Embassy’s specific comments to the Department’s suggestions are contained in footnotes 2–7 below.

2 The Embassy agreed that IMF consultants could help provided they had the public support of the highest levels in the Philippine Government and the power to evaluate performance.

3 The Embassy noted that the government was planning to retain some economic regulation probably through the Central Bank. The Embassy thought the IMF could help on this issue, but the United States could do little except as a quid pro quo for enlarged aid programs.

4 The Embassy reported that retention of tax revenues was already being practiced, but full implementation seemed unlikely.

5 The Embassy planned to use the Peace Corps to the fullest in rural development.

6 The Embassy agreed but noted that this would best be handled from Washington to avoid implication of U.S. interference.

7 The Embassy commented that while civic organizations abounded, none had the potential to provide a nucleus for ensuring honest elections and none could be created in the 3 months before the elections.

358. Memorandum of Conversation 358. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, August 12, 1961.

SUBJECT

Corruption in the Philippines

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Jose Yulo, Philippine Citizen

Mr. Myron Cowen, Former Ambassador to Philippines

Mr. Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Mr. McConaughy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. James Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

At the suggestion of former Ambassador Myron Cowen, Jose Yulo, a wealthy landowner and political figure in the Philippines, called on Mr. Johnson on Saturday, August 12, to express his views on the current political situation in the Philippines.

Mr. Johnson opened the discussion by expressing the concern of high-level U.S. officials with respect to corruption in the present Philippine administration. He pointed out that the Philippines could not assume a role of leadership in Asia until there was a change for the better. Mr. Johnson said he recognized that there is a good deal of graft and corruption in other Asian governments, but pointed out that the U.S. always expected a little more from the Philippines.

Mr. Yulo agreed completely with Mr. Johnson’s comments and said that the situation also worried him. Several things, he thought, might be done to try and improve the situation. First he mentioned the possibility of getting some experts from the IMF or elsewhere to be placed in strategic ministries and agencies of the Philippine Government. Mr. Johnson said that this idea also interested us very much, but that we were inclined to think the individuals involved should not be Americans. In any event, we believe they should be provided through an international agency such as the IMF. Asked what the chances were of President Garcia requesting some technicians of this kind, Mr. Yulo said that he had recently received word from Garcia that he would give serious consideration to such a proposal after the elections.

Mr. Johnson said that the steps taken to eliminate the multiple exchange rate and devaluate the peso to permit a free system should be very helpful in correcting the present situation. He wondered if it would be possible to accelerate the plans to accomplish this objective. Mr. Yulo thought that this was unquestionably a step in the right direction but he was a little hesitant about moving too rapidly for fear of a flight of capital. Mr. Johnson pointed out that if the proper conditions existed in the Philippines, there would very likely be a return of capital to the Philippines for investment. After reviewing the exchange controls that have been in effect for the last 10 years and his part in helping set them up, Mr. Yulo said that some time ago consideration had been given to requesting a $300 million stabilization loan and indicated that a stabilization loan (amount not specified) of some kind might be desirable before all controls are eliminated.

Mr. Johnson asked about the cost of living and specifically the price of rice. Mr. Yulo attributed high rice prices to the Chinese middleman and said that President Garcia some time ago had called in the rice distributors and told them they must reduce prices. When they refused to do so, he imported rice and prices have since dropped. Mr. Johnson asked whether the United States had provided any rice under PL 480. Mr. Bell said there was now under consideration a request for 30,000 tons but that we were having problems with the Department of Agriculture over the method of payment. Agriculture favors the use of Title IV and a longterm payment in dollars, whereas the Department believes that longterm dollar credits for food are not desirable.

Mr. Yulo handed Mr. Johnson a paper which he had prepared at the request of Ambassador Cowen outlining policies which he would recommend as needed reforms in the Philippines.1 In discussion of one of the points in this paper—land administration and distribution, Mr. Johnson asked about land distribution, particularly the question of small farmers owning their own land. Mr. Yulo said there are still a number of very large landowners, of which he was one. Based on his own experience (some 14,000 people live on Yulo’s estate near Manila), he felt that there was no great need for breaking up the big estates. He pointed out there were large areas of unused land in Mindinap. In response to Mr. Johnson’s question, he said that there was in the Philippines legislation similar to the U.S. homesteading laws.

Mr. Cowen asked if Mr. Yulo would give Mr. Johnson the benefit of his views with respect to Liberal Party candidates Macapagal and Pelaez. Mr. Yulo, who was Macapagal’s running mate in 1957, said that he was disappointed in Macapagal, in part because he does not believe Macapagal is strong enough to handle the job of the presidency of the Philippines, and at least in part because some of Yulo’s friends and political associates had been frozen out of influential positions in the Liberal Party. According to Yulo, Macapagal and the young element have complete control of the Liberal Party and used dubious methods—terrorism—to control the Liberal Party convention. Mr. Yulo. said that even Pelaez does not seem to be thoroughly behind Macapagal and although campaigning vigorously for his own candidacy, Pelaez was giving only lip service to Macapagal. Yulo further thought that Pelaez was too “leftist.” (Pelaez is personally known to the drafting officer. He is a nationalist and a fairly young progressive who favors land reform and other types of social and economic progress which would not likely have an appeal to Yulo.) Yulo is convinced that Garcia will win the election with little or no difficulty. He pointed out that in addition to the usual fraud at the polls, an additional factor militating against Macapagal is the appearance of a third candidate, de la Rosa, who has entered the race, avowedly to draw votes away from Macapagal.

(In a subsequent conversation with Yulo and Ambassador Cowen, the conversation turned to an American citizen named Harry Stonehill, who Ambassador Cowen views as a very bad influence, deeply involved in graft and corruption. Stonehill has recently purchased Chick Parsons’ interest in the Manila Evening News and is supporting Macapagal for the presidency, according to Yulo.)

Mr. Yulo told Mr. Johnson that he did not plan to return to the Philippines until after the elections. He will be in New York for about two weeks and then will tour Europe. However, he said, that he had the means to get a confidential message to President Garcia and that he would see that Garcia was informed of the concern in Washington re graft and corruption in the Philippines.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/8–1261. Confidential. Drafted by Bell on August 14 and approved in G on August 28.

1 Attached but not printed.

359. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 359. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, August 28, 1961.

Reference your memorandum to Mr. Bundy of 14 August1 on the matter of increasing the number of Filipino troops available for combat operations in Southeast Asia.

The best estimates are that:

a. The Philippine Government would probably be in a position to furnish 1500 troops for use in Southeast Asia. Their willingness to actually do so has not been determined.

b. Any troops allocated would have to undergo some refresher training.

c. The United States would be asked to re-equip the troops.

While the Task Force agrees that the Philippine Government should be urged to make as large a contribution as possible, an approach to this end should be deferred until the United States has settled more firmly on its intentions in Southeast Asia. Steps could be taken at that time to improve the training and equipment situation of the Philippine units involved.

Taylor

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, NSC, T-624–71. Secret.

1 The President’s memorandum to Bundy, then redirected to Taylor, reminded Bundy and Taylor that the President had suggested increasing the number of Filipino troops in planned SEATO action in Laos to “fill the gap left by the delay in the arrival of Pakistani troops because of the necessity of moving by sea. Suggest we ask the Philippine government to increase the number from 180 to several thousand. I wonder if we could find out what progress is being made on this.” (Ibid.)

360. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy) to Secretary of State Rusk 360. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (McConaughy) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 7, 1961.

SUBJECT

Philippine War Damage Bill (H.R. 8617) Put Over to Next Session by House Rules Committee

The House Rules Committee yesterday voted 9–4 with one abstention not to refer the revised Zablocki Philippine War Damage Bill to the floor during this session. The Committee then voted unanimously to put the Bill over for consideration during the next session.

Ambassador Romulo this morning pleaded in the strongest terms that you issue a brief statement, primarily for use in the Philippines, expressing regret that this Administration supported Bill did not get to the House floor during this session, and reassuring the Filipino people of our continuing warm and affectionate regard.

The Ambassador, who appears to have given President Garcia virtual assurance that he would secure passage of the Bill, points out that in the Philippines disappointment will be keen and press reaction strong. The Ambassador’s sense of urgency is evidently personal as well as official. He subsequently has also called the President with a similar request. The White House Staff is recommending that the President issue a statement along the lines of attachment No. 1. An alternate version prepared in SPA is included as attachment No. 2. The White House will be in touch with your Office before releasing any statement.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/9–761. Confidential. Drafted by McFarland and cleared by Emmons, Steeves, and John P. White, Legislative Management Officer, Bureau of Congressional Relations.

1 Both attached but not printed. The White House released a statement by the President in support of the bill providing payment for Philippine war damages on September 8; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, p. 833.

361. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 361. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, September 18, 1961, noon.

323. For McConaughy. From at least two sources we have report that President Garcia has been advised that Congress failed act on War Damage Bill because of national elections scheduled November. One report went further to indicate that President had been told that all US aid was being slowed down until after elections and that if Liberals won we would undertake extensive aid program in Phils. Source of report on War Damage Bill seems to have been Elizalde in New York partly at least to discredit Romulo.

Would like to pass word quietly to President Garcia that report without foundation and that delay in approval of bill entirely result of congressional pressure for adjournment. Before doing so however would appreciate confirmation that Phil elections had no bearing in congressional decision.1

Mein

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/9–1861. Secret; [distribution indicator not declassified].

1 In telegram 299 to Manila, September 19, the Department reported that, as far as it could ascertain, failure of the House Rules Committee to report out the War Damage Bill was not related to the Philippine election campaign. At Mein’s discretion, he could so inform Garcia, but should not give assurances that postponement was caused exclusively by congressional adjournment pressures. The Department had intimations that postponement was influenced by reservations that a few members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee had, but could not predict if these reservations would affect the progress of the bill during the next session. (Ibid.)

362. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 362. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, December 9, 1961, 1 p.m.

655. Ref Embtels 598 and 623.1 Continued absence concession statement by Pres Garcia, and daily spate speculative, and often imaginative stories, circulating in Manila rumor mills and appearing in press have maintained some degree of tension in local atmosphere.

Nervousness accentuated Dec 7 with appearance unattributed accounts both Daily Mirror and Evening News to effect Garcia preparing protest to be filed with Congress before Dec 12 joint session. Papers added protest to be discussed with Senate Pres Rodriguez and NP congressional leaders during weekend. Dec 8 papers carried Press Secretary Nable’s statement issued previous night that President “still awaiting official results of elections and no decision as yet reached as to what course of action to be taken.” Statement concluded “President has no knowledge of any protest or complaint being prepared on manner in which poll count has been conducted.” Press also reported Liberal leaders late Dec 7 decided ask Supreme Court issue writ mandamus compel Congress proclaim Macapagal and Pelaez in event NP majority resort dilatory tactics.

At Malacanang farewell dinner for Ambassador Thursday night Garcia told Amb he had not been well and attributed his “nervous tension” to aftereffects of drugs his doctors had prescribed to keep him going during campaign. He said he expected this effect would wear off next few days but meanwhile he felt “confused”.

In response Amb’s inquiry about rumors concerning vote count and proclamation, Garcia at first replied that whatever might happen relations between Phils and US would not be affected. Amb then referred to prospect for orderly transfer of powers.2 Garcia replied he had not yet made up his mind what course of action he would take after official count completed but that Amb could be assured he would never exceed legal framework of Constitution and peace and order would be maintained.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Garcia continues receive from extremist fringe of palace clique reports of irregularities in electoral count of a nature which, in spite of reliable sources, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] best described as weird. Embassy has noted comments and actions both public and private by responsible administration officials (e.g., Serrano, SecDef Santos, Aytona) which amount effectively to complete acceptance Macapagal–Pelaez victory and indicate desire for orderly transfer. Nonetheless, President’s propensity for procrastination and indecision, buttressed by his isolation from all but most partisan and extremist advisors, has resulted in public position of ambiguity which has in turn kept Liberals on edge and doubtless provoked them into intemperate actions and further propagation of rumors pointing to possible public incidents and disorders during transition period.

In part, Liberals themselves are to blame. In first flush of victory Liberal leaders put undue public emphasis on pledges to fulfill campaign promises of early and vigorous prosecution graft and corruption cases. NP figures, who believed themselves personally threatened, reacted vigorously and convinced Garcia of need to withhold concession. Subsequent Macapagal instructions have produced fewer statements as well as abandonment of his own daily press conf with healthy result. Embassy informed reliably Macapagal has assured Garcia there will be no prosecution Pres and Mrs. Garcia and LP emissaries have been in touch with Mrs. Garcia and Press Secretary Nable frequently over past two weeks to give assurance and to attempt convince Pres he has everything to gain from orderly transfer.3

Nable yesterday told me preparations going forward quietly for orderly turnover and Garcia only awaiting congressional proclamation. He also confirmed that overweening Liberal statements had placed Garcia in difficult position and influenced his actions. In fact, he said early concession statement drafted and plans made for breakfast announcement, but action withheld on account Liberal allegations.

Several sources attribute Dec 7 story re Garcia protest to Senate Pres Rodriguez. Motivation not altogether clear but could be to keep himself in best possible bargaining position for retention Senate Presidency. LP official informed EmbOff both Senate and House will come under LPcontrol after January. Control of Senate had already been virtually conceded by most observers on basis wounds piled up during convention and electoral knifing among NP Senators. However, House control reported to be assured on basis assurances of non-persecution given by LP’s to leaders Iglesia Ni Kristo which reportedly controls crucial bloc of Congressmen. At same time this development will allegedly bloc the election protest which has formally been filed by Vice Presidential candidate Sergio Osmena.

In sum, Embassy believes there is relatively remote possibility of any hitch in proclamation Macapagal and Pelaez although possibility minor disturbances during joint congressional session next week cannot be ruled out. AFP still firmly committed to observance Constitutional processes and maintenance peace and order. Even AFP Chief of Staff Cabal, who might, because of pending investigation against him, be considered unreliable, has privately given assurance he will back constitutionality.

Military Comdrs are conscious of possible contingency involved and have placed certain constabulary units on precautionary alert against civil disturbances. Chronicle today quotes AFP Vice C/S Cruz statement that AFP and Manila police have worked out joint security measures for Dec 12–30 period.

Times, Chronicle and Herald also report today statements by Rodriguez and House Speaker Romualdez that they consider any move by NP to block or delay proclamation “ill advised” and giving assurance that, in spite of possible turbulent session, proclamation of Pres and VP would be accomplished before Dec 30.

Mein

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.00/12–961. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC POLAD, Commander 13th Air Force, and Commander, U.S. Navy, Philippines.

1 These telegrams, November 22 and 29, transmitted reports from Manila that if the Garcia government blocked the transfer of power to Diosadado Macapagal, the Philippine Army, Navy, and Air Force had begun contingency planning that would force the Congress to proclaim Macapagal President. Nevertheless, most reports indicated an orderly turnover of government. (Ibid., 796.00/11–2261 and 796.00/11–2961)

2 According to telegram 582 from Manila, November 20, Macapagal asked for help from “American representatives” to exert pressure on Garcia to desist in his plans to block a peaceful transfer of power and to counteract a plan by the military to support Garcia’s continuation in power. The Embassy commented that it had no evidence that the army would support Garcia, but rather that it would support Macapagal. (Ibid., 796.00/11–2061)

3 In telegram 656, December 9, the Embassy reported that a source close to Macapagal had requested refuge for Macapagal in the hypothetical event that Garcia moved against him. The Embassy thought the possibility unlikely and was not prepared to reply to a hypothetical question. If it became known that the United States had offered refuge it would create the impression, which was false, that the United States was expecting trouble. (Ibid., 796.00/12–961)

363. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 363. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, December 12, 1961, 5 p.m.

665. Embtel 630; Deptel 599.1 Mutuc who has been designated by Macapagal for liaison with Embassy during period preceding inauguration informed me today that Macapagal expects special US representative at inauguration December 30 and hopes US will agree send one. I attempted discourage invitation but according Mutuc President-elect could not be dissuaded. Not only does Macapagal desire have special representative from US but he feels that absence of such representative will be misunderstood by Phil public in view of his announced policy of close association with US and presence special representative at Garcia’s inauguration 1957. I suggested to Mutuc there were other ways correcting any public misinterpretation such as warm message from President Kennedy, reference to close relations, high esteem, etc. when new Ambassador presents credentials, but he did not think this would satisfy Macapagal. Told Mutuc I would cable Department but that in view of our policy I was not at all sure we would send special representative and added that in meantime I hoped President-elect would not make any public statement on this subject which might make our respective positions difficult should US not send special representative.

I recommend strongly that if Ambassador not scheduled arrive prior December 30 we send special representative for inauguration. Macapagal is close friend of US and is strongly committed to close relations with US. Special representative, especially if well known person, would be reassuring to Macapagal personally and would be boost US-Phil relations. Absence such representative with US represented only by Chargé might be misunderstood not only by public and press but by Macapagal himself. I realize time is short and date of inauguration somewhat inconvenient but hope arrangements can be made to reply favorably to Macapagal’s invitation.2

Mein

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 796.11/12–1261. Confidential; Priority.

1 In telegram 630 from Manila, December 5, the Embassy asked for the Department’s thinking on designating a special representative to attend the inauguration of Macapagal. In telegram 599, also December 5, the Department stated that the U.S. Chief of the Mission would attend as it was not U.S. policy to send special envoys to inaugurations. (Both ibid., 796.11/12–561)

2 In a handwritten note to McGeorge Bundy, December 14, Harriman agreed with White House interest in sending a special envoy to the inauguration, but noted that Chester Bowles was not free to go and he saw “no point in picking Robert Murphy.” Harriman suggested a number of candidates: Governor Pat Brown, Senator William Fulbright, Congressman Stuart Symington, Senator Albert Gore, or Walt Rostow. Bowles and Murphy were the two names formally suggested to the White House in a memorandum from Battle to Dungan on December 15. “(Attached note to memorandum from Dungan to Battle, December 13, and memorandum from Battle to Dungan, December 15; ibid., 796.11/12–1361 and 796.11/12–1561)

The special representative choosen to attend the inauguration was Robert B. Meyner, Governor of New Jersey. Meyner, the son-in-law of the newly-appointed Ambassador to the Philippines, William E. Stevenson, was asked to deliver congratulatory messages from President Kennedy to President Macapagal and Vice President Pelaez. (Telegrams 662 and 698 to Manila, December 20 and 28; ibid., 796.11/12–2061 and 796.11/12–2661)

364. Memorandum of Conversation 364. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, January 16, 1962, 11:40–11:52 a.m.

SUBJECT

Philippine Economic Mission

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Sison, Acting Minister of Finance of the Philippines

Mr. Calingo, Minister, Philippine Embassy

The Secretary

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

Secretary Sison expressed Philippine appreciation for the “wonderful reception” his group had received in Washington.1 He especially mentioned the long hours of overtime put in by the IMF and IBRD to help meet the early Philippine deadline. Mr. Sison said that he felt his group was making real headway and mentioned that there would be further consultations in Manila next week with an IMF team. Mr. Sison asked the Secretary how far the United States could go in helping them in trying to obtain a $100,000,000 stabilization fund from the U.S. Government (to be used in conjunction with funds they hope to receive from international agencies and private banks). The Secretary replied that he was not prepared to give a specific answer in the way of figures but that we were very interested in social and economic development in the Philippines. In this connection he said that we were also trying to put our house in order so that we might act more promptly on matters of this kind.

Mr. Sison explained that the need for quick action was due to the fact that Macapagal did not control the Philippine House of Representatives and that in order to put the final phase of decontrol into effect he would have to act before the Philippine Congress meets January 22. Mr. Sison informed the Secretary that he was going to New York tonight; would leave Thursday for the Philippines, arriving there Saturday morning; would hold a meeting of the Monetary Board Saturday afternoon. President Macapagal would issue the order for decontrol measures on Sunday, January 21. Mr. Sison said there was no question of Macapagal’s legal ability to put decontrol into effect prior to the opening of the Philippine Congress. He said that the Philippine desire to have available a large stabilization fund prior to decontrol was in part because of the psychological impact it would have and the consequent deterrent effect on wide fluctuations once decontrol had been instituted.

The Secretary assured Mr. Sison that he would try to get an answer for him before Mr. Sison’s group left the United States.2

The Secretary asked about the Philippine balance of payments. Mr. Sison said that the Philippine balance of payments situation had been unfavorable but that he felt the new program on which the Philippine Government was now embarking would correct this.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.9611/1–1662. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and approved in S on January 17. The time of the meeting is from Rusk’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

1 Sison headed a special mission sent by President Macapagal to obtain U.S., IRBD, and IMF help for a new program of decontrol of trade and exchange transactions, and virtual unification of existing multiple exchange rates into a single fluctuating rate to be determined by market forces. This economic program required a stabilization fund to assure public confidence and prevent panic. Sison and his group discussed their plan with Department of State officials prior to this meeting with the Secretary (Memorandum of conversation, January 16; Department of State, Central Files, 411.9641/1–1662)

2 On January 17, representatives of the various U.S. agencies and the IMF discussed loan contributions to the Philippines for its decontrol program. (Memorandum of conversation, January 17; ibid., 896.10/1–1762)

The same day Avery Peterson sent a memorandum to Rusk recommending a reply to Sison that had been approved by interested U.S. agencies. The reply assured Sison that the United States was prepared to provide assistance from the Treasury Stabilization Fund in association with arrangements to be worked out between the Philippine Government and the IMF. AID was prepared to make loans of $50 million over the next 18 months to support development projects meeting its criteria, and the Export-Import Bank of Washington would provide additional credits of $25 million. Rusk approved the letter and it was transmitted to the Philippine Embassy. (Ibid., 896.13/1–1762 and 896.10/1–1762)

365. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the State-Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting 365. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the State-Joint Chiefs of Staff MeetingSource

Washington, January 19, 1962, 11:30 a.m.

[Here follow a list of those present at the meeting and the record of discussion of Berlin, West New Guinea, and Algeria.]

IV. The Philippines

Mr. Johnson stated that we are reasonably hopeful that a mutually acceptable agreement on criminal jurisdiction can be reached with the new Macapagal Administration which is demonstrating a desire to work more closely with the U.S. than did the Garcia regime. There is no pressure from the U.S. side to reach agreement since conditions under present arrangements are generally satisfactory. Mr. Johnson then said that we would like the views of the JCS on their future requirements for Philippine bases and an estimate of their strategic importance.

General Decker said that the JCS have fairly large Air Force and Navy base requirements in the Philippines and that Admiral Felt has a contingency plan for stationing one U.S. Army Division in the Philippines. However, this latter plan has considerable fiscal and political implications. General Decker pointed out that the Philippines offers an excellent strategic position for deployment of forces which might be required in the Southwest Pacific Area. In response to a question from Mr. Johnson, General Decker said that the military had large construction requirements in the Philippines and that sufficient areas appeared to be available although specific sites had not yet been selected. He also said that the division Admiral Felt was using in his planning was based in the ZI. Although the JCS had used Okinawa instead of the Philippines to meet an area stockpile base requirement, they hoped that the Philippines would be available for any additional U.S. forces which might be deployed to the area.

Admiral Anderson said that the Navy needed all of its present facilities in the Philippines and that any new agreements should provide for their expansion (after appropriate consultation). However, the Navy probably will not require any additional facilities in the Philippines for peacetime use. General Smith said that the Air Force may have to place additional units in the Philippines; and, accordingly, any further agreements should not contain restrictions on the number of USAF units which may be stationed at Clark Field. Admiral Anderson cautioned that we should not proceed too fast in our negotiations with the Philippine Government because internal political problems in which we could become involved might develop. He also emphasized that the military do not attach any urgency to early conclusion of a SOFA.

[Here follows the record of the brief discussion of U.S. forces in Korea.]

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Meetings. Top Secret. A note on the cover sheet indicates that this was a State draft not cleared with the Department of Defense.

366. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East (Rice) to the President’s Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman) 366. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East (Rice) to the President’s Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman)Source

Washington, February 7, 1962.

SUBJECT

Your Request to Assistant Secretary Edwin Martin for Information on Administration Support for the Philippine War Damage Bill (H.R. 8617)

The Administration has consistently supported passage of the Philippine War Damage Bill (H.R. 8617) on the grounds that: 1. Original legislation (The Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946 (S. 1610, 79th Congress)) provided for payments for rebuilding, replacement or repair of damaged private property up to a maximum of 75 percent of the approved amount of each claim after an initial $500 had been paid on each claim. The $400 million appropriated under the Act for this purpose was sufficient only to pay the initial $500 on each claim and approximately 52.5 percent of the amount of each approved claim in excess of $500. Thus this program was not carried out as fully as the law permitted due to the shortage of funds appropriated.

2. Payment in settlement of this matter would be of substantial assistance to the United States in attaining its foreign policy objectives. This is true because the Philippine Government and people sincerely feel that the failure of the United States to appropriate additional war damage compensation has defeated a legitimate expectation of assistance to a firm ally which suffered severe damage in the mutual war effort.

3. This Bill or similar ones were introduced annually for some years in an attempt to clear this moral obligation of the United States to the people of the Philippines from the books. H.R. 8617 was held up in the Rules Committee last year due to pressure of other business. At that time the President issued a statement regretting that the Bill had been held over, emphasizing that the Administration continues to give whole hearted support to such legislation, and expressing hope that it would receive Congressional approval this year.1

4. Payment this year would make an especially significant contribution to the foreign exchange reserves of the new Philippine Administration of President Macapagal which has recently undertaken removal of foreign exchange controls, with stabilization of the peso at its true value and which is returning to a free-enterprise economy pledged to development with the assistance of foreign private investment.

ER

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/2–762. No classification marking. Drafted by McFarland and cleared by Bell:

1 See footnote 1, Document 360.

367. Memorandum of Conversation 367. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Philippine Sugar

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Abello of the Philippines

The President

Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

During a conversation at the time Ambassador Abello was presenting his credentials, the President said that he had noted a news report some days ago that the Japanese were planning to buy 300,000 tons of Cuban sugar and asked the Ambassador if the Philippines could not provide the sugar to Japan.

Ambassador Abello explained that the Philippines did not produce enough sugar to sell 300,000 tons in the open market after fulfilling their quota to the United States. The President asked if the Philippines could increase their production. The Ambassador said he was sure the Philippines could and would be glad to increase production but pointed out that it would take 12 to 15 months. He also noted that sugar sold in the Japanese market would be for the world price while the Filipinos would obviously prefer to sell sugar at a premium price in the United States. The President told the Ambassador of the proposal now under consideration whereby the difference between the premium prices and the world price for Latin American sugar would be put back into the Alliance for Progress. He said that as far as the premium price was concerned the Philippines should not worry as the United States had no intention of denying the Filipinos the premium price.

The President suggested the Philippines might be prepared to sell 300,000 tons of its 980,000 ton U.S. quota to the Japanese with the United States paying the Filipinos the difference between the price paid by the Japanese and the U.S. premium price. He pointed out that this was not a U.S. Government proposal but an idea he had been thinking of.

Ambassador Abello thought this was an interesting suggestion and said that he would report it to his Government. The President asked Mr. Bell to have the State Department prepare a memorandum for him on this subject.1

Note: Although not stated explicitly, the President apparently had in mind payment to the Philippines for the difference between the world price and the U.S. premium price on 300,000 tons of sugar for Japan until the Philippines could increase their production so that they could satisfy the Japanese market as well as fulfill their U.S. quota.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 896.235/2–2062. Secret. Drafted by Bell and approved by the White House on February 22. A separate memorandum of conversation covers the discussion between the President and Abello of a potential Corregidor-Bataan memorial. (Ibid.) Another memorandum of conversation contains a brief account of the discussion on the question of the Philippines’ prohibition of importation of U.S. tobacco, Abello suggested if the Philippine Supreme Court did not rule favorably on the question, President Macapagal would make proposals to solve the issue satisfactorily for American business interests. The President said that the War Damage Bill and the tobacco issue should not be tied together. (Ibid.)

Abello also discussed the issues of sugar, a Corregidor-Bataan memorial, and tobacco with Bell on February 21. (Memorandum of conversation, February 23; ibid., 896.235/2–2162)

1 In a March 7 memorandum to the President, Rusk stated that it did not appear practical to ask the Philippine Government to divert sugar to Japan because Japan had already concluded its purchases from Cuba and had filled its 1962 requirements for sugar. The Philippines had no sugar to sell on the world market and was unable to meet its quota in the U.S. market. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 8/61–4/62)

368. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 368. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, May 10, 1962, 9 p.m.

1322. For Harriman. Embtel 1321.1 Have just returned from frank talk with President and Vice President who are greatly distressed about adverse War Damage vote2 and state it will be regarded throughout Phils as serious setback to Phil-American relations. Therefore issue for them is whether or not US visit now will help or aggravate that set-back. Because of present pressures they incline toward a postponement on grounds they must demonstrate control of situation rather than letting opponents take over the issue. I of course argued the other way and minimized vote so far as our relations are concerned. I also pointed out possible detrimental effect on new investment and five year program if trip postponed or cancelled. I think I did persuade President not to make a decision for few days pending review of public reaction and press comments in both countries, as well as analysis of US Congress vote. However, unless reaction here proves far less intense than President and Vice President predict or likelihood of immediate reconsideration or some favorable action in US Congress, fear President will issue strong statement cancelling or possibly postponing the visit. If he does that it will be because he feels visit under present circumstances will worsen situation with Filipino people possibly even leading to election of anti-American President in 1965. On other hand if he cancels or postpones as now seems likely he would hope to hold control of situation and rebuild improved relations over period of time. During conversation they mentioned possibility and advantages of neutralistic position.3

Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/5–1062. Secret; Niact.

1 In telegram 1321, May 10, Stevenson reported on his discussion with Pelaez earlier that afternoon on the defeat of the War Damage Bill. (Ibid.)

2 On May 9, despite solid bipartisan support, the House of Representatives defeated the Philippine War Damage Bill (H.R. 8617) by a vote of 201–171. In analyzing the failure of the bill, the Department recognized that payment to some 325 large claimants drew opposition from Congressmen who were not opposed to payments to small claimants. It was noted that the Philippines had received $1.7 billion in postwar aid, and $73 million would be a windfall to large claimants who had already reconstructed and rehabilitated their businesses. (Telegram 1371 to Manila; ibid.)

3 At the Department of State’s instigation, President Kennedy sent Macapagal a letter expressing regret for the failure of the War Damage Bill, noting that his administration had given it wholehearted support, and suggesting that it was only a temporary setback. Kennedy stated he looked forward to seeing Macapagal in Washington next month. (Telegram 1370 to Manila, May 10; ibid.)

369. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 369. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Macapagal State Visit and Philippine War Damage Bill

On May 9, 1962 the House of Representatives defeated H.R. 8617, to pay $73 million to some 88,000 individual and corporate claimants in the Philippines. On May 14, 1962 President Macapagal announced postponement of his State Visit to the United States, publicly attributing his decision to Philippine popular and Congressional “resentment” over the War Damage Bill disapproval.1 Embassy Manila declares that public opinion opposing the visit and resentful of the United States has been largely brought on by public utterances of Philippine Congressmen and Administration leaders up to and including Vice President Pelaez and President Macapagal.

The Embassy notes that domestic considerations largely influenced Macapagal to take this action, that he did so with little regard for US-Philippine relations, and concludes that in the interests of these relations the dust must be allowed to settle before resuming plans for a State Visit.2

The Department of State agrees with these conclusions and notes further that uncertainties still surrounding prospects for the new Philippine War Damage Bill (H.R. 11721—tentatively scheduled for a vote during the week of June 4) make it unwise at this time to consider reviving the Macapagal State Visit during the period June 17–29.3 A suggested reply, for President Kennedy’s signature, to Macapagal’s letter of May 14 postponing his trip is attached.4 The letter is as warm and friendly as possible under the circumstances, accepts Macapagal’s decision to postpone his visit, notes the difficulty of completing arrangements now for a June visit, and suggests he inform Ambassador Stevenson when he might be able to come again. We cannot, of course, rule out that Macapagal may himself seek to revive the trip as originally scheduled. The attached letter is designed to forestall such action insofar as possible.

Because a mutually acceptable time might not be available until late in the year or until 1963, consideration might be given to other means of indicating our continuing friendliness to the Filipinos. Macapagal reportedly has been invited to receive an honorary degree from the University of Pittsburgh in September. If this unofficial trip materializes, consideration might be given to inviting him to the White House for lunch and a short talk, without prejudice to a later State Visit. The Philippine Congress has indicated a desire to send a goodwill delegation to the United States this year. An invitation might be extended or an exchange of visits arranged on initiative of our Congress.

Andre Navez5

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 5/62. Confidential. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by McFarland, cleared by Rice, and cleared in draft by Bell, Dutton, and Samuel L. King, Assistant Chief of Protocol for visits and ceremonies. (Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/5–2362)

1 Reported in telegram 1350 from Manila, May 14. (Ibid., 796.11/5–1462)

2 Reported in telegram 1387 from Manila, May 18. (Ibid., 796.11/5–1862)

3 Stated in part in telegram 1428 to Manila, May 22. (Ibid., 211.9641/5–2262)

4 The draft letter was attached and was approved with slight revisions that softened the U.S. position on the postponement of the visit. For example, “dismay” became “disappointment.” The text of the letter was sent to Manila as telegram 1446, May 25. (Ibid., 796.11/5–1862)

5 Navez of S/S signed for Brubeck above Brubeck’s typed signature.

370. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 370. Notes of Telephone Conversation Between President Kennedy and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, June 8, 1962.

ROUGH NOTES ON JFK CONVERSATION

JFK—Unfortunate—we probably should have come through more powerfully—that the President and Administration were fighting for it and we were having trouble with the Congress so it wouldn’t be the US.1

Why don’t you say—the President is trying to get this bill straightened out—he believes in our relations—you know what happens in politics—US has been carrying on a heavy aid program for 15 years—gold problem—carrying big deficit—and therefore he should understand what our problems are—just feeds anti-Americanism.

H—This Macapagal is afraid of his political future or has no sense.

JFK—That’s what we ought to determine.

K [H]—I am making this effort, etc.

K—We sometime ought to point out the Republican actions on foreign policies have caused us trouble in the Philippines as well as other places.

* Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Apparently dictated by Harriman.

1 Reference is to the defeat of the War Powers Bill and the Filipino reaction, especially a statement by Macapagal as reported by a Washington paper apparently tying the deterioration of U.S.-Philippine relations to U.S. base rights in the Philippines; see footnote 2, Document 371.

371. Memorandum of Conversation 371. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 8, 1962.

SUBJECT

President Macapagal’s Interview with UPI

PARTICIPANTS

Governor W. Averell Harriman—Assistant Secretary, Far Eastern Affairs

Ambassador Emilio Abello—Ambassador of the Philippines

Mr. James H. McFarland, Jr.—Officer in Charge, Philippine Affairs

Governor Harriman stated that he had asked Ambassador Abello to come in to inform him that President Kennedy was very unhappy over the headline story in today’s Washington Evening News.1 The President and his Administration had gone out on a limb in support of the War Damage Bill. Macapagal’s comments gave no credit to the U.S. Administration and make more difficult getting the revised Zablocki Bill (H.R. 11721) through the U.S. Congress.

Abello replied that the press story did not justify the headline, to which Governor Harriman agreed, acknowledging also Macapagal’s domestic political problems, but asked whether Macapagal could not be persuaded to refrain from any further public comments on deterioration of relations between the countries until the U.S. Congress had time to consider and act on the new pending legislation. Governor Harriman stated that his remarks should in no sense be considered a démarche, but wished President Macapagal could be brought to recognize that such statements were counterproductive.

Governor Harriman assured Ambassador Abello that President Kennedy would make no statement and there would be no official comment here but noted that he personally would be appearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee June 12 and anticipated that this statement would be raised by some members.2 He asked if Ambassador Abello could provide him with a helpful clarification of Macapagal’s remarks prior to Tuesday, June 12, which the Ambassador agreed to try to do.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 211.9641/6–862. Confidential. Drafted by McFarland on June 12.

1 The Washington Evening News of June 8 contained an article, entitled “We May Lose Our Philippine Bases, Macapagal Hints,” that was based on a UPI interview with Macapagal in Manila. Macapagal was quoted as worried that continued deterioration of U.S.-Philippine relations could endanger U.S. base rights, but Macapagal himself stated he was making every effort to halt the deterioration. (Telegram 1505 to Manila, June 8; ibid.)

2 On June 12, Harriman testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in support of the Humphrey Bill (S. 2380) and in opposition to the Fulbright Bill (S. 3329) for Philippine war claims. The Humphrey Bill, according to Harriman, which authorized payment to individuals, was the only way to discharge the U.S. moral obligation to claimants and finally terminate claims of that nature. The Fulbright Bill was essentially a grant that did not commit the Philippines Government to reimburse the claimants in any way or use the money in an agreed manner. Some members of the Committee raised Macapagal’s statement as quoted in the Washington Evening News, but Harriman assured them Macapagal had been misquoted. (Telegram 1518 to Manila; ibid., 211.9641/6–1162)

372. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 372. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, June 11, 1962.

SUBJECT

Summary of Developments Regarding Philippine Decontrol Program

Soon after President Macapagal took office in December 1961, he sent a Presidential Mission to the United States to obtain financial support for a program of elimination of trade and exchange controls and adoption of a flexible military exchange rate.1 In view of the economic and political situation in the Philippines at the time, President Macapagal thought he had to implement this program by Presidential decree before the Philippine Congress convened a few weeks later. My letter dated January 17 to Acting Secretary of Finance Sison, who headed the Philippine Mission, set out the financial support which the United States Government was prepared to extend (Enclosure No. 3).2 The amounts from the United States official sources were as follows:

$ 23.25 million Federal Reserve Gold Loan due in three months (subsequently renewed for three months)

35 million Export-Import Bank for financing projects and commodities

50 million Agency for International Development for financing projects which meet AID criteria

$108.25 million TOTAL

My letter stated that Treasury would negotiate a Treasury Stabilization Fund Agreement but the amount and date were not mentioned. In addition, the Philippines obtained a drawing from the International Monetary Fund of $28.3 million, and negotiated a roll-over of $75 million of existing short-term credits with United States commercial banks and also obtained standby credits from these banks of $77 million of new money.

An International Monetary Fund Mission visited the Philippines in February 1962, and negotiated a standby arrangement for $40.4 million effective April 12 this year. Of this amount $10 million may be used to June 30, 1962; up to $20 million through September 30, 1962; and up to $30 million through December 31, 1962. The remaining $10.4 million will be available through April 11, 1963.

The United States Director of the International Monetary Fund reported to the National Advisory Council that so far as the domestic side of the Philippine stabilization program is concerned, progress has been satisfactory; prices are firm, credit expansion is about at the level expected, and the fiscal position is also within the expected range. The principal difficulty confronting the Philippines is related to the external position, including external debts which the Central Bank must meet during 1962 and the management of the exchange rate.

On May 16, President Macapagal sent the enclosed letter to you (Enclosure No. 2)3 describing the constructive actions in the financial field which his administration has taken thus far and gratefully referring to the effective cooperation given by the United States to the Sison Mission. He mentioned the commitment of the United States Government to provide assistance from the Treasury Stabilization Fund in association with arrangements which might be worked out with the International Monetary Fund. He endorsed a need for $450 million (the bulk of which he expected to come from the United States) to carry the program forward. There is no economic justification for setting $450 million as the minimum amount required by the Philippines.

The opinion of United States experts is that the present and projected foreign exchange available to the Republic of the Philippines totals approximately $400 million and is sufficient to meet Philippine commitments, and, should the need arise, for market operations to stabilize the peso at the appropriate time. These funds are as follows:

From Philippine sources: $ 127 million held as reserves on April 30, 1962, by the Central Bank and the commercial banks

72 million mandatory sale of 20 per cent of export proceeds

30 million Central Bank purchases in the free exchange market

From United States and other sources: $ 35 million Export-Import Bank

77 million standby United States commercial banks

58.75 million IMF, of which $40.4 million has already been agreed

$ 399.75 million TOTAL

In addition, the Agency for International Development still has available $50 million for projects which meet AID criteria. By coincidence these available resources total approximately $450 million.

Secretary Dillon has replied to the joint letter he received from the Secretary of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines stating that the Treasury Department is willing to begin negotiations promptly on an agreement covering money from the Stabilization Fund.4 This reply does not mention a figure or terms. These will be determined during the course of negotiations. These resources will carry the Philippines over the period of stringency through August and the end of 1962.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that you reply to President Macapagal along the lines of the enclosed draft letter (Enclosure No. 1).5

Dean Rusk6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62. Official Use Only. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates it was drafted by Matilda L. Milne (Officer in Charge of Exchange Rates and Systems, Bureau of Economic Affairs) and Jarvis of SPA, and cleared by Bell, Peterson, Leonard Weiss (Director of the Office of Trade and Finance, Bureau of Economic Affairs), Isaiah Frank (Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs), Heyl of AID, Diehl of Treasury, Irvine of the Federal Reserve Board, U.S. Executive Director of the IMF Southard, and Houston of the Export-Import Bank. A note on the memorandum indicates it was signed by Rusk. (Department of State, Central Files, 896.10/6–1165)

1 See Document 364.

2 Attached but not printed; see footnote 1, Document 364.

3 Not attached, but a copy is attached to a May 23 memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62.

4 Castillo’s letter to Dillon of May 16 is attached to Brubeck’s May 23 memorandum to Bundy. On May 25, Dillon replied that the U.S. Treasury was ready to begin negotiations of an agreement covering use by the Philippine Government of resources of the Treasury Stabilization Fund. (Department of State, FE/SPA Files: Lot 64 D 523, Stabilization, 7.9)

5 The attached reply to Macapagal, approved by the President on June 14, reiterated that the United States was prepared to provide funds to ensure the success of the Philippine program, but then added the qualifications presented to the President in the last three paragraphs of the memorandum from Rusk. The letter was sent to the Embassy in Manila in telegram 1529, June 14. (Department of State, Central Files, 896.10/6–1462)

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

373. Memorandum of Conversation 373. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, June 26, 1962, 4–4:55 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vice President Pelaez Call on The President1

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Pelaez, Vice President of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines

Ambassador Emilio Abello

Assistant Secretary W. Averell Harriman

In discussing the present adverse reaction in the Philippines to the United States as a result of the negative vote in the House on the War Damage Bill, the President explained to Mr. Pelaez that he had done everything he could to get it passed. President Macapagal and Mr. Pelaezshould understand the problems that often exist in obtaining legislation by Congress. The leaders of the House were taken by surprise. Opposition developed because so much of the money would go to prosperous corporations. The bill had been reintroduced with slight amendments and it was now hoped that it would pass. The President asked that this be made plain to the Philippine people. Vice President Pelaez said an attempt had been made but that the situation was so complicated that adverse public reaction had not been allayed. He believed, however, that if the bill were passed, the present situation would be smoothed over since there was a basic strong sentiment for the United States and the desire to retain U.S. friendship.

He explained that the change of Independence Day from July 4 to June 12 had no connection with the War Damage incident since it had been agreed to before that had come up. He mentioned that Aguinaldo had urged this change for some years and that agreement among the Philippine leaders had been reached sometime ago. He said that this was not an anti-American action, that July 4 would continue to be a holiday and will be known as American-Philippine Friendship Day. He then showed the President an English translation of the Declaration of Independence of June 12, 1898 and pointed to the expressions of trust, confidence, and respect for the United States in this document. This declaration would be a permanent record of the close relation between our two countries. Vice President Pelaez spoke of the deep friendship between our two countries, of what the Philippines had learned from the United States and the role which the Philippines hoped to play in bringing to Asia a true understanding of the principles of democracy.

The subject of Laos was discussed and President Macapagal’s unfortunate toast to Phoumi.2 Vice President Pelaez said the President should understand how strongly the people of the Philippines felt about Communists, the battle they had had against the Huks, and feeling of prejudice against neutrality. The President explained in some detail his attitude in regard to Laos, pointing out that if we had intervened militarily, most of the forces would have come from the United States, only a hundred or two from the Philippines, and the best that could have been done was to have held the Mekong River cities. The FAR had shown little ability to fight. He contrasted the fighting spirit of the South Vietnamese with that of the Laotians. He expressed the hope now that Laos could remain independent by transferring the struggle from the military to the political arena. The non-Communists were in the majority. The question hinged on whether Mr. Khrushchev would keep his word given to President Kennedy in Vienna. In any event, he planned to watch the situation closely and would welcome Philippine participation in what we were doing in Southeast Asia, token forces for Thailand and some type of assistance in Viet-Nam and Laos.

Vice President Pelaez raised the subject of sugar and asked whether something more could be done for them. The President explained that sugar was a controversial subject on the Hill and he did not know whether the Senate bill or House bill would pass. In any event, he believed the Philippines could count on their 952,000 tons a year. Pelaez said he hoped that could be increased since it was a fixed tonnage and had not been changed for many years. The President pointed out that domestic interests were after the Cuban quota but he had opposed this since some day Cuba might become independent again, in which case Cuba should have its fair share again. If domestic producers took the quota, it would be difficult to pry it away. Investments would have been made in production facilities. The President asked Pelaez whether they could not sell sugar to Japan. He had been disturbed because Japan had been buying sugar from Cuba. Pelaez replied that the Philippines is a high cost producer and could not sell at the world price. The President asked how large was the differential. Ambassador Abello replied 2-1/2 cents. The President suggested they might consider giving a subsidy to sugar in order to earn foreign exchange just as the U.S. gave cotton producers. Pelaez made no comment.

The subject of the Corregidor Memorial was discussed and Pelaez agreed with the President that the O’Neal proposition for an enormous 7.5 million dollar monument was out of place. The President suggested that a public park similar to Gettysburg or Saratoga would be more appropriate. Pelaez agreed and suggested a shaft on which our two flags could be flown as a permanent memorial to the joint action of our two peoples.

The meeting was cordial and it was obvious that Vice President Pelaez enjoyed the frank and direct exchange of views on subjects of mutual interest. Ambassador Abello told Governor Harriman the Vice President had not expected the privilege of such a full discussion, which lasted three quarters of an hour. He was also pleased that photographs were taken.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.96/6–2762. Secret. Drafted by Harriman and approved by the White House on July 25. The source text is dated June 27; the June 26 date and the time of the meeting are taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library) A briefing memorandum from Brubeck for the President, June 25, is ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62.

1 Vice President Pelaez’s visit to Washington was “hastily arranged” as a means of demonstrating U.S. regard for the Philippines and to offset the defeat of the War Damage Bill. Pelaez arrived in Washington on June 25. In addition to the President, he saw the Acting Secretary of State, the Secretaries of Defense, Commerce, and Agriculture, the AID Administrator, Bowles, Harriman, the Acting Director of USIA, U. Alexis Johnson, the Chairman of the JCS, the heads of the IMF and Export-Import Bank, McGeorge Bundy, Senator Sparkman, and Congressmen Judd and Zablocki. An overall account of these meetings is in telegram 1609 to Manila, June 28. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.9611/6–2862)

Memoranda of conversation between Pelaez and Secretary of Defense McNamara, Secretary of Agriculture Freeman, and Acting Director of USIA Wilson, all June 26, are ibid., 796.56511/6–2662,411.9641/6–2662, and 511.964/6–2662, respectively. An account of the meeting with AID Administrator Hamilton is ibid., FE/SPA Files: Lot 64 D 523, Chron File, 1962.

2 In the toast Macapagal encouraged visiting anti-Communist Lao leaders Prince Boun Oum and Phoumi Nosavan to oppose neutralization of Laos by stating that he deplored the fact that they were receiving less support from the West than Lao neutralist forces. (Memorandum from Hilsman to Harriman, RFE–26, June 19; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62) This memorandum also concluded that Macapagal’s reaction to the defeat of the War Damage Bill was for domestic Philippine consumption and did not represent a real deterioration in U.S.-Philippine relations.

374. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 374. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)Source

Manila, July 13, 1962.

Dear Averell: I received your letter of June 28th.1 Personally, I believe we are on the same wave length, although at times our signals do not seem to get through to each other. Cables and despatches are not entirely satisfactory. They convey basic information, but in more cases than not fail to give a complete or accurate picture of the atmosphere at the time. That is one of the reasons why I was looking forward to my trip to Washington in connection with President Macapagal’s visit to the United States. The planned week in Washington would have given me a desired opportunity to sit down with you and others to discuss problems of mutual interest and concern.

As a matter of fact, I wonder if it would not be a good idea to have me come to Washington at some point in the not too distant future for a period of consultation.2 Now that I have been here for almost six months and that I am more familiar with our problems, such consultations might be useful from both our and the Department’s standpoint. I would appreciate your thoughts on this. Should such consultations be desirable, we would of course have to be careful as to timing and publicity so as to avoid any misunderstanding as to the cause of the trip.

I assure you that we have all worked conscientiously and persistently to offset the harm done here to Phil-American relations. This has involved several talks with the President and Vice President, and numerous ones with newsmen, legislators, officials and many others. It has involved courtesy calls and social amenities beyond the normal number. While the tension is abating, the fact remains that until a bill is passed by the U.S. Congress the atmosphere of good will which previously prevailed cannot be restored by anything we can do here. That our efforts have been helpful seems indicated by the enclosed clippings from Manila papers3 and from statements made repeatedly to us by both official and unofficial Filipinos.

As far as President Kennedy’s efforts on behalf of the war damage bill are concerned, I have stressed this point over and over again, especially in my talks with the President and Vice President. I am sure that both of them have long been well aware of the favorable attitude of both President Kennedy and the Department of State. Vice President Pelaez expressed his appreciation for this support of the bill in his speech to the Phil-American Chamber of Commerce in New York en route to Washington (see attached memo)4 and again in his press conference upon his arrival in Manila on June 29th. He has also made similar statements in speeches since his return. Likewise the press has publicized reports of the support being given the bill, so that most Filipinos interested in the bill are aware, I am sure, of this support.

Such efforts, while appreciated, do not remedy, however, the traumatic shock sustained by the Filipino people by what they consider to have been a repudiation by the American people through their Congress of a long standing obligation. Under all the accumulated circumstances, this action is interpreted here as an unfriendly act. (Of course it was not, something which we have explained over and over again!)

President Macapagal’s interview was arranged directly by NBC with the President’s office. We were only consulted in connection with an NBC request for me to say a few sentences (Embtel 1458).5 When Robinson, the NBC man, came in to interview me he had already finished with the President. At that particular time (June 11, 1962) we were concerned about Macapagal’s statement of a few days earlier that the war damage situation might affect our bases here. When we saw Robinson he said that when he interviewed Macapagal the latter had back-tracked on his earlier bases statement. As we reported in Embtel 1501,3 our Press Officer tried unsuccessfully to find out more about the NBC Macapagal interview. It certainly came as a surprise and disappointment to us that once again the President had made statements which were “unfortunate” from our viewpoint.

We are most grateful for the splendid, all-out reception which was given Vice President Pelaez in Washington and elsewhere. As we reported in Embtel 16,6 he returned full of good will and appreciation. He also was feeling much better about our relations in general and the war damage bill in particular. What he found in the United States appears to have confirmed in his own mind what we had been telling him and others here, that the vote in the House had not been an anti-Filipino vote, should not be so interpreted and that Americans had the highest regard for the Filipinos and their government. It is hard to understand why Pelaez had to go to the United States to discover, or “rediscover” as he puts it, “the reservoir of good will” in the United States for the Philippines, but that appears to have been the case, and it paid off. Pelaez seems to have come back completely “converted”. Whether he will be able to pass some of his impressions and enthusiasm along to Macapagal, and whether the latter will choose to listen and be impressed, we do not know. The President left on his trip the same day Pelaez returned, so the Vice President had very little opportunity to discuss his visit to the U.S. with the President.

The reception given Pelaez was very much to the good, but the problem now is not Pelaez but Macapagal. Macapagal is very much the key figure. We should not let ourselves believe that just because Pelaez appears to have been brought around that Macapagal will automatically change his attitude. We must wait until after the latter’s return to see if there has been any change in his thinking or reaction. As we have previously reported (Embtel 1595),7 the President is unpredictable and easily stirred up, especially on the war damage issue. His resentment is deeply rooted and subjective. It seems apparent that none of us, including Pelaez, may be able to change this and that only the enactment of a war damage bill will do so.

We do hope that the happy time you all had with Pelaez won’t lead (1) to abatement of all out efforts to get a war damage bill through, or (2) to the assumption that harmonious relations with Pelaez necessarily guarantees control over what Macapagal says or does.8 The two men are not close and Pelaez’ influence on the President is uncertain. For example, Pelaez was as horrified as were the rest of us by Macapagal’s outburst on neutralism at the luncheon for Boun Oum and Phoumi.

Although, as we reported in Embtel 1320,9 Pelaez disagreed with our policy on Laos (this was also the position of the Garcia administration), he had assured me the Philippine Government didn’t intend to offer Phoumi more than a courteous reception. (Incidentally, it was our information before the war damage bill defeat that Macapagal was trying to stave off the Phoumi visit until after his then pending trip to the United States).

I am sending this to Washington in the hope that, by the time it arrives there, you will have returned from Geneva having accomplished a most successful mission, for which I congratulate you most heartily.10

With all good wishes,

Sincerely yours,

Bill

* Source: Department of State, FE Files: Lot 65 D 25, S. Confidential; Personal; Official–Informal. A note in Harriman’s handwriting indicates that he discussed this letter with Bell.

1 Not found.

2 Next to the margin, Harriman wrote “yes.”

3 Not found.

4 Attached but not printed.

5 Dated June 4. (Department of State, Central Files, 996.6211/6–462)

3 Not found.

6 Dated July 3. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.9611/7–362) A copy of this telegram was included in the President’s weekend reading. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 6/62–7/62)

7 Dated June 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 911.50/6–2562)

8 Next to points (1) and (2), Harriman wrote, “We know this” and “absurd.”

9 Dated May 10. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.51J96/5–1062)

10 In telegram 210 to Manila, August 15, Harriman agreed that Stevenson should come to Washington for consultations. (Ibid., 211.9641/8–1562)

375. Editorial Note 375. Editorial Note

On August 1, 1962, the House of Representatives passed the Philippines War Damage Bill by a vote of 194 to 35. On August 24, the Senate passed the bill unanimously. The President signed the bill authorizing appropriation of $73 million for Philippine war damage claims, Public Law 87–616 (76 Stat. 411), on August 30. Payment to successful claimants would be in dollars or pesos, as the Secretary of the Treasury prescribed, at the rate of 2 pesos to 1 dollar. The text of P.L. 87–616 is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pages 1089–1091.

376. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 376. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, September 7, 1962.

[Here follow 2 paragraphs on the Dutch complaint to the NATO Council about West New Guinea.]

Philippines

I have had talks with Averell [less than 1 line of source text not declassified on the Macapagal problem most recently exemplified by the Philippine President’s speech on September 4th.1

We [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] agree that no United States representative is really getting through to Macapagal, [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Averell’s guess is that Ambassador Stevenson has simply not been able to establish a continuous working relationship with Macapagal. There are probably three principal reasons for this: first—a mechanical one—is that Macapagal has been relatively inaccessible to the Ambassador. The second is that the Vice President and Foreign Minister Pelaez, with whom we do have fairly close contacts, for obvious reasons, is not on the same political wave length as the President. Faced with these two difficulties, it is possible that our Ambassador simply has not shown the vigorous imagination necessary in the situation.

Averell is acutely aware of the problem and has written several letters to Stevenson, trying to stimulate more effective activity.

Stevenson is having lunch with Macapagal today to go over the problems of our relationship, especially in light of the recent speech, and has been called home by Averell for consultation on September 17th. Averell points out that you cannot take Stevenson by the scruff of the neck, but he does plan to explore the problems in Manila in some detail.

Averell tells me that he got good results from Macapagal when he took up the question of the impounded American tobacco last March.2 Averell feels therefore that the problem is by no means insoluble, and is quite prepared to take on the problem himself if that appears necessary after his talks with Stevenson.

[Here follows 1 paragraph on counterinsurgency in South Vietnam.]

Michael V. Forrestal3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Forrestal, 6/62–10/62. Secret.

1 In this speech, Macapagal indicated that Philippine policy toward Communism was different from U.S. policy in that the Philippines refused to have relations with Communist states. He believed “American leadership” was not as effective as it could be in combating Communism because it relied more on material power and less on “spiritual and ideological weapons.” Macapagal noted that the United States, despite generous foreign aid, was unpopular in recipient nations because of its lack of attention to spiritual and ideological values. (Telegram 325 from Manila, September 5; Department of State, Central Files, 796.11/9–562)

2 In 1961, certain U.S. Congressmen from tobacco-producing areas worked out an informal arrangement with the Garcia administration to import American tobacco. American exporters shipped seven million pounds to the Philippines, but on January 17, 1962, Macapagal ordered Philippines customs officials to seize the tobacco on the grounds it was illegally imported. The exporters went to the Philippines court to prevent the seizure. On January 25, Harriman and Romulo met to discuss the problem. The Macapagal administration considered the importation to be illegal, but in light of the fact that the American companies thought they were operating in good faith, it was prepared to allow the tobacco to be released provided it did not reenter the Philippines. Macapagal also promised a new agreement that would allow importation of U.S. tobacco for blending purposes. (Memorandum from Peterson to Harriman, January 25, and letter from Romulo to Harriman, January 31; ibid., FE/Philippines Files: Lot 64 D 523, Tobacco, 6–A.8 and Tobacco Letters)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

377. Memorandum of Conversation 377. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 29, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

Philippine Reaction to American Policy

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Amelito Mutuc of the Philippine Embassy

The President

Mr. Duke, Chief of Protocol

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

The President, recalling that irritations between the United States and the Philippines of some months ago had abated, told Ambassador Mutuc he hoped President Macapagal would feel free to raise with him (President Kennedy) any question of United States policy, particularly in Southeast Asia, which troubled him. The President expressed the belief that an exchange of views on any aspect of United States policy which troubled President Macapagal would be beneficial to both our countries. Ambassador Mutuc said that he was a good personal friend of Ambassador Stevenson and that in the past when Ambassador Stevenson had expressed a desire to develop a close personal contact with President Macapagal, he, Mutuc, had discouraged it because of Philippine domestic political considerations. Mutuc said that Macapagal had taken such a pro-American attitude during the political campaign of 1961 that there was a danger that he would be characterized as an American puppet if he developed too close a personal relationship with the American Ambassador. The President, smiling, observed that it was highly unlikely that President Macapagal would be so characterized now.

When Ambassador Mutuc left the President’s office, the President said the Ambassador should feel free to call on him when he had a matter which he felt needed to be discussed. (From remarks made later by Ambassador Mutuc, he apparently took this invitation literally.)

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 8/62–12/62. Confidential. Drafted by Bell and cleared by Forrestal for the White House on November 2. The meeting was held at the White House. The President’s Appointment Book indicates it was held from 12:15 to 12:25 p.m. Separate memoranda of this conversation cover a possible State visit by Macapagal and Laos. (Both ibid.)

378. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 378. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 14, 1963.

SUBJECT

Proposed Presidential Reply to March 2 letter from President Macapagal

Enclosed is a proposed reply by the President to the letter of March 2 from Philippine President Macapagal1 in which the latter described his difficulties in coming to the United States at the present time,2 touched on the political pressures for realignment of forces in the Far East and invited the President and Mrs. Kennedy to visit the Philippines at a date convenient to them.

Reports from Embassy Manila have consistently indicated President Macapagal does wish to come to the United States but does, indeed, have major political problems, primarily opposition control of the Senate and an up-coming senatorial election, which make it difficult for him to leave this year. We suggest, therefore, that we give him the benefit of the doubt and in our reply have taken sympathetic note of his explanations for his inability to give a clear-cut response at this time to the President’s invitation, suggesting that he may wish to postpone the visit until next year.

We believe we should not specifically respond to President Macapagal’s mention of pressures for realignment and revision of alliances in Asia, but rather address ourselves to the issue of immediate concern to him, Malaysia, the differing U.S.-Philippine attitudes toward it, and our underlying mutual interest in ensuring the security of the Philippines.

As for his invitation to the President and Mrs. Kennedy to visit the Philippines, we think it advisable to rise above his rather unique handling of this matter, attributing his prior public mention of his invitation to well intentioned, if somewhat ill-advised, spontaneity. The closeness of our relations with the Philippines can absorb this incident and we recommend the acceptance in principle of the invitation, leaving the time of such a visit completely open through the use of language similar to that employed in the President’s recent message to President Sukarno.

Grant Hilliker3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 PHIL. Secret. Drafted by Ballantyne and cleared by Bell and Rice.

1 The March 2 letter is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–4/63. A note on the source text indicates that the suggested reply attached to this memorandum and that attached to the March 20 memorandum (Document 379) were combined. The combined reply, dated March 21, was attached and was sent to Manila by pouch on March 22.

2 On October 4, 1962, Forrestal informed McGeorge Bundy that Harriman favored a visit by Macapagal but the President was unenthusiastic. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Forrestal, 6/62–10/62) On November 16, Stevenson cabled that he had approached Macapagal three times on a U.S. visit without success, but he would keep pressing. Harriman cabled Stevenson that it seemed undignified to do it again and suggested Stevenson leave the next move up to Macapagal. (Telegrams 594 from Manila and 542 to Manila, both November 16; Department of State, Central Files, 796.11/11–1662)

3 Hilliker signed for Brubeck above Brubeck’s typed signature.

379. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 379. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Brubeck) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

Suggested Reply to President Macapagal’s letter of February 12, 1963

In his February 12 letter to the President,1 Macapagal asked for increased and accelerated military assistance to all four of the Philippine services (Army, Navy, Air Force and Constabulary) totaling, according to Department of Defense estimates, approximately $100 million.

Macapagal’s involvement in this matter probably comes as a result of his concern over developments in Indonesia, to follow-up Secretary of National Defense Peralta’s request along similar lines made in early February during a Washington visit, and perhaps as a straw in the wind to determine the degree of cordiality in US-Philippine relations following our open divergence on the Malaysia issue.

Tentative study by Defense of Macapagal’s request indicates that this level of assistance is neither justified by any increased threat to the Philippines nor digestible by the country’s military establishment as it now stands. The Philippines needs both to reform its armed forces and to increase its defense appropriations to make them fully effective. Defense Department officials made this clear to Secretary Peralta during his visit.

We suggest that the President’s reply reflect these considerations, and also cover the following points: 1. That reductions in our military assistance appropriations on a world-wide basis are likely. (In this connection we could point to the heavy burden we have been carrying and draw Macapagal’s attention to the fact that in Vietnam and Thailand, contrary to his criticism of US policies as not being sufficiently strong, the US is carrying almost the entire load of foreign assistance.)

2. That, being linked to the Philippines in a mutual defense treaty, we are pledged to its defense and consequently intimately concerned with its security.

3. That we were encouraged by indications that the Philippines plans to improve its support for and the efficiency of its military establishment.

4. That we will be studying his request for accelerated assistance and be in touch with him through Ambassador Stevenson.

A proposed reply is enclosed.2

Walter Lubkeman3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 PHIL. Secret. Drafted by Ballantyne; cleared by Bell, Barnett, Rice, Colonel William B. Robinson of the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs, and Harriman; and cleared in draft by Martin M. Tank, Director of the Military Assistance Division of AID, William Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and Admiral Riley, Chief of the Joint Staff of the JCS.

1 The February 12 letter is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–4/63.

2 See footnote 1, Document 378.

3 Lubkeman signed for Brubeck above Brubeck’s typed signature.

380. Memorandum of Conversation 380. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Possible Presidential Visit

PARTICIPANTS

The Honorable Emmanuel Pelaez, Philippine Vice President and Secretary for Foreign Affairs

The Honorable Amelito Mutuc, Philippine Ambassador

The Honorable Salvador P. Lopez, Philippine Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs

The President

Mr. Bell, Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs

In answer to a question by Vice President Pelaez, President Kennedy said that he hoped to visit the Philippines and that he would look at the situation this summer to see whether it would be possible to make a visit to a number of places in the Far East.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part I of IV”; for Parts II–IV, see Documents 381–383.

381. Memorandum of Conversation 381. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Philippine Claim to North Borneo; Malaysia

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document 380.]

After having read an 11-page letter from Philippine President Macapagal that Vice President Pelaez handed him, the President pointed out that the United States had made no claim on North Borneo while we were in the Philippines.1 Pelaez acknowledged this and said that this matter had been pushed only since Macapagal was President, although the Philippines had exhibited an interest in the area since 1946.

President Kennedy said that he understood the principal reason behind the proposal for Malaysia was the need for a racial balance because of the large number of Chinese in Singapore. He pointed out that we have no historical interest in this area, and that of course our first consideration was security. He said it appeared that there was a difference of opinion as to how security requirements could best be met. We believe the Malaysia proposal offered the best hope of achieving this objective. The President asked if Indonesia had a claim on any of the area. Pelaez replied they did not. In answer to another question, Pelaez said Indonesian-Philippine relations were very good. Pelaez informed the President that the Philippines believed a solution might be for a United Nations trusteeship over all three Borneo territories with an act of self-determination sometime in the future.

The Vice President recounted Philippine efforts to bring Indonesia, Malaya and the Philippines together and seemed confident that the ministerial-level meeting scheduled for mid-May would lead to a “summit” meeting during which differences could be ironed out. He said the Philippines wanted an opportunity to make every effort through tripartite talks which he felt would be jeopardized if the United States, the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth were all to endorse the Malaysia plan. He indicated that part of the Philippine concern was to try and reach a settlement which would placate the Indonesians.

In answer to a question as to the British view, Pelaez said the British Government had rejected the Philippine arguments and there had been an agreement for an exchange of “documents.” The Philippines at their meeting with the British had, according to Pelaez, suggested referring the matter to the World Court but had received an “equivocal” answer from Lord Home.

The President told Vice President Pelaez that he would answer President Macapagal’s letter directly.2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part II of IV”; for Parts I and III–IV, see Documents 380 and 382–383.

1 The letter, dated April 20, is attached to an April 23 memorandum from Brubeck to Bundy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 5/63–11/63) For additional documentation on this subject, see Documents 327 ff.

2 A noncommittal reply was sent on June 19. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63)

382. Memorandum of Conversation 382. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Philippine War Damage

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document 380.]

The President asked Vice President Pelaez if he had read the news stories of the Senate investigation into lobbying activities with respect of the Philippine War Damage Act.1

Vice President Pelaez said that he had; that the Philippine Government viewed this as an American domestic political matter and were not commenting on it in public. The President remarked that he thought this was a good attitude to take. Vice President Pelaez said that he was somewhat concerned over the possibility of an exchange of recriminating statements arising if the opponents of attempts to amend the War Damage Act in the United States Congress were to make comments unfavorable to the Philippines.

The President said we were unable to predict the outcome of the proposal to amend the Act in the House of Representatives.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Confidential. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part III of IV”; for Parts I–II and IV, see Documents 380–381 and 383.

1 The stories charged that certain Filipinos lobbied Congress illegally to assure payment from the $73 million authorization of their individual war damage claims.

383. Memorandum of Conversation 383. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 23, 1963, 11–11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Bataan–Corregidor Memorial

PARTICIPANTS

[Here follows the same list as Document 380.]

The President asked Vice President Pelaez about the status of the Bataan–Corregidor memorial. Vice President Pelaez reported that the Philippine Government was moving ahead and had already done a lot to clean up the Island and improve the tunnels, and were awaiting for word from the United States.

Mr. Bell explained that we had only recently had an opportunity to discuss this with the Congress; that the Bataan-Corregidor Memorial Commission had finally come around to accepting the proposal for a modest memorial and that legislation to get funds to carry on this project would shortly be introduced.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Philippines, General, 1/63–6/63. Official Use Only. Drafted by Bell. The ending time of the meeting, which was held at the White House, is from the President’s Appointment Book. (Ibid.) The source text is labeled “Part IV if IV”; for Parts I–III, see Documents 380–383.

384. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 384. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)Source

Manila, May 6, 1963.

Dear Roger: I cannot emphasize enough how unhappy we are out here about the pending new war damage legislation (Fulbright Bill).1 There are a number of reasons for our concern.

In the first place, the Bill is predicated on so many erroneous assumptions, e.g., that the damage to properties here was largely a Japanese action, whereas we had a large, if not the largest, share in it; that the principal purpose of the 1946 Act2 was to assist the Philippine national economy, whereas that was very incidental and aid to individuals who had suffered such severe losses largely at our hands was the main objective; that the claimants’ interest in final payments was largely kept alive by the two lobbyists, whereas thousands of them have been counting on this money ever since we offered it many years ago; that the claims will “net out” close to the $73 million figure, whereas it is our information (based on consultations with representatives of the Foreign Claims Commission in Manila) that as much as $15 million to $25 million may not be required; that the Department has continuously favored settlement on a government-to-government basis, whereas the Department testified to the contrary before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee a year ago.

The theory is most unconvincing that these two lobbyists, by the machinations alleged against them, (1) shifted the whole theory of the Act from government-to-government to government-to-people basis for their own benefit; (2) stirred up 88,000 people to continue to seek monies promised them but never paid on the theory that they did not need the money or did not want it, and (3) by payments totaling about $9,000 to the campaign funds of twenty members of Congress, secured the passage of legislation which would otherwise not have been adopted, or at least would have been adopted in some other form.

Regardless of the factors mentioned, our biggest concern is about the ultimate result and the strong likelihood that American goodwill here will suffer a tremendous setback.

In considering the situation as it has been developing, the GOP has faced a dilemma: (1) If it took no action there was a better chance that a controversy in the Congress would not arise which could lead to the revocation or emasculation of the 1962 Bill and, most important of all, the GOP would be the beneficiary of the considerable sum received but not claimed. Fully recognizing that serious problems, including the likelihood of local irregularities, would probably occur when, as and if the local government did attempt to settle with the various claimants, the desire to get the “bonus” money—especially in an election year—has been a paramount factor in preventing the GOP from facing this whole issue forthrightly; (2) If the GOP protested, it ran an almost certain risk of controversy in the United States Congress and strong likelihood that the 1962 Act would be drastically amended or even appealed. Also, the extra millions would be lower.

Assuming that a turmoil is not about to blow up when this new legislation reaches the House, the ultimate adoption of the Fulbright legislation and the payment of the whole $73 million to the GOP will almost certainly have these consequences: (1) At the very least there will be long delays in settling with the claimants; (2) Irregularities of various types are almost certain to arise, based on past experience; (3) The U.S. image will have suffered greatly from having “passed this buck” to the local government: Incidentally, as this whole situation is receiving more and more attention in the local press, the suggestion is being made that claimants may be able ultimately to receive their money via the Philippine Government and then to sue the United States Government for the balances due them. Whether or not they should ultimately be successful, this will certainly prolong the agony and keep alive anti-American sentiments.

It may well be that nothing can now stop this unfortunate matter from taking its dire course. I did feel, however, that at least for the sake of the record you would want me to write you quite frankly about the situation as we see it from here. I would stress that the fact that the Phil Government has not spoken up strongly against the pending legislation should not, in my judgment, be considered as too important a factor. If it did not believe (as we do here) that there is a substantial bonus coming its way I am confident that it would have protested vigorously. In other words, GOP silence has been procured because of its eagerness to secure this windfall.

With your knowledge of the Philippines, you are well aware of the historic charge that “we take them for granted”. I cannot help wondering whether the pending action on this War Damage Bill does not substantiate their claim. In other words, would our legislators have proceeded as they have if the U.K. or some other major power had been the one involved. After all the difficulties we have been through because of the false start on the war damage legislation last year in the Congress—and I cannot emphasize enough the innumerable antagonistic attitudes and problems which have confronted us over the past few months as a result of that situation—it seems almost tragic for us to take another action which not only will efface most of the goodwill which we have so patiently reestablished, but can also lead to much additional and permanent bitterness. Certainly the timing is unfortunate, just when—as the Filipinos view it—we are supporting our British ally in its Malaysia plan rather than siding with our own “ward”. Also, the GOP is greatly concerned about the reduction in our Military Aid Program.

The U.S. image became tarnished by the original congressional action last year. By hard and patient polishing, the tarnish has pretty well faded. This new action not only will reestablish the tarnish but probably increase it.

From the standpoint of Phil-American relations, I believe we should complete the payments as expeditiously as possible under the 1962 Act. If it can be done, the lobbyists should be dealt with in some other way. It is far more in the United States interest to see that these claimants are paid directly by the U.S. Government as presently contemplated than to change the concept and procedures at this late date in an attempt to punish two lobbyists for actions which the Congress feels were objectionable if not offensive.3

Sincerely yours,

Bill Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, EA/Phil Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damages. Confidential; Official–Informal.

1 Fulbright placed before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on April 23 a bill to provide for government-to-government payment of war damage claims in lieu of private payment as provided for in P.L. 87–616. (Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Affairs Frederick Dutton to Harriman, April 20; ibid.) Regarding P.L. 87–616, see Document 375.

2 60 Stat. 128.

3 In a letter drafted by Ballantyne and cleared by Bell and Rice, May 20, Hilsman replied to Stevenson that the Department agreed with his comments. Hilsman reported that “a very high level in the Department” and President Kennedy had discussed the matter with Senator Fulbright who still believed that the legislative process had been tampered with and Congress misled. Fulbright considered that the importance of rectifying this situation overrode potential adverse effects of his bill in the Philippines. Hilsman stated that the attitude of the House of Representatives was different. (Department of State, EA/Phil Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 17 (Amb. Stevenson))

385. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 385. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, May 29, 1963.

JCSM–415–63

SUBJECT

Future Philippine Force Levels and Mix and MAP Levels (U)

1. Reference is made to a memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), 1–21670/63, dated 11 March 1963, in which he requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff re-examine the missions now contemplated for the Philippine armed forces and submit recommendations as to the appropriate missions, force structure and types, and levels of MAP equipment that should be provided to the Philippines.1

2. The most likely source of overt attack on the Philippines is from Communist China. Recent events in Indonesia have not altered this basic estimate of the threat. The present threat to the Philippines from Indonesia is from infiltration and subversion supported by exploitation of the territorial waters and air space of the Philippines, rather than from overt action.

3. A basic US military objective is to deter or deal effectively with communist attacks on the free community or areas important to its survival in conjunction with Allied and friendly forces. To attain this end, US military planning includes appropriate missions and forces for indigenous armed forces which can support the US forward strategy. Although the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Philippines provides a guarantee to the Philippines of US assistance in the event of overt attack from any source, the Philippine armed forces should be able to execute the following primary missions: a. Maintain internal security and counter subversion, infiltration, and sabotage.

b. Defend against minor incursions into their territory, including air defense.

c. Assist in collective defense of the area, including a modest but effective contribution to SEATO.

Details of missions, force structure, and objectives are included in the Appendix to this memorandum.2 Although the Philippine Air Force and Navy are small, they are reasonably effective forces which serve to augment US forces, and are capable of conducting small-scale independent operations. Development of the Philippine Army has been handicapped by organizational difficulties. This problem is currently under study by CINCPAC and the Military Assistance Advisory Group in the Philippines.

4. In consideration of the foregoing, the present dollar guidelines for MAP for the Philippines are still valid. Because of the importance of the Philippines to US objectives and strategy, future MAP dollar guidelines should remain near the currently programmed levels unless there is a major change in the situation. The major items and levels of equipment recommended for the Philippines are listed in the Appendix to this memorandum.

A detailed FY 64–69 Military Assistance Plan which will include these items will be submitted by CINCPAC in June 1963. If political necessity requires furnishing additional items requested by the Philippines, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that emphasis could be placed on furnishing heavy engineer construction equipment on a cost-sharing basis for support of President Macapagal’s socio-economic improvement program.

5. Since no need for major changes are indicated in the Philippine program, it does not appear necessary to send a planning team to the Philippines at this time. Improvements and changes that are required can be accomplished by CINCPAC and the Chief, Joint US Military Assistance Advisory Group, in cooperation with the Country Team and with Philippine officials, as appropriate.

6. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have re-examined the missions, force structure and types, and level of MAP equipment for the Philippines. In their judgment Annex J to JSOP–68,3 as amplified in the Appendix to this memorandum, reflects valid missions, force structure and force objectives; therefore, planned types and levels of MAP equipment to support the armed forces of the Philippines are considered appropriate.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
A.H. Manhart4
Major General, USA
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Philippines 200.0–680.1, 1963. Secret.

1 The memorandum was a result of Philippine Defense Secretary Peralta’s visit to the Pentagon on February 6. Peralta submitted an extensive request for military assistance including supplying equipment for five divisions. (Ibid.) Peralta discussed this question with Macapagal who sent a personal letter to President Kennedy requesting additional equipment, totaling approximately $100 million, and timely deliveries; see footnote 1, Document 379.

2 Attached but not printed.

3 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Manhart signed the original.

386. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 386. Letter From the Ambassador to the Philippines (Stevenson) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)Source

Manila, June 8, 1963.

Dear Roger: An important new channel with the Philippine Government, and with President Macapagal in particular, has developed here over the past few months which I think you should know about.

As you are doubtless aware, two people in which the President has very great confidence and whom he sees almost daily are Rod Perez, Acting Secretary of Finance, and Ting Roxas, Director of the P.I.A. (Program Implementation Agency). We regard these two as very outstanding Filipinos, both with ability and integrity Jim Ingersoll1 came to know them both quite intimately through various A.I.D. matters and subsequently the four of us began a series of regular Friday luncheons, which are rotated between our homes or occasionally held in some private dining room.

At these luncheon meetings we feel free to bring up and discuss any and all Philippine-American problems. I usually have a list of two or three items, current ones being war damage, Cultural Foundation, Retail Trade Bill, disruption of road traffic between Subic and Clark Field because of delay in replacing washed-out bridge, etc. Jim and I have found our two Filipino counterparts most easy to talk to and we usually see eye-to-eye on nearly every problem that comes up. Better still, they give us a high degree of cooperation and do their best to clear up or correct items which we present. Naturally, we try to show the same cooperative attitude on our side.

Since these two men are so close to the President, we know that he will hear very promptly of situations about which we would like to have him aware. In some cases, I can ask Perez to get the President’s reaction on a certain matter and he will call me back within a few hours. In other cases, he can arrange appointments with the President on short notice, which might take several days through regular channels.

While this arrangement which I have been describing is entirely unofficial and somewhat unorthodox, it seems to be working very well and the fact that these two important and busy men arrive very promptly for our luncheons and remain with us as long as there are things to discuss seems to indicate that they and possibly the President are pleased with the relationship.2

This channel is especially satisfactory from my point of view since, as you are aware, the Vice President can make very few decisions on his own responsibility and hence in the long run we have to get the President’s approval or viewpoint. I am sure that the Vice President knows about these luncheons and does not resent them, since Roxas is a very close personal friend of the Vice President as well. Also, Rod Perez was identified with the Grand Alliance, of which Pelaez was the leader, and Roxas and Perez are close friends of Senator Manglapus. In fact, they brought the Senator to a luncheon not long ago to enlist his interest in trying to work out a satisfactory solution to the Cultural Center impasse.

On the subject of communication, I learned from our luncheon yesterday that one of the reasons for Hechanova’s trip to the States later this month3 is to evaluate by personal “inspection” whether or not he would like to be the GOP Ambassador to succeed Mutuc. Perez indicated there was a strong possibility that Hechanova will get the assignment if he likes the looks of things in Washington. It is our understanding that one of the reasons Mutuc was sent to Washington was because of his Harvard background and thus the opportunity to cultivate the Kennedy Family. Presumably in the GOP view, Hechanova’s youth would tend to be a favorable factor in his developing contacts with the younger members of the Kennedy Administration.

I told Perez quite frankly that I felt that whoever was sent to the U.S. to succeed Mutuc should plan to remain for several years. He said he agreed and that Hechanova would certainly stay at least two years. Presumably, he would then wish to return to run for Senator or Governor, since he has political ambitions.

We have our fingers crossed on the war damage situation. Please have someone keep us as up to date as possible, since there is great interest here and I am asked about it by the Vice President and other officials whenever I see them.

Sincerely,

Bill

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL PHIL–US. Confidential; Official-Informal.

1 James H. Ingersoll, Director of the AID Mission in the Philippines.

2 Hilsman responded in an official–informal letter to Stevenson, June 19. He approved fully of the informal channel idea. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 PHIL)

3 Philippine Secretary of Commerce and Industry Rufino G. Hechanova visited the United States June 26–29 to discuss trade and economic relations. Documentation on his visit, including memoranda of conversation with Department of State officials, is ibid., POL 7 PHIL.

387. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 387. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, June 14, 1963.

[Here follows information on Japan, Taiwan, and Korea with annotated comments by McGeorge Bundy.)

Manila

The principal current problem with the Philippines is the War Damage Bill, which is still hung up in Congressional bickering over whether the money should be paid to the Philippine Government or directly to the claimants. This matter should be resolved in the near future; but with the legislative jam in Congress, it could be delayed long enough to arouse bitterness.1

Another potential trouble spot, not only with the Philippines but also with Indonesia and Malaya, is the proposed Federation of Malaysia. In the past two weeks prospects appear to have brightened considerably for a peaceful attitude by Indonesia and the Philippines toward the formation of the Federation, which is scheduled for August 31st of this year. There is at least an even chance, however, that tempers may flare again as the date approaches. The result would be less serious in the Philippines than in the other two countries.

Senatorial elections are scheduled in the Philippines for November 1963 with the result that you will be arriving there in the midst of the campaign. There is an even split in the Senate between the Government and the opposition (12 to 12). Since most of Macapagal’s economic program has been held up by the Philippine Congress, he will be campaigning actively. Your visit will, however, probably be considered by him as a definite plus factor.

[Here follows information on Indonesia, Malaya, and Australia.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Trips and Conferences Series, President’s Proposed Trip to the Far East, 3/63–6/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the memorandum was part of the President’s June 15–16 weekend reading.

1 On July 3, Forrestal briefed the President on the fate of the amendment to the War Damage Bill as follows: “With considerable difficulty a compromise was worked out between the warring conferees of the House and Senate on the Philippine War Damage Bill. The conference has accepted paying all claims of $25,000 or under and putting the rest of the money in a fund in the U.S. Treasury to be spent, subject to your agreement and that of President Macapagal, on educational exchange and educational programs. Despite the fact that this sum of money is rather large in light of the purposes (it might be as much as $30 million), State believes that the disappointment in the Philippines can be held within reason.” (Ibid., National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memos, Forrestal, 11/62–11/63)

388. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 388. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)Source

Washington, July 16, 1963.

SUBJECT

Visit to the Philippines

Macario Peralta, Secretary of National Defense, Republic of the Philippines, has sent me a personal note urging that I visit the Philippines.1 A Filipino journalist, Mario Chanco, hand-carried the note and said that Secretary Peralta would send a more formal invitation, if I indicated there was a probability that I could accept it.

I asked Mr. Chanco for the real reasons underlying the invitation at this time, since he had had a long talk with his friend Secretary Peralta about it. Mr. Chanco outlined it about as follows: a. On the surface, the Philippines appear to be making great progress socially and economically. Just below the surface, however, there seems to be almost blind hatred building up—class against class, financial group against financial group, nationals against foreigners (including U.S.), news media against the Administration (and its reforms)—coupled with the fever to “make a fast buck.”

b. Secretary Peralta, as an old guerrilla leader and trusted supporter of President Macapagal, senses that real trouble is brewing. President Macapagal is striving hard to give leadership in improving the situation, but nearly each of his actions seems to arouse tremendous controversy and end in frustration. The “academic proletariat” (many college graduates are unemployed, a prey to Communist attractions in the “parliamentary struggle”) is restive. New legislative bills seem to be more and more towards radical socialism. The Chinese community seems to be turning towards Mao Tse-tung. Yet, it’s hard to get a “fix” on root causes, let alone get a good start towards licking the problems so they stay licked.

c. Thus, Secretary Peralta wants me to take a hard look at the Philippines scene, analyze it, tell them what is wrong, and suggest some constructive lines of action. Presumably, I would do this for the U.S. Government, but make results of the study and further counsel available to the Philippine Government.

(Comment: The request is not too strange. Although Peralta was in the opposing camp in 1953, he was one of a group of Filipino Senators and Congressmen who subsequently thanked me for saving the Philippine Constitution. On his visit to Washington, as Secretary of National Defense, he made a point of visiting me to reassure me that he was still a dedicated man and a friend.)

I noted for Mr. Chanco that such a study in the Philippines would go considerably beyond military matters and that I would have to take it up with you and Secretary McNamara. In turn, we probably would want to discuss it with appropriate officials outside Defense. Also, I said that it was unlikely that the U.S. would want me present in the Philippines just prior to an election, since my name still has considerable currency among Philippine political groups. (There is a national by-election this November for governors, mayors, and certain Senate seats.) Mr. Chanco said that this was understood and that the needs went far beyond the 1963 elections; it was the fundamentals of national security which were causing Secretary Peralta’s concern.

If you believe there is merit in this proposal to make use of my experience and close relationships across many Philippine sectors, then I suggest that it be brought to the attention of Secretary Rusk.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 7 PHIL–US. Confidential. A copy was sent to McNamara. The source text is a copy sent to Alexis Johnson; see Document 389.

1 Not found.

389. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) 389. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric)Source

Washington, August 2, 1963.

Dear Ros: I refer to your note of July 171 enclosing a copy of a memorandum from Ed Lansdale2 relating to a proposed invitation to visit the Philippines from Defense Secretary Peralta. I would like to be able to give an unqualified “yes” to Ed for, as you know, I have high regard for him and am very familiar with the great constructive job he did there. It is truly one of the great stories of American “political action.”

However, it is this very success and Ed Lansdale’s close personal identification with it throughout much of the Philippines that, regretfully, makes me skeptical about the wisdom of such a visit, even under the auspices of Peralta. As you know, we carefully and deliberately refrained from any interference of any kind in the last election and have been trying to pursue a policy of permitting the Philippines, and particularly Macapagal, to increase Philippine prestige in Southeast Asia by a posture of increased independence from the United States. He is successfully doing so and, although this also presents its problems, we feel that in the long run it will be beneficial to all of us.

Because of Ed’s previous identification with another phase of our policy, I fear that, no matter how this was handled, a visit by him could be seized upon by unfriendly elements as an effort on our part to return to active intervention in Philippine internal politics, and thus could well be counterproductive. Therefore, fully recognizing the undoubted constructive role that Ed could in fact play, and his own unquestioned motives, I nevertheless on balance feel that it would be wiser if he did not undertake such a visit.

If you desire, I would, of course, be glad to discuss this further with you.

Sincerely,

Alex

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 7 PHIL–US. Personal and Confidential. A draft by Bell, dated July 27, was substantially revised by Johnson. This draft is attached to a July 29 memorandum from Hilsman to Johnson, in which Hilsman stated that he felt strongly that Lansdale should not go to the Philippines because he was “a symbol of the policy we have abandoned.” Hilsman noted that since Lansdale’s past affiliations were known, his mission would raise questions of U.S. interference in Philippine domestic affairs. Hilsman noted that there was a competent Embassy staff in Manila to report on Philippine developments. (Ibid.)

1 Attached but not printed.

2 Document 388.

390. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk 390. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, August 12, 1963.

I have today approved an amendment to Public Law 87–6161 concerning payment of Philippine War Damage Claims which establishes an appropriation account in the United States Treasury to be used as determined by the Presidents of the United States and Philippines “for the purpose of furthering educational exchange and other educational programs to the mutual advantage of the Republic of the Philippines and the United States.”2

In light of the above, I request that you prepare for my consideration the United States proposal to the Philippines regarding the setting up of the appropriation account, its administration, and the formulation of programs to be supported by it. The United States proposal should reflect the following:

1. The intent of the Congress that the programs be broadly conceived, covering not only educational exchange but education and training in the Philippines in the widest sense.

2. The element of mutuality as stipulated in the amendment.

3. Arrangements for coordinating the formulation of the programs with the Philippine Government.

4. The relationship of these programs to other programs supported by the United States.

5. The effect of this program on our balance of payments situation during the next two years and to what extent this may be minimized.

In view of the probable relationship of activities supported by the new appropriation account with programs of other United States agencies, I request that you keep the Director of the Bureau of the Budget informed as this matter goes forward.

I request that you submit to me by January 1, 1964, the complete proposal for negotiation with the Republic of the Philippines.

John F. Kennedy

* Source: Department of State, EA/Philippines Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damage. No classification marking.

1 See Document 375.

2 In a public statement on July 31, the Department of State welcomed this Fulbright–Hays Amendment. The Department noted that it would provide equitable settlement of claims under $25,000 and the balance would go into an education fund. For text of the statement and the relevant portion of P.L. 88–94, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 829–831.

391. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 391. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of StateSource

Manila, September 21, 1963, 5 p.m.

451. Embtel 429.1 Two-hour meeting reported reftel called by Pres Macapagal for discussion AFP and MAP with JUSMAG and me in accordance desire he expressed six months ago for informal review this subject. This message reports significant aspects of discussion military subjects.

President opened discussion saying his efforts in office thus far devoted primarily to economic and moral reform, and he now wanted address attention to armed forces. Said he wanted know particularly what, from standpoint national security, Phils expected do and what their capabilities are. Macapagal said with sincerity that he wanted Phils help US in its global responsibilities in event of a crisis.

Following is summary of JUSMAG comments: 1. Phil constabulary fully capable meeting its internal security and peace and order missions except for anti-smuggling which in JUSMAG view impossible task which can only be dealt with by legislation.

2. Phil Army mission is to meet external aggression and assist PC maintain internal security. PA totally incapable fulfilling its role. Manning has been a serious problem and this was major factor behind reorganization proposals.2 (JUSMAG clarified that proposal accepted by him ad referendum, that is not committed yet, and that press accounts erroneous this respect.) President expressed concern after Tacon3 referred to availability of US equipment which not delivered because of undermanning Phil units. President told Peralta Phils must do their part and get units manned. Interestingly, he appeared have no prior knowledge of reorganization proposal.

3. Phil Navy capable fulfilling its mission of keeping coastal sea lanes free of submarines and mines but only for limited period. Problem is reduced shipboard manning.

4. Phil Air Force expected participate with USAF in Phil air defense and capable doing so but only for limited period in daylight and in fair weather conditions. PAF shortcomings are in maintenance fire control systems of all weather aircraft and in logistics system which incapable supporting continuous operations. Some progress being made but at slow rate.

5. Budget. JUSMAG described this and personnel as two areas in which President could assist Peralta. Defense share of national budget down from 21 percent in 1960 to 14 percent for 1964. Peralta only able feed, clothe and house forces with nothing left for force maintenance and improvement. President said that gaining control of Senate in November elections would permit him increase defense budget which he wants to do so GOP can do its part in maintaining AFP. He then asked that Peralta and Tacon prepare a “top secret document” whose contents would be known on Phils side only by President and Peralta, outlining forces and equipment essential for AFP to discharge its missions. Tacon should show what part of requirements MAP can meet. Macapagal said he wants furnish balance through Phil budget. (Despite difficulties of dealing with documents on such restricted basis, JUSMAG did not want to jeopardize highly advantageous prospects by challenging arrangements at that time. He plans press on with this vigorously with Peralta to meet President’s request. He will, of course, make no commitments.)

6. Personnel. President told that EM fine but officer corps, particularly senior officers, letting him down. Lack of initiative and managerial skills due to present system. Need is for change permitting forced retirements and retention good officers beyond 26–30 years service. Draft legislation prepared with US assistance described to President. JUSMAG pointed to need for President’s help both in getting legislation through Congress and afterward when political pressures would be expected on behalf officers selected out.

7. President accepted criticisms of AFP well and without challenge. Moreover, he said several times he does not want to be accused of failure AFP meet its military responsibilities in event of crisis. Obviously, no assurance can be given that Presidential performance on budget and legislation will meet the promise, but his awareness now of low state of AFP readiness, his concern, and his professed intention assure that Phils do their part represent significant progress. This progress due in large measure to persistent and commendable efforts of General Tacon.

JUSMAG has fully reported conversation to CINCPAC.

Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 PHIL. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC.

1 Dated September 18. (Ibid., POL 15–1 PHIL)

2 See Document 394.

3 Major General Avelin P. Tacon, Chief, JUSMAG, the Philippines.

392. Memorandum of Conversation 392. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, November 26, 1963, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

1. United States-Philippine Relations

2. Indonesia

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

Governor W. Averell Harriman, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Mr. Roger Hilsman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Angier Biddle Duke, Chief of Protocol

The Philippines President Diosdado Macapagal

Ambassador Amelito R. Mutuc

Executive Secretary to the President Rufino Hechanova

Col. Dizon, Military Aide to the President

After an exchange of pleasantries, President Macapagal mentioned his proposed visit to the United States. He had intended to come after the completion of the Philippine elections, but he had come now to express the Philippine national feeling of sorrow and to assure President Johnson of their high regard for him.1 President Johnson could count on the Philippines and the Philippine people always to be ready to stand by the side of the United States.

President Johnson raised the question of the Indonesia–Malaysia dispute and Philippine recognition of Malaysia, emphasizing his feeling that the Filipinos could be of great help; that it was perhaps better for the United States to stay in the background on this issue.

President Macapagal said that on recognition the Filipinos were always ready to recognize Malaysia; that there was no animosity whatsoever towards Malaysia. The question was one of implementing the Manila Agreements and concerned only procedure. The Tunku wished to have recognition first and then implementation of the Manila Agreements. The Filipinos thought the procedure should be the other way round. However, President Macapagal wanted to assure President Johnson that they regarded recognition as an opportunity to bring Indonesia and Malaysia together.

The President inquired whether Sukarno was planning a visit to Manila.

President Macapagal said that Sukarno had asked about the possibility of a visit November 28th, and Macapagal had asked that it be taken up with his Foreign Office. President Macapagal said that they looked at the problem in the following way. First, the Philippines shared a heritage of common ideals with the United States and their over-all purpose was to further our joint objectives. As the United States Ambassador had once said, Asians can do things that the United States cannot do, and President Macapagal saw the Philippine role in just this way. Since Indonesia is a close neighbor of the Philippines and since it is large, it must be kept out of Communist control. Sukarno and the Indonesians were now bewildered about the situation—they didn’t know quite what to do. It had been Macapagal’s experience that whenever the Indonesians and Sukarno were pushed to the wall they turned to the Communists. They did this during the Sumatra revolt and again during the West New Guinea troubles. The Filipinos feel that they can do something to keep the Indonesians from being pushed to the wall on this issue. The Philippines can be a window for Sukarno to look at the West and for the West to look at Indonesia. Sukarno is, in fact, interested in moving towards the West—of this President Macapagal is convinced—and there has been a change in Sukarno’s attitude in this respect. In the Manila Agreements, for example, Sukarno agreed not to permit foreign bases in Indonesia. President Macapagal said that his interest was in bringing Indonesia along towards the West. However, he wanted to assure President Johnson that, if this turned out to be impossible, the Filipinos would withdraw from association with Indonesia and join in the recognition of Malaysia. President Macapagal said Sukarno had sent Subandrio to tell him that Sukarno was willing to meet with the Tunku at any time. In President Macapagal’s opinion, the problem was now the Tunku. He felt that the West should put pressure on the British to let the Tunku meet with the other two countries.

President Johnson reiterated that he felt that this situation presented a great opportunity for the Philippines to exercise leadership and that it would be a great achievement for us all if the Philippines could bring Indonesia into friendly relations with its neighbors.2

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL PHIL–US. Confidential. Drafted by Hilsman and approved in the White House on December 2. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22.

2 Macapagal also met with Secretary Rusk at the Shoreham Hotel at 3:15 p.m. on November 27. They discussed the intentions of the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, and the People’s Republic of China in Asia and the conflict over Malaysia. (Memorandum of conversation, November 27; Department of State, EA/Philippine Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 7 Visits and Meetings, Pres Macapagal)

393. Memorandum for the Record 393. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, November 27, 1963.

* [Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 PHIL. Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

394. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 394. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, December 10, 1963.

JGSM–971–63

SUBJECT

Reorganization of the Philippine Army (U)

1. Reference is made to JCSM–415–63, dated 29 May 1963, subject: “Future Philippine Force Levels and Mix and MAP Levels.”1 In their review of the missions of the Philippine Armed Forces, wherein the Joint Chiefs of Staff forwarded their views on the Military Assistance Program (MAP), the Joint Chiefs of Staff stated that the Philippine Army has been handicapped by organizational difficulties and that CINCPAC and the Military Assistance Advisory Group in the Philippines had the problem under study. The results of that study are now available.

2. While the authorized strength is to remain the same, the major features of the Philippine Army reorganization proposed in the study include the following: a. An active duty Army strength of 14,560 with approximately 70 per cent of that number concentrated in two divisions and three brigades. It should be noted that the terms “division” and “brigade” cannot be equated to US units of the same designations.

b. The remaining 30 percent of active Army strength to provide for support units, including an engineer group, a signal battalion, two hospitals, ordnance and quartermaster companies, and miscellaneous administrative and support units.

c. Provision for five reserve battalions, without active duty personnel, to handle the annual reserve training load.

3. The reorganization gives promise of the following advantages over the existing organization: a. Improved utilization of available personnel. With the present active strength of about 15,000 compared to an authorized strength of 27,000, the Philippine Army has produced only one effective battalion combat team (BCT). The reorganization represents an attempt to create an effective Army based realistically on an available strength of 14,560.

b. Improved combat capability. The reorganization would provide for eight BCTs instead of one, with an improved ratio of combat forces to support forces.

c. Improved organization of BCTs. With elimination of some organic transport and armament, the BCTs would be equipped with light equipment and would be foot mobile; they would be more closely tailored to the mission and combat environment visualized, and would have a capability for conventional or counterinsurgency operations.

d. Improved disposition of forces. The reorganization would allow more effective distribution of active Army strength throughout the Philippines rather than concentration in Luzon as now exists.

4. In reviewing the reorganization, CINCPAC has stated that it promises substantial improvement over the present organization, even though anticipated reduction in MAP funds will preclude MAP supply and support of 17 tanks and 26 armored personnel carriers proposed under the reorganization.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff endorse the view of CINCPAC. Annex J (Free World Forces) to the Joint Strategic Objectives Plan 1969,2 which is now being staffed, will reflect the above changes. Additional details of the reorganization are attached as the Appendix to this memorandum.3

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
A. H. Manhart4
Major General, USA
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 67 A 4565, Philippines 200.6 to 680.1, 1963. Secret.

1 Document 385.

2 Not found.

3 Attached but not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Manhart signed the original.

395. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 395. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Special Education Fund, Philippine War Damage Legislation

President Kennedy’s memorandum of August 12, 1963,1 regarding the special fund provided for in the amendment (P.L. 88–94) to the Philippine War Damage legislation (P.L. 87–616)2 instructed me to submit by January 1, 1964, the United States proposal for negotiations with the Philippines relating to this fund. A proposal for these negotiations is enclosed.

We have not commented in our proposal regarding specific educational projects which might be supported by the fund. At this stage, we prefer to retain flexibility in this regard for negotiating purposes, particularly in view of the fact that we do not know what the size of the fund will be and what magnitude of projects it will be able to support. (The Foreign Claims Settlement Commission hopes to have an estimate by the end of this year.)

While we have not attempted to detail possible projects, we have had several exchanges with Embassy Manila on this subject. In the event the special fund reaches the earlier estimate of twenty to thirty million dollars, we are tentatively planning to suggest to the Philippine Government that the fund be used in support of the training aspects of land reform, for vocational training, for improvement of the secondary school system and for support of specific projects in the Philippine budget for education.

Dean Rusk3

Enclosure

SUGGESTED UNITED STATES PROPOSAL FOR ADMINISTRATION OF SPECIAL EDUCATION FUND AUTHORIZED IN AMENDMENT TO PHILIPPINE WAR DAMAGE LEGISLATION

I. Setting Up Account:

The account should be designated “Philippine Education Program” and placed in the budget chapter “Funds Appropriated to the President” between the Peace Corps and Public Works appropriations. This placement is in accordance with the basic legislation which defines this activity as a Presidential program. It will also avoid involvement with budgets for the existing activities of the Department and the Agency for International Development. This is consistent with the concept that the program should be additive to present United States programs in the Philippines, and not an extension of the educational exchange program of the Department or of the development programs of the Agency for International Development.

II. Administration of the Account:

Responsibility for the administration of the account will lie with the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs of the Department of State, operating with the assistance of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs and the Agency for International Development.

III. Formulation and Administration of Programs:

A) The United States and the Philippines will negotiate and enter into a general, bilateral agreement pursuant to which discussions between the two governments will be carried out relative to specific proposals for the use of the fund. The text of the proposed agreement is enclosed.4

B) The agreed proposals for the use of the fund will be worked out between the Philippine Government and the Embassy, and will be forwarded by the Embassy to the Department of State for final approval.

C) The Embassy, in formulating programs and developing projects thereunder, and the Department, in considering them for approval, will bear in mind the following: 1. It was the congressional intention that the fund should be used to further educational and training projects which serve to promote general development in the Philippines.

2. The element of mutuality stipulated in the amendment will be provided for by recognition that programs which contribute to the economic development of the Philippines are also to our advantage.

3. All possible steps will be taken to develop projects which in substance are distinct from the Department’s Cultural Exchange Program.

4. Insofar as is feasible, the impact on our balance of payments should be minimized by favoring projects which will extend over a period of years and/or involve purchases of American goods and services.

D) Administration of the projects shall be the primary responsibility of the Philippine Government. Under the terms of the bilateral agreement, the Philippine Government will undertake to furnish the United States with an annual report covering the status of the specific projects supported by the fund until such time as the fund’s support for such projects has ceased.

* Source: Department of State, EA/Philippines Files: Lot 66 D 502, POL 27–9 War Damage. Confidential. Drafted on December 17 by Ballantyne; cleared in draft by Czyzak; John P. White, Legislative Officer; Verne B. Lewis, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Budget and Finance; Donald L. Ranard, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Programs, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs; and Heyl of AID; and cleared by U. Alexis Johnson. A handwritten note indicates that the memorandum was sent to the White House on December 26.

1 Document 390.

2 See footnote 2, Document 390, and Document 375.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 Not printed.

ThailandThailand

396. Memorandum From Kenneth P. Landon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, February 16, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–6/61. Secret.

397. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, February 24, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. No classification marking.

398. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, March 21, 1961, 11:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–2161. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Parsons and Askew; cleared in draft by OSD and JCS and Usher, Bohlen, and Czyak of L/FE; and approved by Rusk. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for POLAD and Vientiane.

399. Despatch From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, April 3, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/4–361. Top Secret. Drafted by Johnson.

400. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 6, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/4–661. Secret. Drafted by Young and approved in the White House on April 13. Young was appointed Ambassador to Thailand on March 29, and presented his credential on June 22.

401. Summary of Letter From Prime Minister Sarit to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, undated.

[Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.13/5–161. Secret. 7 pages of source text not declassified. The source text is an extract from a message from Bangkok sent to Secretary Rusk under cover of an April 14 memorandum from Allen Dulles.]

402. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy

Washington, April 17, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. Secret. The Department of State copy indicates that Askew drafted the memorandum and the enclosed letters. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/4–1761)

403. Editorial Note

404. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale)

Washington, May 5, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Thailand. Top Secret.

405. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, May 9, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/A Miscellaneous Sensitive Files: FRC 71 A 6489, Laos 381 (Sensitive), April-May 1961. Top Secret.

406. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Hong Kong

Washington, May 14, 1961, 12:07 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/5–1461. Secret; Priority; CODELJohnson. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated priority to Geneva for the Secretary and to Bangkok for Johnson.

407. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 15, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. Secret.

408. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 19, 1961, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.11–JO/5–1961. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated niact to Karachi, priority to Geneva, priority to CINCPAC, and to CINCPACPOLAD.

409. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Embassy in Greece

Bangkok, May 20, 1961, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/5–2061. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to the Department of State as telegram 2099 and to CINCPAC and CINCPACPOLAD. The source text is the Department of State copy. Johnson was in Athens returning from his visit to Karachi. Regarding the Vice President’s report to the President on his trip, see Document 4.

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 27, 1961, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2761. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for POLAD.

411. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, June 23, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 6/61–7/61. Secret.

412. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, June 26, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 6/61–7/61. Secret.

413. Editorial Note

414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, July 8, 1961, 6:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/7–861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Swezey and Cleveland; cleared by officials in FE, ICA, DOD/ISA, and USIA and by the Deputy Coordinator for Foreign Assistance; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to CINCPAC. On June 30, Rostow sent this telegram and a copy of Robert Johnson’s analysis and critique of the Young report (Document 412) to President Kennedy. (Memorandum from Rostow to Kennedy; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. II, 6/61–7/61)

415. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, July 25, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia, Rostow Report, 2nd Try. Top Secret. This memorandum is a revised version of one that Rostow had sent the President on July 21, which the President had rejected as “too difficult to read.” (Ibid.) Portions of the July 21 version are printed in vol. XXIV, pp. 307–309.

416. Editorial Note

417. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)

Washington, August 28, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61 Secret.

418. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy

Washington, October 2, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Thailand Security. Top Secret.

419. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 2, 1961, 12:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Drafted by Steeves and approved in S on October 10. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library) After the meeting, Rusk and Thanat retired for lunch on the 8th floor of the Department of State.

420. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 3, 1961, 10:45 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.9211/10–1661. Secret. Drafted by McConaughy and approved by the White House on October 19. The meeting was held in the White House.

421. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, November 7, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/11–761. Secret. Repeated to CINCPACPOLAD.

422. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, January 8, 1962, 4:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Masters; cleared by Cleveland, Cross, Rice, and U. Alexis Johnson; and approved by Harriman. Repeated priority to the Geneva FECON and to CINCPAC/POLAD.

423. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative’s Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, January 20, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Thailand (#1) 12, T-029-69. Secret.

424. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, January 23, 1962, 7:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1-2162. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Masters; cleared in draft by Harriman, Chayes, and Cross and by Rice, Peters, and McGhee; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Discussed in substance with the President. Repeated to Geneva FECON, to Vientiane, London, Paris, Saigon, and CINCPAC POLA.

425. Editorial Note

426. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 1, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSC: Special Group (CI) Mtgs, 6/61–10/62. No classification marking. Drafted by Thomas A. Parrott, the Special Group’s Secretary.

427. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, February 4, 1962, 2:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–362. Secret.

428. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia

Washington, February 15, 1962, 9:19 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–1662. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cleveland; cleared by Harriman, Koren, Czyzak, Peters, McGeorge Bundy (who cleared it with the President), and Rusk; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated priority to Bangkok and to CINCPACPOLAD.

429. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, February 16, 1962, 9:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1662. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by U. Alexis Johnson; cleared by Harriman, Chayes, Rusk, Nitze, and McGeorge Bundy (who cleared it with the President); and approved by Johnson. Repeated niact to Djakarta for Robert Kennedy and Unger and to CINCPACPOLAD, Canberra, Karachi, London, Paris, Wellington, and Manila.

430. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, February 17, 1962, 4:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–1762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Koren; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to Vientiane.

431. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, February 20, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPACPOLAD, priority to Rome, and to Saigon and Vientiane.

432. Memorandum

Bangkok, February 26, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, 13.2 Foreign Policy. Secret. There is no indication on the source text who drafted the memorandum.

433. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 2, 1962, 4:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/3–262. Secret Drafted by Masters and approved in Son March 15. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

434. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, March 5, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 3/1/62–3/8/62. Secret.

435. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 5, 1962, 4:31–5:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.13/3–562. Secret. Drafted by Koren and approved in S and the White House on March 15. The time of this meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

436. Editorial Note

437. Editorial Note

438. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, May 12, 1962, 9:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1262. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Koren; cleared by Harriman, McNamara, and Forrestal; and approved, by Rush. Repeated priority to Moscow and niact to Vientiane, CINCPAC, and Saigon.

439. Editorial Note

440. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 14, 1962, 1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Niact. Received on May 13 at 6 p.m. and relayed to the White House. Repeated priority to Moscow, Saigon, and Vientiane.

441. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, May 13, 1962, 11:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Harriman and Forrestal. Repeated priority to Vientiane and to Moscow and CINCPACPOLAD.

442. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 14, 1962, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Priority. Received at 1:45 p.m. and repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

443. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, May 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Laos Security, 5/11/62–5/28/62. Top Secret. There is no indication on the source text that Forrestal drafted this memorandum, but the last sentence in the fifth paragraph was added in his handwriting.

444. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 14, 1962, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Laos, General, 5/17/62–5/25/62. Top Secret Drafted by Forrestal on May 23.

445. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

446. Editorial Note

447. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 21, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2162. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to Canberra, London, Wellington, and Saigon and to CINCPACPOLAD, Karachi, Manila, and Paris. A copy was sent to William Bundy in the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

448. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 24, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2462. Top Secret. Passed to William Bundy and repeated to Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

449. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, June 11, 1962, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5411/6–1162. Top Secret; Priority

450. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, June 11, 1962.

[Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298/19.1 US Visits to Thailand, January to July 1962. Secret. 6 pages of source text not declassified.]

451. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 13, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret. Drafted by Chester Cooper.

452. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 15, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 6/1/62–6/15/62. No classification marking. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy at the White House. Notes on the source text, which is McGeorge Bundy’s copy, in his hand read: “Hold for President Monday” and “President approved June 18.”

453. Editorial Note

454. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)

Washington, June 26, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Thailand, 334–384, 1962. Also sent to William Bundy and Frank K. Sloan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Affairs (ISA). The source text is Bundy’s copy with a note on it indicating that he saw it.

455. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 7/16/62–7/31/62. No classification marking. Drafted and initialed by Robert Kennedy. Bundy sent this memorandum to Ball under a covering memorandum that stated that this memorandum was also for Rusk and Harriman. Bundy stated that the Attorney General’s office records suggested that these two meetings which Kennedy described took place on June 18 and 19.

456. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, July 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Countries, Thailand Security. Confidential

457. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 12, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 7/16/62–7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Koren.

458. Summary of Discussion

Undated.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/7–2362. Secret. Drafted by Masters. At President Kennedy’s request, McNamara, U. Alexis Johnson, and William Bundy met at Camp Smith in Honolulu with military and diplomatic officials responsible for Southeast Asia. The meeting was primarily about Vietnam; see vol. II, pp. 546–556.

459. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

July 24, 1962, 4:20 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Thailand. No classification marking. McNamara was in Honolulu; Ball was in Washington.

460. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, July 25, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.56311/7–2562. Top Secret. Copies were sent to Harriman, G/PM, and Rusk, who was that day returning from the Geneva Conference on Laos.

461. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 13, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Thailand 334–384. Confidential.

462. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President Johnson

Washington, September 17, 1962.

Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Memoranda to the Vice President from Burris, July 1962–April 1963. Confidential.

463. Paper by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)

September 21, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Far East Trip, Sept. 62, T–022–69. Top Secret. Taylor presumably drafted this paper en route to Washington.

464. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 24, 1962.

Source: Kennedy, Library, President’s Office Files, Laos Security, 9/1/62-12/31/62. Secret.

465. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, September 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.551/9–2862. Secret.

466. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, September 28, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Thailand; Southeast Asia Addendum. Secret.

467. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 28, 1962, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/9–2862. Secret. Drafted by Masters and approved by the White House on October 15. The meeting lasted until 4:42 p.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

468. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 2, 1962, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.927/10–262. Secret. Drafted by Masters and approved in G on November 13.

469. Summary of Discussion

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 S 298, 1.B.3 Personnel. Secret. Drafted by Masters. The participants at the conference also discussed Vietnam; see vol. II, pp. 688–691.

470. Memorandum of Decisions

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, l.B.3. Personnel. Secret. Drafted by Masters.

471. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

Washington, November 7, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. IV, 11/62–12/62. Secret. According to the Department of State copy, this paper was drafted by Masters and cleared by Koren and Harriman. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/11–762) It was transmitted to the White House under cover of a November 7 memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy in preparation for a meeting with the President. The meeting was held from 4 to 4:30 p.m. on November 8 and was attended by McNamara, Heinz, and William Bundy for Defense; Harriman, Koren, and Sullivan for State; Janow and Hamilton for AID, Taylor and Clay for the JCS, and Cline and Hepworth for CIA. The topic of Laos dominated the discussion. Apparently the only decision taken at the meeting concerning Thailand was that Young should emphasize to Sarit that it was crucial that he should continue to counsel Phoumi to cooperate with Souvanna Phouma. For accounts of the meeting, see vol. XXIV, pp. 911–915.

472. Paper Prepared in the Embassy in Thailand

Bangkok, undated.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 7925/12–2862. Secret; Priority. This plan, condensed and revised, was sent to the Department of State in airgram A-238 from Bangkok, December 28. The airgram explained that the plan incorporated contributions from major elements of the Mission in Thailand and provided a framework for a coordinated effort to assist Thailand in strengthening its internal security capabilities. The plan would be presented to Thailand in modified form as a basis for joint Thai-U.S. planning and action.

473. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, January 10, 1963, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5411/1–1063, Secret. Repeated to Canberra, CINCPACPOLAD, London, Saigon, Vientiane, Wellington, Karachi, Manila, and Paris.

474. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report

Washington, March 25, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 1/63–4/63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Routine.

475. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 29, 1963, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, CSM 9–6 THAI. Secret; Prioriy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

476. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 3, 1963, 12:03–12:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI-US. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and approved by the White House on April 15. The time of this meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

477. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Paris, April 8, 1963, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, P9L THAI-US. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Karachi, Manila, Canberra, Wellington, London, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Rusk and Thanat were attending the Eighth Ministerial Meeting of the SEATO Council April 1–10 in Paris.

478. Memorandum From the Director for Operations, Joint Chiefs of Staff (Unger) to the President’s Military Aide (Clifton)

Washington, June 4, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 5/63–7/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Kennedy saw the original in Clifton’s JCS file.

479. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, July 15, 1963, 7:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Masters; cleared by Koren and Rice and in draft by Cross, Abram E. Manell of FE/P, Czyzak, and Robert J. McCloskey of P; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Vientiane, London, Paris, and CINCPAC.

480. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, September 19, 1963, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

481. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 9, 1963.

Source: Department of State, EA/Thai Files: Lot 67 D 320, POL 15 Government, 1963—Nov.-Dec. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it. Originally Pickering drafted a longer memorandum for Koren, which Koren passed on to Hilsman and Rice. (Ibid.) Hilsman instructed Koren to “Have this redone—shorter, punchier, and in much, much less detail—as a memo to S.”

482. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, December 9, 1963, 6:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 THAI. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Pickering, cleared by Arzac and Koren (in draft), and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Saigon, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

396. Memorandum From Kenneth P. Landon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 396. Memorandum From Kenneth P. Landon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, February 16, 1961.

SUBJECT

President’s Letter to Marshal Sarit of Thailand

The working levels of State, Defense, ICA are struggling with a draft letter from the President to Marshal Sarit which Mr. Rusk requested be prepared as a result of discussions in the White House. The problem is to provide substance in such a letter because Marshal Sarit is an earthy person who looks for hard evidence of friendship in support of verbal affirmations.

The present draft, if it survives the working levels, should satisfy Marshal Sarit because it includes: (1) three DLF projects amounting to a total of $21.5 million, repayable in dollars, for irrigation projects in connection with economic development; (2) helicopters or, alternatively, small planes capable of using short landing strips which are particularly requested by Marshal Sarit; (3) defense support to erect some needed military installations; and (4) an increase in MAP to support up to about 80% of Thai armed strength, Thailand still having some non-MAP supported forces.

The last time a letter of this sort was developed, with less substance than this one, about three months elapsed before the concerned agencies could agree on the package.1 The present tactic at the working level in State is to attempt to secure Secretary Rusk’s approval in principle to help expedite clearance of the package without serious deletions. If you wish, I will follow the progress of this letter and keep you informed of developments.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–6/61. Secret.

1 Reference is to a letter from President Eisenhower to Sarit, November 8, 1960; see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XV, pp. 1153–1154.

397. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 397. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, February 24, 1961.

SUBJECT

Reaffirmation of United States Support for Thailand

On the basis of recent discussion of our policies in Southeast Asia I believe that a reaffirmation of our moral and material support for Thailand would be both timely and highly advantageous to our interests. With this thought in mind I submit for your signature a letter to Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat, Prime Minister of Thailand, reiterating our intention fully to honor our obligations as an ally and friend and expressing our willingness to discuss with the Royal Thai Government measures designed to further the security and economic progress of Thailand.

President Eisenhower wrote to the Prime Minister on November 8, 19601 to assure him that the preservation of the independence and integrity of Thailand was a matter of the highest concern and importance to the United States and to inform him of our willingness to explore with the Thai Government measures for advancing its program of economic and social development. President Eisenhower’s letter stressed the high value which the United States continues to place on its friendship and cooperation with Thailand. In replying in December, 1960 Field Marshal Sarit expressed his deep appreciation of President Eisenhower’s assurances and the gratitude of the Thai Government and people for American military and economic assistance.2

The Prime Minister continues to be gravely concerned over the threat to Thailand’s security posed by the troubled situation in Laos and the resulting prospect of a southward thrust of Communist power in Southeast Asia. He has welcomed our past assurances of our fidelity to our commitments under SEATO, to which, in the absence of a bilateral mutual defense treaty between the United States and Thailand, the Thai Government is inclined to give a de facto bilateral interpretation. The importance of our relationships with Thailand is such as to warrant a reaffirmation of our continuing awareness of Thai economic and security requirements and of our unswerving sympathy and support.

I believe that a personal reassurance from you in this sense to the Prime Minister would be both timely and highly advantageous to our interests and I therefore recommend that you sign the enclosed letter.3

It is recommended that, if approved, no publicity be given to this message. If approved, we shall transmit it by telegram to our Ambassador at Bangkok for delivery to the Prime Minister.

I enclose for your information a biographic sketch of the Prime Minister.4

Dean Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. No classification marking.

1 See footnote 1, Document 396.

2 Sarit’s note was conveyed to the Department of State by the Thai Ambassador on December 28 and then sent on to the White House. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File)

3 Attached but not printed. The letter was signed by President Kennedy and the text was transmitted to Bangkok in telegram 1277, February 28. In telegram 1531 from Bangkok, March 1, the Embassy reported that the letter was delivered to Sarit at noon that day. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/2–2861 and 611.92/3–161)

4 Attached but not printed.

398. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 398. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, March 21, 1961, 11:09 p.m.

1442. Depcirtel 1436.1

A. Request you again approach Sarit in effort obtain his agreement: 1. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and

2. To raise number of Marine maintenance and base support personnel beyond 300 to magnitude demanded by circumstances but for present not to exceed 500.

B. In this approach you authorized: 1. Disclose to Sarit concept and planned use of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] B–26’s (if PL offensive is not terminated and de facto cessation of hostilities not achieved per reftel) drawing on information available to you direct and through JUSMAG. You may note precise mission of B–26’s to be determined as situation develops. They have broad range of capabilities and can be used as deemed best to fit given set circumstances. B–26’s would operate from Takli but they will not be used without prior notification of RTG.

C. You may inform Sarit you specifically authorized by President to endorse in his name private assurances of US support of Thailand contained in President Eisenhower’s letter of last November2 and in your letter to Thanat (your 795).3 You may add US understands Sarit’s concern for air defense of Thailand which under present conditions provided for in current deployment of US forces in Asia. On this point you may wish comment that Communist reaction against Thailand in form air strikes at Udorn or Takli would require direct military response by US, as we believe Communists cannot fail to recognize. Posture and capability US forces in Far East, including ability of Seventh Fleet to retaliate swiftly against North Viet-Nam, constitute more effective deterrent to Communist action against Thailand than any increase in RTAF air defense capabilities realizable within immediate future. In event US forces move into Laos, plans include further provision for direct air defense Thailand by positioning suitable US fighter elements in Thailand.

D. In addition to excellent presentation already made your 16474 you may draw on following if deemed useful in relating actions to overall framework our position on Laos: 1. US has concluded that unless PL offensive stopped an improvement in Lao military situation would be essential precondition to political settlement consonant with US objective of neutral but independent Laos with a government capable of maintaining internal security in the face of Communist subversion and infiltration.

2. US preparing to give further military support to Laos through use of aircraft and helicopters, and is considering additional measures.

Intention is also to make clear to Moscow US prepared take further action defend Laos against Communist takeover in event political settlement not forthcoming.

3. US and Thai joint interest in Laos requires continued cooperation in taking of such additional measures as may be necessary to prevent domination of Laos by Communists.

4. The additional measures now being prepared obviously raise level of US-Thai commitment in support of Laos, emphasize importance of Thailand to Free World interests in area and automatically imply our obligation to protect Thailand. Thai can count on full military support of US pursuant our obligation in event Thai-US cooperation involves Communist attack on Thailand. President wishes Prime Minister know this is a complete commitment.

E. If in your judgment absolutely necessary in order retain Sarit’s confidence with reference para C above, you may indicate to Sarit US willingness explore at technical level practicable means providing reasonable anti-aircraft defense at Udorn and Takli.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–2161. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Parsons and Askew; cleared in draft by OSD and JCS and Usher, Bohlen, and Czyak of L/FE; and approved by Rusk. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for POLAD and Vientiane.

1 Circular telegram 1436, March 21, contained an account of Rusk’s discussions with the British and French Ambassadors that day. (Ibid.) Rusk was briefing the Ambassadors on the decisions taken at a White House meeting of March 21 on Laos. For accounts of that meeting, see vol. XXIV, pp. 95–96 and 98–99.

2 See footnote 1, Document 396.

3 On October 28, 1960, Ambassador Johnson proposed sending a secret letter to Thanat, assuring the Thai Government that if the situation in Laos should result in identifiable external Communist aggression against Laos or Thailand, the United States would take the gravest view of the situation and “without delay” take appropriate measures. (Telegram 768 from Bangkok, October 28; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/10–2860) In telegram 624 to Bangkok, November 3, 1960, the Department authorized sending the letter with the deletion of the phrase “without delay.” Telegram 795 from Bangkok, November 3, 1960, reported delivery of the letter. (Ibid., 792.00/11–360) See Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. XV, pp. 1149–1150.

4 Telegram 1647, March 16, contained an account of Johnson’s discussion that day with Sarit, Thanat, and Air Marshal Boonchoo about potential U.S. and Thai military assistance to the Royal Government of Laos. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–1661)

399. Despatch From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 399. Despatch From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, April 3, 1961.

No. 554

REF

Deptel 1442, Embtel 1724, and Deptel 14731

SUBJECT

Assurances to Thailand

I have the honor to enclose a copy of an Aide-Mémoire which I handed to the Foreign Minister today, pursuant to the referenced telegrams and after consultation with the Secretary and Admiral Felt.

A copy of the Aide-Mémoire has also been given directly to Admiral

Felt.

After reading the Aide-Mémoire the Foreign Minister expressed his satisfaction and said he would discuss it with the Prime Minister. He noted that the Aide-Mémoire was related in time to the “present measures of Thai-United States cooperation and assistance to the Royal Lao Government.” I said that this was also my understanding.

There was no discussion of the question of the President’s ability or willingness to act with or without the consent of Congress.

U. Alexis Johnson

Attachment

AIDE-MÉMOIRE

In his conversation with His Excellency the Prime Minister on March 28, 1961, the American Secretary of State expressed to His Excellency the appreciation of the United States Government for the relations of friendliness and frankness that exist between the two Governments and for the effective cooperation that exists in developing their common interests.

The Secretary of State further stated that he had been authorized by the President to endorse in his name the assurances of United States support of Thailand contained in President Eisenhower’s letter of November 8, 1960 to His Excellency the Prime Minister and in the Ambassador’s letter of November 3, 1960 to His Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs.2 The President wishes the Prime Minister to know that this is a complete commitment.

The Secretary of State also stated that he was authorized by the President to inform His Excellency the Prime Minister that Thailand can count on the full military support of the United States pursuant to its obligations in the event that present measures of Thai-United States cooperation and assistance to the Royal Lao Government should result in a Communist armed attack on Thailand. The Secretary of State noted that whereas this commitment is pursuant to formal United States obligations under the Manila Pact,3 it is not conditioned on the prior unanimous agreement of all SEATO Members. In this connection the Secretary of State noted that the current deployment of United States forces in Asia is such as to deter air attacks against Thailand because under present conditions, Communist air strikes against Udorn, Takli or other such target would require a direct military response by the United States. It is believed that the Communists cannot fail to recognize this and that the posture and capability of United States Forces in the Far East, including the ability of the Seventh Fleet to retaliate swiftly against North Vietnam, constitutes the most effective deterrent of Communist action against Thailand.

The Secretary of State is confident that the Prime Minister will agree that the exchange of views between heads of Government on matters of such delicacy as this should not be made public.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/4–361. Top Secret. Drafted by Johnson.

1 Telegram 1442 is printed as Document 398. In telegram 1724, March 23, the Embassy in Bangkok suggested wording for incorporation into the aide-mémoire to be given Sarit before seeking his consent to U.S. B–26s operating from Thailand into Laos [text not declassified]. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–2361) In telegram 1473, March 24, the Department authorized giving Sarit the aide-mémoire with some minor language changes. The Department was not prepared to offer written assurance that the United States would act promptly if Thailand were subjected to Communist armed attack even if other SEATO members were unprepared to do so. Johnson was authorized to substitute an oral assurance to that effect at his discretion as an alternative to the language that “U.S. action is not conditioned on prior unanimous agreement of all SEATO Members.” (Ibid., 792.5/4–361)

2 See footnote 1, Document 396, and footnote 3, Document 398.

3 The Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty (Manila Pact), signed September 8, 1954, was ratified by the Senate on February 1, 1955, and entered into force on February 19, 1955. (6 UST 81–86) The text is printed in American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents, pp. 912–916.

400. Memorandum of Conversation 400. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

Exchange of Letters

PARTICIPANTS

The President

His Excellency Visutr Arthayukti, Ambassador of Thailand

The Honorable Kenneth T. Young, Jr., United States Ambassador to Thailand

The Ambassador of Thailand called on the President at 10:30 April 6, 1961, to present a letter from Prime Minister Sarit dated March 21.1 This message replied to the President’s letter of February 28.2

After reading the Prime Minister’s letter, the President said that he wished to reaffirm the statements made in his letter of February 28. The United States Government is prepared to support Thailand against the dangers it faces on such a long exposed frontier. The President assured the Ambassador that the US Government was fully sympathetic to the problems facing Thailand and that there was no division within the US Government in this regard. The President said that Secretary Rusk had reported to him on the vigor and determination which the Prime Minister and the Royal Thai Government had shown in regard to the SEATO Conference. The President was very glad to hear this and expressed his appreciation.

With regard to economic development, the President pointed out he hoped the Government of Thailand realized that the Administration had the problem of convincing the Congress of the necessity of continuing the foreign aid programs, and that, while the US Government might wish to do many things, it had to persuade the Congress and sometimes could not do all it wished. The President pointed out that the aid program was being reshaped to put our assistance on a realistic and long-range economic basis. The intention is to develop programs for building an economy on a five-year planning basis and not for temporary purposes. The President said that such programs should show measurable progress. He told the Ambassador that the US Government intended to move ahead, and noted that the US Government was intensively studying various concrete ways and means to formulate such programs. By way of illustration, he pointed out that Ambassador Young was studying Thailand’s economic development very carefully and extensively. The President then read out loud, and said he agreed with, the last paragraph of the Prime Minister’s letter of March 21.

The President then asked the Ambassador what he thought of the situation in Laos and Southeast Asia. The Ambassador replied that the discussions regarding a cease-fire and a conference made the situation seem better. However, he was afraid that the communists would try to use these devices to take over Laos and South Viet-Nam. Their next target would then be Thailand in his opinion. The President agreed and stressed the need for building a strong military shield in Laos if that were possible.

In conclusion, the President asked the Ambassador to inform his Prime Minister of US support for and interest in, Thailand. The President emphasized that it was his policy to support those desirous and anxious to help themselves.

The President told the Ambassador that he had visited Bangkok and had enjoyed it very much. The Ambassador then told the President how much the King and Queen had enjoyed their visit to the United States. As the Ambassador was leaving, the President said, that Mrs. Kennedywould be very pleased to meet Madame Visutr and he hoped that this could be arranged.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/4–661. Secret. Drafted by Young and approved in the White House on April 13. Young was appointed Ambassador to Thailand on March 29, and presented his credential on June 22.

1 In his letter, Sarit stated that while Thailand was heartened by President Kennedy’s appreciation of its contribution, Thailand needed sympathetic understanding and concrete, tangible support. Thailand welcomed assurances of U.S. support in resisting Communist aggression and subversion, but needed to enhance its basic economic strength. It therefore welcomed U.S. willingness to explore with Thailand measures for economic development and mobilizing of Thai resources. In the last paragraph of the letter, Sarit hoped that such a joint exploratory undertaking would not remain purely academic, but would lead to positive and concrete results. (Telegram 156 to Bangkok, April 7; ibid., 611.92/4–761) The letter as submitted by the Thai Embassy is ibid., EA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 500, Correspondence between Heads of State.

2 See footnote 3, Document 397.

401. Summary of Letter From Prime Minister Sarit to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles 401. Summary of Letter From Prime Minister Sarit to Director of Central Intelligence DullesSource

Washington, undated.

* [Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.13/5–161. Secret. 7 pages of source text not declassified. The source text is an extract from a message from Bangkok sent to Secretary Rusk under cover of an April 14 memorandum from Allen Dulles.]

402. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Kennedy 402. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President KennedySource

Washington, April 17, 1961.

SUBJECT

Message on Laos from the Prime Minister of Thailand

A message addressed to you by Thai Prime Minister Sarit was delivered at the Department on April 11 by Ambassador Visutr of Thailand and was forwarded the same day to the White House.1 Although the Ambassador described the message as urgent and serious, he did not wish to trouble you personally so soon after having called on you April 6.2

Marshal Sarit’s message concerns Laos and the dangers we may face at the conference table as well as in any moves to create a more representative government in Vientiane. I believe the Prime Minister’s remarks reflect a genuine and deep concern over the effect of U.S. decisions and actions on the security of Thailand. At the same time, Marshal Sarit firmly pledges Thailand’s cooperation with the United States in determining and taking actions in the event a peaceful resolution of the Lao crisis is not possible.

In view of the Prime Minister’s justifiable concern over the crisis in neighboring Laos and of Thailand’s key importance in our efforts to stem the Communist advance in Southeast Asia, I believe Marshal Sarit’s message merits a personal response from you. Accordingly, a proposed reply is enclosed for your approval. Since Marshal Sarit sent me a virtually identical message, I propose to reply in general terms, emphasizing our intention to consult the Royal Thai Government closely on actions to be taken in the Lao crisis. A copy of my proposed reply also is enclosed.3

If you approve, the replies would be transmitted simultaneously to our Embassy at Bangkok for delivery to the Prime Minister. I recommend that these replies not be released for publication.

Dean Rusk

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. Secret. The Department of State copy indicates that Askew drafted the memorandum and the enclosed letters. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/4–1761)

1 In his letter, Sarit stated that any solution for Laos should not result in its partitioning or dismemberment, nor would Thailand be able “to support a solution that will permit, in the near or distant future, the destructive Communist elements to assume a de facto or de jure control over Laos,” The optimum solution, Sarit continued, would be “a regime of genuine and unbiased neutrality in which a wider representation of national elements is assured with the exclusion of disruptive Communist factions which are subservient to outside control.” Thailand was prepared to cooperate closely with the United States in implementing appropriate action. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61)

2 See Document 400.

3 The attached proposed replies by the President and the Secretary were sent unchanged to Bangkok in telegrams 1615 and 1614, respectively, both April 18. According to telegram 1888 from Bangkok, April 20, both letters were delivered. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/4–1861 and 751J.00/4–2061)

403. Editorial Note 403. Editorial Note

At the 483d meeting of the National Security Council on May 5, 1961, U.S. policy in Southeast Asia was the last item on the agenda. The participants at the meeting concentrated on Cuba, but at the end of the session it was agreed that there should be “some sort of SEATO Standing Force in Thailand” and it was confirmed that assurances were given to Sarit and Diem in light of the upcoming Geneva Conference on Laos. (Memorandum for the record by Admiral Arleigh Burke, May 5; for text, see volume I, page 125)

At the end of the meeting, according to Burke’s account, Ambassador Johnson stated: “when we send troops into Thailand, we should do it with the full Thai approval. He thought it would be easily obtained. We must assure Sarit that we will send troops to support him in the event the communists take over, although this is very unlikely. We must also think of the possibility that the Thais may feel induction of SEATO troops into their country would not be wise at this time.” (Naval Historical Center, Burke Papers, Bumpy Road Materials)

After the NSC meeting, the President approved NSC Action No. 2425, which reads as follows:

“a. Noted that efforts should be made to reassure Sarit and Diem that we are not abandoning Southeast Asia.

“b. Noted the President’s view that Sarit could be told that we are considering inclusion of U. S. troops in SEATO forces to be stationed in Thailand, the timing to be dependent on developments during or after the forthcoming 14-nation Geneva Conference.

“c. Noted that the Secretaries of State and Defense would be sending recommendations to the President promptly on U. S. training troops in Viet Nam.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 483d NSC Meeting)

404. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale) 404. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to the Secretary of Defense’s Assistant for Special Operations (Lansdale)Source

Washington, May 5, 1961.

SUBJECT

Thailand

At this afternoon’s meeting at State1 there was discussed, in addition to the question of disregarding the Geneva Accords in the MAAGaugmentation schedule for South Viet Nam, the possible stationing of combat units in either South Viet Nam or Thailand or both. On this point the decision was that, for the time being, nothing would be done about putting such units, into South Viet Nam but that the matter of stationing U.S. forces in Thailand would be taken up with Marshal Sarit, presumably by Ambassador Young when he reaches his new post. This decision is, of course, subject to Presidential approval which we hope to secure at next week’s NSC meeting when the program for South Viet Nam comes up for further consideration.2

Meanwhile, we should, I think, here in Defense, be giving some thought to what kind of a U.S. force we propose be stationed in Thailand. Should it not be part of a SEATO force? Should it be conceived of and fashioned as a deterrent to guerrilla infiltration from across the Mekong rather than simply as a U.S. “presence” to serve as a “plate glass window” or “trip wire”, as discussed by Walt Rostow at our Task Force meeting yesterday?3 There are also to be considered such other questions as whether the U.S. force should include engineers and civic action teams as well as special forces and straight combat units.

In advance of next week’s NSC meeting we should have a paper on this subject coordinated not only within DOD but also shown to State.

Roswell Gilpatric4

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1803, Thailand. Top Secret.

1 Reference is to a meeting among Rusk, officials of FE, and officials of ISA from 2 to 2:43 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) Ostensibly the issue was Laos, but as described in this memorandum and a May 5 memorandum for the record (printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, Book 11, pp. 67–68), the stationing of combat troops in South Vietnam and Thailand were the issues primarily discussed.

2 The 484th meeting of the NSC, May 19, discussed Vietnam. (Department of State, NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95) The President approved on May 5; see Document 403.

3 For an account of this meeting, see vol. I, pp. 115–123.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Gilpatric signed the original.

405. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 405. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, May 9, 1961.

JCSM–311–61

SUBJECT

Thailand (U)

1. This memorandum is in response to your memorandum, subject as above, dated 5 May 1961.1

2. It is the consensus of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that if US forces are stationed in Thailand prior to achieving a political settlement on Laos, they should be the same as the US element for SEATO Plan 5 (Modified).2 This force is composed of two Battalion Landing Teams, one Marine Air Group, one Air Force Mobile Strike Force, SEATO Field Forces Headquarters plus necessary command and logistic support units. An Army Airborne Battle Group will be held at Clark Air Base in reserve. The mission for this force should be to contribute to a visible SEATO or multinational effort to stabilize the defenses of Southeast Asia against Communist encroachment, demonstrate US intentions to fulfill our commitments to countries in the area and the further development of facilities to support any subsequent combat actions in the area.

3. This force should not be used for counter-infiltration purposes as this is within Thai capabilities, but should remain combat ready for possible use within the concept of SEATO Plan 5, further deployment to South Vietnam or the defense of Thailand.

4. It is preferred that any deployment be part of a SEATO action but if this does not materialize we should place our forces in Thailand as part of a multinational or bilateral (US-Thailand) action.

5. US forces should be drawn from PACOM components, augmented as necessary from CONUS. These elements are formed, alerted and presently prepositioned in forward areas. They contain sufficient engineer units and civil affairs personnel to meet initial requirements. The major portion of these components would arrive in Thailand within a seven-day period from receipt of the order to deploy.

6. Subsequent to achieving a political settlement on Laos, the US or SEATO force stationed in Thailand should have a two-fold mission. First, they should serve as a visible symbol of our intention to fight if necessary to preserve the freedom of Southeast Asia; secondly, they should begin the development of the necessary base facilities to support any subsequent major SEATO or US combat operations in Southeast Asia. As stated in paragraph 3, this US force should not participate actively in combating guerrilla operations at this time, but should remain in the best possible combat-ready state for the defense of Thailand. It should aid in training Thai forces to the maximum extent possible consistent with its mission.

7. The composition envisaged for the US element of such a force would be a reinforced Brigade Task Force on the order of 5,000 to 6,000 men. The Task Force should have all the capabilities necessary to enhance its value as a cold war instrument in furthering US interests in Southeast Asia as well as to accomplish the missions enumerated above. These capabilities could include Special Forces, civic action teams, Psychological Warfare units, engineer units, and such other units as CINCPAC may deem desirable.

8. Any discussion with the Royal Thai Government in regard to the stationing of US forces in Thailand should include their possible use in Laos or South Vietnam as well as a bolster to the defense of Thailand.3

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Arleigh Burke
Chief of Naval Operations

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/A Miscellaneous Sensitive Files: FRC 71 A 6489, Laos 381 (Sensitive), April-May 1961. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

2 The basic concept of SEATO Plan 5/61, prepared by SEATO military advisers and updated and revised periodically, was that 25,000 SEATO troops (with a potential troop ceiling of 40,000) would cross the Mekong and hold the major towns of Laos adjacent to the Mekong River. This would free the FAL to engage the Pathet Lao in counter-insurgency operations. SEATO Plan 5/61, entitled “A Plan To Assist the Royal Laotian Government to Counter Communist Insurgency in Laos” (MS/623/1/61), April 20, is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 333, SEATO Registry Microfilm, Reel S–3–61.

3 On May 10, Lansdale sent McNamara and Gilpatric memoranda on his “personal views” on the merits of placing U.S. troops in Thailand and South Vietnam. Lansdale stressed Thailand’s and Vietnam’s geographic significance, trained military manpower resources, food surplus, and the psychological importance of keeping them pro-American. As for the shape of U.S. forces, Lansdale stressed the need for a “hard core” of combat troops accompanied by engineer battalions and other U.S. forces capable of civic action. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Lansdale Files: FRC 63 A 1804, Thailand)

406. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Hong Kong 406. Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate in Hong KongSource

Washington, May 14, 1961, 12:07 a.m.

1361. For the Vice President from Alexis Johnson.1 Bangkok’s 2047 to the Department rptd Hong Kong 7152 for you greatly reinforces vital importance of your mission to Thailand. In reviewing talking paper prepared for your use in Thailand3 I believe that it would enable you substantially to strengthen your presentation to Sarit of point two “Stationing of SEATO or US Force in Thailand” if you would explicitly state that the President had authorized the making of that offer. (FYI in addition to discussions at which you were present I specifically checked this point with the President before it was incorporated in talking paper.)

Also FYI preliminary instructions have already been transmitted to Embassy Bangkok and work is proceeding here to permit prompt follow-up on point three “US Military Assistance”.

I am suggesting to Secretary Rusk that he transmit to you any additional suggestions for your Bangkok conversations in the light of the difficult situation he is facing in Geneva.

Regards,

Bowles

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/5–1461. Secret; Priority; CODEL Johnson. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated priority to Geneva for the Secretary and to Bangkok for Johnson.

1 Vice President Johnson toured Southeast Asia and South Asia May 9–24, stopping in Vietnam, the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, India, and Pakistan. He arrived in Bangkok on the evening of May 16 and left on the morning of May 18.

2 In telegram 2047 from Bangkok, May 13, the Embassy reported that Thanat was empowered to attend the Geneva Conference on Laos but was having serious second thoughts about attending. Thanat believed the British and French were preparing to concede Laos to the Pathet Lao through the interim facesaving device of a government under Souvanna Phouma. Chargé Unger suggested that Vice President Johnson’s trip to Bangkok be used to reassure the Thais about U.S. intentions at the conference. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/5–1361)

3 Documentation on the planning for the trip, including briefing papers, is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 65 D 336, CF 1875–1883. See also ibid., Central File 033.11–JO; Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, VP Travel, Far East Trip, May 1961; and ibid., VP’s Visit to SE Asia I and II.

407. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 407. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, May 15, 1961.

SUBJECT

Draft Letter from the President to Prime Minister Sarit

As you will have seen from Secto 114 from the Secretary,1 in spite of the arguments I gave him in Tosec 94 against a letter from the President to Prime Minister Sarit,2 the Secretary still feels such a message would be desirable. The President briefly spoke to me last night in this regard. While he was not enthusiastic about sending such a message, he was willing to consider one and I promised I would have a draft for him on his return today.

My own views have changed somewhat because of the necessity of our accepting the “three-delegation” formula at Geneva. This will clearly further upset the Thais and I now believe a letter from the President to Sarit might well be useful. (In this connection, see Bangkok’s 2053 of May 14.)3

Accordingly, a draft is attached. If this is approved by the President, I would propose transmitting it by telegraph to the Vice President for delivery. The text will also give the Vice President guidelines for his discussion with Sarit on this subject.

UAJ

Attachment4

DRAFT LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT TO PRIME MINISTER SARIT

Dear Mr. Prime Minister: I have asked the Vice President to visit you and deliver this message in order to inform you personally and directly of my full appreciation of the understandable concern which you and your countrymen feel over developments in Southeast Asia. He will also tell you of the additional concrete steps which we are prepared to take with you to strengthen the national security and economy of Thailand.

We are meanwhile seeking to deal with the grave situation in Laos on both the diplomatic and military fronts, each of which must complement the other. Although a cease-fire now seems to have gone into effect, we have no intention of relaxing our military vigilance against a possible renewal of hostilities. We likewise seek to assure that no concessions will be made to the Communists at the conference which would result in merely establishing a cover for a progressive Communist takeover of the kingdom. In this endeavor we stand greatly in need of Thailand’s continued stout support and of the wisdom and experience that your distinguished Foreign Minister could provide for this purpose at Geneva. As in the past, I rely on your comprehension of the magnitude of the problems we jointly face and the importance of concerting our counsels and our efforts to this end. The long record of our friendship has repeatedly proven the value of our close and confident cooperation in dealing with problems of common concern. This special relationship was never more important than it is today.

What the Vice President will say to you will faithfully reflect our unchanging convictions with respect to the immense importance, to us and to the entire free world, of the freedom, integrity and welfare of Thailand, and I shall await with great interest a report of his conversations with you.

Sincerely,

John F. Kennedy5

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 1/61–5/61. Secret.

1 In Secto 114 from Geneva, May 14, Rusk stated: “Believe a short message from President to Sarit would help Vice President especially in view of messy situation in Geneva.” (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/5–1461)

2 In Tosec 94 to the Secretary in Geneva, May 14, U. Alexis Johnson stated that he did not urge a Presidential letter because “it seemed difficult to me to expand on what had already been said.” Johnson thought the Vice President could adequately assure Sarit in his discussions based on briefing papers provided him. (Ibid., 379/5–1461)

3 Not printed. (Ibid., 751J.00/5–1461)

4 The draft letter was approved without change and sent to Bangkok in telegram 1788, May 15. (Ibid., 033.11–JO/5–1561)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

408. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 408. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 19, 1961, 9 p.m.

2096. Geneva for FECON. CODEL Johnson. Vice President Johnson, accompanied by members of his party, Amb Young and members US Mission staff, and PriMin Sarit accompanied by FonMin Thanat at all times, and through most meetings by all leading military staff members, met on three occasions during Vice President Johnson’s visit, each lasting about two hours. First and second sessions, while devoted primarily to question capability Thai Armed Forces and possible US and Thai measures to enhance capability also touched on need for Thai and Lao representation at Geneva and possible Thai, US and SEATO military action Laos in case, resumption hostilities. Communiqué essentially agreed on at close second session. Third session expected to be largely formality releasing communiqué to press, but Sarit however held VP for extended discussion on question of what action US prepared take if Communists violate cease-fire or if, following conference breakdown, Communists resume hostilities. Sarit, obviously asking this question primarily for his own information, based question on his need respond to Phoumi’s query reported Embassy telegram 2061 to Department.1

Discussion on readiness and capability Thai forces and need for expansion Thai defense budget and US MAP program will be covered separate telegram.2

During first meeting VP inquired about TG decision to participate Geneva Conference and stated this so essential he would even urge PriMin to go. He emphasized that there is dangerous conflagration in region spreading this way and it surely worth considerable effort on part TG if this will forestall thousands of men having to go to war. PriMin expressed doubt whether Geneva Conference can lead to concrete and useful results. VP replied it probably will not if influential leaders don’t go, leaving the conference to Communists and fail to take this opportunity spotlight Communist tactics. It was President Kennedy’s desire that VP discuss current emergency situation with leaders throughout Southeast Asia and urge that strong men be in Geneva “talking turkey”. Essential that, if conference should break down, people all over world and in US be convinced we have made best effort work out peaceful solution. Important world understand that leaders of stature of PriMin have no interest in aggressing on anyone or in fighting if this can be avoided. VP urged PriMin also to speak to RLG in this vein so that they will also be represented. PriMin said he would do this but indicated RLG at this point quite discouraged. VP again alluded to public opinion particularly in US; with Rusk in Geneva fighting it out there with communists in words, RLG representatives ought to be standing by his side. VP acknowledged some doubt as to whether we will get peace we seek at Geneva but emphasized again that it must be made clear we have done everything possible in that forum. He stated again President’s wish, expressed in his letter to the PriMin (Embtel 2084)3 that Thailand be strongly represented at Geneva to help get peace we all desire. Much better to talk than fight as long as we don’t have to give up any principles.

Discussion with PriMin of Thai military capabilities logically led to examination of missions which Thai armed forces might be expected perform and this in turn raised question of possible military action in Laos. VP asked, if there is violation of cease-fire or the conference breaks down, how many Thais are ready to move into Laos, ready and willing to go in with SEATO, tomorrow if it should be necessary. PriMin stated he would be ready to move one regimental combat team (more than five thousand men) right now if US is also ready to move. Reference was made at this point to Thailand’s SEATO commitment under Plan 5 to provide two battalions, a total of about three thousand men. VP inquired whether PriMin would be ready to increase these numbers if necessary, what would be maximum number ready to go if button is pushed, out of 70,000 or more available army forces. PriMin said if US and SEATO are also ready to go and situation demands, then he is prepared to put in any number required.4

VP asked PriMin whether he really believed it was wise to have Americans, white men, coming into Asia to fight in Laos, or should fighting on ground not better be done by Laotians and Vietnamese and Thais themselves. He asked in several ways whether, having psychological factors in mind, PriMin judged it wise to bring white men into this region to shoot Asians. Was it wiser for America instead to concentrate on every manner of aid and equipment that could be provided? PriMin reiterated that Thais have men and are ready to go if America is also ready to go. He said probably question of fighting does not arise in present circumstances anyway since it would be role of Americans and other outsiders to take over positions in Laos now in RLG hands (Note: He presumably was referring to points along Mekong) in order to foreclose Communist seizure these points.

VP noted that ChiComs might respond to such American action with some five hundred thousand troops. Russians would be delighted to see us tied down in Laos, leaving them a free hand to move on Berlin, Iran, Korea or elsewhere on next day. With whole world situation in mind, is this wise, or should US not confine itself to providing equipment, training and leadership? He again put to PriMin the choice of US sending in equipment and all manner of aid or sending in Marines, “rich Americans”, with all the possible provocations of ChiComs and Russian reaction that this might imply. PriMin maintained his point that if Americans don’t move, others will not. It is of course essential that US supply necessary equipment but if there is a flare-up of war, Americans must also come in. At present time, with lull in fighting, the job is to bring in aid and equipment to strengthen forces here. If and when fighting breaks out again, however, and if it is not possible to bring it peacefully to a stop, America’s forces should step in. PriMin said that nations in region look to US directly much more than they look to SEATO.

VP then referred to problems this question raises in US where Korea is fresh in people’s minds. There would be serious problem at home in sending Americans to fight in Laos when there are sufficient numbers already in area to do job. Nevertheless, he asked PriMin whether he specifically recommends sending of US forces into Thailand and Laos now and if so what should be their size and their mission. Sarit said at this moment he was not suggesting sending US troops to Thailand or Laos and emphasized that he was not asking for American troops for defense of Thailand but only equipment. Moreover he was of course sympathetic with US reluctance to send forces but said this is something it was hard for us to avoid as world leaders. Some time earlier, when fighting was still going on, he strongly believed US and Thai forces (and perhaps others as well) should go into Laos to help out govt forces. This is inappropriate right now but we should take opportunity we have now to talk together and decide about future action. It is most important that US intentions and decisions be known.

Sarit then referred to questions raised with him by General Phoumi about US plans and intentions (Embtel 2061). RLG is hard-pressed and in desperate situation and is prodding TG for advice as to whether they should keep on facing pressures bearing on them or give in. A crucial element in this is US intentions. VP said if conference fails, and we must prepare for worst while hoping for best, he thought it essential countries in Southeast Asia get together and determine what they believe should be done and put a concrete proposition to us. He urged Sarit to take leadership with Vietnamese and Laotians and others and propose what US and SEATO and others should do, at same time stating unequivocally what Thailand is prepared to do if cease-fire would blow up. On being pressed again by PriMin for more specific statement of US intentions, VP stated that because of present state of American public opinion it is not possible to speak with finality at this time. US Congress believes public is in no frame of mind to send American boys to fight in Laos, especially when Americans are not satisfied that Laos are fighting very hard themselves. He hopes President Kennedy will be able formulate his position after VP’s return and know what help can be provided if conference should fail. Of course first business at hand is work at Geneva to make clear to public opinion that peaceful effort is being made. If this fails, we must call the roll and see what each one in region will do. US will also say what its part will be. NSC will have to find immediate answer in this case. Sarit made clear he also does not face with equanimity resort to force but said circumstances may compel us to this. In conclusion VP stated he could not say with finality what USG will do on this question. President Kennedy of course has great influence with Congress but his word is also not final. RLG should not throw in towel and should know we will remain alert to help but at this time we cannot say specifically what action we would take in light of subsequent developments.

At later stage in their talks VP also threw out idea perhaps what was necessary was a Pacific NATO covering entire region from San Francisco westward. As in NATO there might be single command with a Norstad in charge with each nation contributing its forces and ready to go when button is pressed. Sarit responded that it sounds like good idea and inquired whether this would put SEATO into deep freeze. VP explained he was simply exploring a concept noting SEATO leaves many areas uncovered and excludes several firm allies. Likewise it does not provide for forces in being.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.11–JO/5–1961. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated niact to Karachi, priority to Geneva, priority to CINCPAC, and to CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Telegram 2061, May 16, reported that Sarit informed Unger that he had received a personal communication asking Sarit three questions: could the Royal Lao Government count on full support of the United States against the Pathet Lao; if the fighting was resumed would the United States send troops; and would SEATO do the same? (Ibid., 751J.00/5–1661)

2 Document 409.

3 In telegram 2084 from Bangkok, May 18, the Embassy reported that Vice President Johnson delivered President Kennedy’s letter to Sarit. Both Sarit and Thanat were pleased with it, and Young stated that Thanat was prepared to work closely with Rusk at Geneva. (Department of State, Central Files, 751 J.00/5–1861)

4 In telegram 2085 from Bangkok, May 19, the Embassy reported that during the course of this discussion on possible intervention to aid Laos, Johnson “specifically asked PriMin whether he wanted to have US soldiers stationed in Thailand now and Sarit replied in the negative.” The Vice President did not raise the issue again. (Ibid., 033.11–JO/5–1961)

409. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Embassy in Greece 409. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Embassy in GreeceSource

Bangkok, May 20, 1961, 5 p.m.

8. CODEL Johnson. Ref Embtel 2096.1 When Vice Pres Johnson met May 17 with Prime Minister Sarit (see ref Embtel) Vice President opened discussion by asking PriMin what United States should be doing in Thailand in view of present disturbed situation Southeast Asia. PriMin said Thailand requires help in military and economic fields and then turned to former, outlining present status and capability Thai armed forces. There was some discussion about numbers of effectives and percentage of authorized strength currently being maintained but in conclusion figure for RTA set at about 75,000 out of authorized RTA strength of 150,000, with many units only 50–60 percent authorized strength while those earmarked for use if needed in connection Lao situation run 70–80 percent; lower figures result of budget deficiencies. Sarit also referred to plans for setting up two additional regimental combat teams, beyond ten existing, for use outside Thailand [1 line of source text not declassified].

Vice President Johnson inquired about readiness Thai army units, morale, adequacy, etc. Sarit responded that there no question about morale these troops if homeland threatened. He also judged the numbers large enough to do job that may be required to defend Thailand although to play it quite safe at 50 percent increase to fifteen RCT’s would be called for. He reiterated army’s plans are ready and men ready for action. Modern equipment is continuing need.

VP’s query about possibility bring army up to full strength returned discussion to questions Thai budget. PriMin mentioned civil defense budget three billion baht (about $150 million) out of a total of eight billion baht. VP noted US devotes about half total budget for defense and inquired whether Thailand could not spend more. Sarit said Thailand at limit of fiscal capabilities unless an improvement in economy will make more funds available. There ensued exploration of equipment and funds needed to put army into optimum shape based on four divisional army with some supplemental troops and all equipment modernized to acceptable level. For equipment for army the figure of twelve to fifteen million dollars was mentioned with another about 12.6 million dollars per year for troop pay if unit there to be maintained at nearly full strength. Certain types of aircraft (additional F–86Fs, helicopters and transport planes) and AC and W equipment were mentioned to bring air force to adequate level. $12.5 million would be required for planes and as far as $15 million for AC and equipment. There was discussion of navy requirements including additional minesweeper, two DEs and boats for patrolling Mekong. Having in mind problem in Vietnam where a force of 150,000 is inadequate, VP Johnson asked whether authorized Thai forces closer to full strength and with modern equipment as indicated would give Thailand what it requires for reasonably secure defense. PriMin replied initially these forces could take care of any presently threatened invasion. It was pointed out the additional two DEs that were being sought were for special dangers such as Laos situation and for employment in unconventional warfare. VP emphasized need for considerable capability in guerrilla warfare to meet likely situations in Southeast Asia.

At later stage in discussion Marshal Dawee, Deputy Secretary-General of Military Staff, inquired specifically whether US prepared put up $12.6 million annually required to call up personnel required to bring units up to strength. VP responded that TG should also find out how much it can contribute. It must be recalled US must provide extra strength also for South Vietnam, Philippines and others. In present situation where there is real threat to Thailand, how much can Thailand do for itself? FonMin Thanat noted this necessarily depends on situation. If emergency is acute, economic programs might have to be scrapped and everything devoted to military. VP then emphasized principle of mutual contributions and said President Kennedy will ask him how much Thais will do for themselves. Hoped he would be able to reply that Thais prepared make all out effort protect their own freedom and ready make certain sacrifices as necessary. Specifically he asked would Thailand match what we do with contributions to half that amount or some other fraction? Will Thailand provide troop pay with US providing equipment? He noted increased taxation will be required in US to make necessary funds available and would expect Thailand would also take necessary steps. Sarit also expressed desire get down to concrete decisions at this meeting and reach understanding on how to improve Thai military capabilities. He alluded to other visits to Thailand made by high ranking US officials which came to nothing; he hoped this time there would be some results. In ensuing discussion, when Thais talked about what matching contribution they could make, it became clear they were thinking in terms of pledging funds already appropriated and VP emphasized he was speaking of new contributions over and above what already available. Recognize this might call for extra taxes or other means of raising requisite funds. VP said will be possible for US make its decisions on additional aid quickly once we know what Thai matching contribution will be. It was agreed that TG would try to inform us of their decision as quickly as possible. Also decided Ambassador Young and Acting Prime Minister/Defense Minister General Thanom would get together shortly to organize preparation of memorandum, setting forth joint position on requirements for Thai armed forces, to be despatched to VP on his return to Washington. Memorandum would include notation of Thai matching contribution.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–JO/5–2061. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to the Department of State as telegram 2099 and to CINCPAC and CINCPAC POLAD. The source text is the Department of State copy. Johnson was in Athens returning from his visit to Karachi. Regarding the Vice President’s report to the President on his trip, see Document 4.

1 Document 408.

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 410. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 27, 1961, 6 p.m.

2149. Deptel 1839.1 Following is preliminary assessment requested reftel. As Dept aware, Mission now giving urgent attention whole problem security of Thailand and will be submitting report soonest including new proposals for action.

In reply reftel, would like emphasize at start that I do not think the Communist bloc will attempt or has any intention attempting “to repeat Laos pattern subversion in Thailand”. Thailand is not Laos; it is a united, fundamentally stable nation, economically viable and making steady, if slow, progress in improving welfare people. The nation is composed of a relatively homogeneous population, large majority of which identifies its welfare with the nation and the King. There are no serious ethnic, economic, social or cultural cleavages among the people which can be successfully, exploited by the Communists in a manner which they have attempted with success elsewhere. There are areas of weakness and serious problems for US and Thais to face now and in future, but pattern Communist campaign against Thailand will be one based on realities Thai situation. We must devote serious attention to these problems, anticipate Communist intentions and study military, economic, social needs of Thailand in order come up with realistic plan action aimed at thwarting Communists before they make any headway. With reference numbered points: (1) Do not believe that there is at present time a Communist underground in Thailand of any importance. There are number disaffected residents and opportunists who would like see present government overthrown and who would be ripe for recuritment by Commies, but they scattered and unorganized. Recent round up in area Udorn in northeast does not seem have turned up any evidence extensive subversive operation, despite publicity given it by government. Likewise, arrest Russian “spy” Bulgakoff in Bangkok has not revealed any signs effective Commie organization here in city.

(2) This point will be covered in detail in report now under preparation. Requires joint assessment [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] attachés and JUSMAG. If required before my June 5 visit will cable next week.

(3) Major weak spot is northeast, chronically depressed area with long record neglect by central government and which center only important Thai left wing activity. Northeast way of life closely resembles that Laos and many people, particularly those living along Mekong, identify selves with Lao people more than with central plains Thais (although these do not tend identify selves with any government or political faction in Laos). Northeast problems seriously complicated by existence well disciplined, Viet-Minh-controlled pockets Vietnamese refugees; totalling about 50 to 60 thousand, and constituting potential fifth column of considerable strength. Northeast is area where tactics similar those used in Laos might be used among scattered remote villages with poor communications. Although at present time there is little evidence pro-Communist or anti-Bangkok sympathies among these people, their isolation, provincial outlook and poverty make them vulnerable infiltration and subversion. My brief visit Udorn May 25 impressed me with remoteness and vulnerability northeast and northern areas.

There also exists potentially serious security problem in other outlying areas Thailand. Throughout northern border areas there many non-Thai hill tribes whose ties to central Thailand very tenuous. Many live in isolated villages, unable speak Thai and lack any strong attachment to Thai nation. Excellent opportunity provide for Chinese use similar groups infiltration activities across borders.

Large Chinese population also problem although in opinion of Embassy current situation probably best since World War II. Existence actively anti-Communist government, banning trade with Red China, suppression propaganda within Chinese community, closer control Chinese schools, vast improvement relations with Republic of China and sound assimilation policies of RTG have reduced proportions this problem. Although leftist influences remain, they are less prominent than before. In long run Chinese situation likely depend more on events outside Thailand (e.g., recognition Red China, admission UN, Communist gains or losses) than on those inside country. Approximately 600,00 Thai Moslems in south have never been completely absorbed, despite long period Thai rule. Given independent status of Malaya, activities of Communist terrorists, and lack rapport between Moslems and local Thai officials, there is danger future serious unrest which might provide opening for Communist gains.

Another element weakness might be described as “Bangkok leftist pseudo-intelligentsia” composed largely newspapermen, former politicians rendered inactive by present government, and opportunists various kinds who might emerge as political force under Communist influence. These groups could be expected try ally selves with economically depressed workers and increasing number university graduates unable find suitable employment.

Other areas weakness which must be watched are university students (although problem here much reduced from previous years) and Buddhist clergy.

(4) In opinion of Embassy present lack overt means political expression does not constitute serious problem. Strict control of government over formerly irresponsible (and unrepresentative) press and banning political activity lessens that vulnerability to subversion and political activity. One need only look at situation existing before 1957 coup d’etat when govt had been attempting “democratize” Thailand. Communists at that time were making significant gains, particularly in northeast and among economically depressed lower classes in Bangkok. Most of thinking Thais still thoroughly disillusioned with democracy and not anxious permit return of irresponsible, uneducated and opportunistic politicians to positions authority. In Bangkok there is some evidence dissatisfaction among intellectuals, especially those educated in Europe and America, with delay Sarit government in drafting new Constitution and planning new elections, but even among these there is no desire rush head-long into undisciplined democracy. Essential remember basic conservatism Thai people, their long period under benevolent absolute monarchy, their conspicuous lack success with even watered-down democracy and their real fear of Communism. These factors combined with an effective political alliance (at least for time being) between major conservative groups (military, civil servants and pro-monarchists), a general awareness of government’s sincere efforts improve economic conditions have combined extend period general satisfaction with Sarit government. In conclusion I would like emphasize fact that in Thailand we have extremely important asset. Country is going concern, fundamentally stable, genuinely anti-Communist and capable of making important economic, political and social gains. While not a “bastion”, it can become an area of stability if initiative, imagination and effort undertaken all sides.

As has too often been true in past, we are not faced with immediate desperate situation. We have that most important of advantages: time. Let us use it wisely but vigorously before it is too late. There is a real opportunity for us, with the help of the rest of the free world (which we must encourage) to seize the initiative, to protect and strengthen Thailand before the Communists have time to make any significant progress.

There must, however, be no business as usual attitude. Thailand has serious vulnerabilities and soft spots lying ahead. Neglect of them—especially in educated groups in Bangkok and remote settlements along frontier—will answer the hows and wheres of Communist penetration. We must seek out, identify and assess Communist target areas. It seems to me most likely that the Communists will move into a number of areas simultaneously (as they were doing in 1956–58). Therefore, we must be prepared immediately to deal with a wide range of problems and deny the enemy a chance ever to exploit any of them. Otherwise Southeast Asia’s “golden bowl” will sour fast.

I am pleased to know that a study of Communist bloc attempts to subvert Thailand is being undertaken in the Department. We would like to know more about it, as studies and proposals now being prepared here will contribute to that effort. As part of your assessment, I would like to present them during my June 6–9 consultations in Washington.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2761. Secret; Priority. Repeated priority to CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 Dated May 25. (Ibid., 751J.00/5–2361)

411. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 411. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, June 23, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposed Program for Thailand

I attended a meeting in the State Department yesterday for a further discussion of Ambassador Young’s proposed program for Thailand.1 Discussion focused on a draft of a telegram prepared by Bob Cleveland. Following is a summary of the major points that emerged from this discussion and other private discussions I had on Thursday on the subject. I submit this for your background information, but would be interested in any reactions.

1. While the Vice President made no explicit U.S. commitment to support an increase in Thai armed forces, he did talk to Sarit about the possible desirability of an increase and talked in terms of how much of the burden the Thais could bear.2 Accordingly, it is the Washington view that at least an implied commitment was made and Sarit views it as an actual commitment.

2. The FY 1962 Military Assistance Program for Thailand as presented to Congress includes a $30 million increase (total program $48.9 million). This additional $30 million is sufficient to cover equipment requirements for the proposed 25,000 man increase in Thai forces.3

3. The principal problem is posed by the proposal that the U.S. provide in addition approximately $10.8 million in baht per year for budgetary support for the proposed increase. The exact amount of budgetary support required will have to be determined on the basis of the study by the U.S. economic team which leaves for Thailand today.4

4. We would not, however, provide budgetary support directly because that would involve us in the indirect support of a number of non-military activities run by the Thai armed forces. Rather, we would provide additional development aid at the required level which would in turn release resources within the Thai budget for support of the additional military forces.

5. Two possible methods of financing the local currency costs were suggested. One possibility was sale of food or fiber provided under P.L. 480.5 However, there seemed to be general agreement in the group that Thailand could not absorb any more food or fiber. The other possibility was to obtain the money from the $500 million contingency fund being requested from Congress. The Executive Branch has, in testimony on the Hill, already stated for the record that Southeast Asia would probably be an important claimant for such funds.

6. It was the view of Jack Kaplan that our commitment to budgetary support should be for FY 1962 only. We were saying in the Congressional presentation that supporting assistance would be discontinued after FY 1962. It was the view of Bob Cleveland, however, that in the negotiations with the Thai we would eventually be forced to commit ourselves to two or three years of financing the baht requirement.

7. I raised the question of whether we accepted the proposed “security area” concept on which at least some part of the military program was to be based. I suggested that perhaps it wasn’t a good idea to put the military in charge of all civilian (and even some private) functions as seem to be proposed in the detailed military plan. It was argued that there was really not very much new in this concept since, after all, the military ran the government in Thailand. I was unable to get anyone else interested in this question, though the paper itself suggests, I pointed out, that it is a new concept. I am not clear that the Thai military controls local government, etc., in the way here proposed. I plan to look into this subject further.

8. Though it is justified as part of a general program based upon a concept of dealing with the problem of Thailand’s remote frontier, most of the new elements of the so-called socio-economic program are straight economic development projects of the sort formerly called technical assistance—e. g., university improvement, vocational education, modernization of civil service, community development. Since a significant part of our aid effort has been concentrated on the Northeast, a case can be made that these programs are related to the problem of the Northeast. But fundamentally, they are economic development aid.

9. ICA, consistent with the new aid concept, does not want to commit the U.S. to such projects until it has determined in consultation with Thailand, what programs should have highest priority. The new economic mission is to make recommendations on this subject. Then specific projects can be considered and approved within such priority programs. We want to get away from the idea of annual aid level commitments and also want to concentrate our efforts in a few areas. (There are presently approximately 40 projects in the relatively small Thai program. We have already agreed to an $11.3 million terminal grant to finish three highway projects.

10. The character of the dilemma we face in this case is that, partly as a result of the wobbly situation in Thailand resulting from the situation in Laos and partly because of the expectations developed by the Vice President’s trip, we are faced by a political need to provide immediate evidence of our support. But the new aid concept precludes economic aid in the absence of some real development effort by the country concerned and in the absence of a careful examination of individual projects.

11. I suggested that one way out of our dilemma was to have the proposed message endorse the concept of deterring guerrilla warfare in Northern Thailand through a series of economic, political and military measures while leaving the details to be worked out in consultation with the Thai by the new economic mission. There was some skepticism as to whether this would really be satisfying to Sarit. He wanted concrete evidence of our commitment. However, it was agreed that the general concept of the Young report should be endorsed in the telegram. (It was not included in the draft.) It was also agreed that the message should begin with a statement of the aid concept.

12. The message is being redrafted on the basis of the discussion and will be considered in a smaller drafting group today. I will sit in as an observer to keep myself informed. Once it was cleared in the Department (I believe they expect Alexis Johnson to sign off on it), it will be sent via Battle to Bundy for possible clearance with the President. It is being drafted on the assumption that the President will himself approve it, though it is recognized that you and Mr. Bundy will exercise discretion in this regard. It is hoped that the message can be cleared in time to get it out over the weekend.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 6/61–7/61. Secret.

1 Regarding the Ambassador’s program, see Document 412.

2 See Documents 408 and 409.

3 As a result of further examination of the Young program, it has been determined that it calls for a 25,000 man increase over existing force levels rather than for a 30,000 man increase as had been initially supposed, [Footnote in the source text].

4 See Document 416.

5 P.L. 83–480, the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act, approved July 10, 1954, provided for the donation or sale on favorable terms of U.S. agricultural surplus to friendly governments; for text, as amended, see 68 Stat. 454.

412. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 412. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, June 26, 1961.

SUBJECT

Proposed Telegram to American Embassy Bangkok (Draft dated June 24, 1961)1

Attached is an analysis of Ambassador Young’s report and the proposed response to it contained in the subject telegram. I recommend that, when the telegram is sent to the President for approval following clearance by the agencies concerned, it be accompanied by an explanatory statement along the lines of the attached.

I also have some proposals for language changes in the draft telegram which I would like to discuss with you. I hope that we may be able to get together early today on the telegram so that I can submit comments to State as quickly as possible.

Bob

Attachment

ANALYSIS OF PROPOSED TELEGRAM TO AMERICAN EMBASSY BANGKOK

I. Objectives of the Young Report

The proposals made by Ambassador Young in the report which he brought to Washington were designed essentially to accomplish three broad objectives:

a. The purely political objective of reassuring the Thai of our support and our determination to defend their independence. Ambassador Young’s purpose was to deal with the “morbid fear gripping the Thais” and thus to reduce the likelihood of a shift to a neutralist policy.

b. The strengthening, through military, economic and communications measures, of the Northeastern border area of Thailand in the face of the new threat posed by Communist successes in Laos.

c. The organization of Thailand for economic development.

Ambassador Young’s program for achieving these objectives was put together in great haste. It is therefore not surprising that it is better designed to achieve the first, and relatively simpler objective, of political reassurance than it was to accomplish the other two. With respect to these latter it is defective in two respects: (a) it is not based upon a fundamental analysis of the willingness and ability of the Thai to carry out necessary programs; and (b) the proposed programs are inadequately related to the last two of the above objectives.

II. The Willingness and Ability of Thailand to Carry Out Required Programs

As Ambassador Young’s report states, Thailand is a relatively static society which continues to live a very lackadaisical existence. The many deeply rooted reasons for this circumstance can be described only briefly here. Thailand has made a unique adjustment between traditional and modern ways and there is little tension in the society from this source. Having avoided becoming a colony it also avoided the emotional and ideological consequences of a nationalist revolution. As a result Thailand is almost totally lacking in ideological conflict and assertive nationalism. The elite groups are relatively open to those who acquire a higher education and education is available to most individuals with talent. The nation is relatively homogeneous and free of communal tensions and dissidence. Food is plentiful.

All of this has produced a society in which there is very little sense of national purpose or drive for change. The basic question is whether Thailand can develop a sufficient sense of urgency to deal with the new potential threats to its existence and whether it can develop the motivation and leadership to undertake the economic development which may be necessary to support the security effort.

The Young Report recognizes the absolutely crucial importance of achieving effective leadership, organization and planning in Thailand. However, there is no real analysis in the report of how this essentially political objective is to be accomplished; the emphasis tends rather to be upon U.S. actions. We need a careful analysis of the areas in which we could hope to get effective action out of the Thai and of the techniques by which such action can be stimulated. If we conclude, as is possible, that little effective Thai action may be expected, we may decide that it would be more effective to throw the mantle of U.S. power around Thailand by a specific commitment to defend her against indirect as well as direct aggression, backed by speedy reaction to evidence of threat.

The balance of this paper examines the congruence between the objectives of the Young report and its proposed programs for carrying them out, indicating also in each case the extent to which the proposed telegram would endorse the Young recommendations. In general, the telegram, like the report itself, is better designed to achieve the political objective of reassurance than it is to achieve the security and economic development objectives. But doubts on the latter score have resulted in a watering down of several proposals with the result that the political impact is also likely to be reduced.

The telegram is being sent now because Ambassador Young has requested action on an urgent basis. Such urgent action is needed primarily for purposes of political reassurance. For this reason, despite all of the reservations about the Young report itself which are expressed in this paper, I recommend that the telegram be sent. It endorses those aspects of the Young recommendations that it seems possible to endorse at this time.

III. The Consistency of Ends and Means

A. The Political Objective. Ambassador Young’s proposals for an expanded military assistance program were intended to implement the Vice President’s implied commitment to the Thai Government. It is doubtful whether the report’s proposed economic program would be politically very reassuring since, though it represented an increase over the program included in the Congressional presentation for FY 1962, it reflected a reduction from FY 1961 levels. The reason for the reduced level is, of course, the emphasis under the new aid concept upon economic development loans the level of which is not projected. As indicated in more detail below, the proposed telegram endorses the military program in a more unqualified way than it does the proposed economic program.

B. Strengthening the Northeast. Ambassador Young states at one point that the over-all concept of his report is this: “The vulnerability of Thailand’s remote frontier is the principal problem to solve.” There is no perceptible inclination in Washington to question the importance of strengthening the Northeast. In fact, it is said that something like fifty percent of our past economic aid effort has gone into that area. But there are questions as to whether the proposed programs have been well related to this objective.

The military program gives the impression of having been worked out with greater attention to the potential threat in the Northeast than does the economic program. It emphasizes the development of counter-insurgency and counter-guerrilla capabilities and proposes a related Thai administrative reorganization. However, the report also states that the Thai armed forces must be prepared for “large-scale modern warfare”, and the program includes such “traditional” items as modernization of two tank companies and addition of five minesweepers (to “keep open the sea lines of communication in the Gulf of Thailand and the river approaches to. . . Bangkok”). These were items that were included in the already-planned MAP program for Thailand. The new counter-guerrilla, counter-insurgency program has been simply added to an existing program without a thorough re-examination of the over-all force and equipment structure.

The proposed telegram endorses in a general way the proposed additional equipment program (estimated cost: $30 million) without suggesting review of the already-planned MAP program for FY 1962 of $19 million. It does not, however, endorse proposed manning levels, but instead approves a “modest increase” in force levels and calls for a re-examination of the extent to which the increase can be met by re-assignment of current forces (p. 3, par. 2–a). One may guess that the field response to this latter suggestion will be negative. The Vice President’s talks implicitly committed the United States to paying a part of the budgetary support costs of the proposed increase in military forces. (The report projects a U. S. share of $10.8 million per year.) The telegram leaves this problem for subsequent negotiation between Thailand and the United States (par. “D”, p. 7). A Young proposal for MAP aid to strengthen the Border Police is, under the proposed telegram, to be studied (par. 1–h, p. 3).

Most of the elements of Ambassador Young’s proposed socio-economic program are activities of the same general character we have been carrying on in Thailand. In fact, according to ICA, most of them are items that were included in the original USOM proposals for the FY 1962 program and were turned down in Washington. An examination of both the text and the maps in the report indicates that the only element in this program peculiarly applicable to the Northeast is the proposal for the preparation of a plan for four “agrimetro centers” in the Northeast.2 The proposals for technical advice in community development and for the establishment of a joint U. S.-Thai commission to assist in modernizing Thai agriculture relate partly, but not wholly, to the Northeast.

The telegram proposes that a U.S. economic team, now on its way to Thailand, look at the agrimetro center proposal and that it explore with the Thai Government the possibility of a joint agricultural commission. The telegram does not specifically cover community development, but that subject is presumably also within the purview of the economic team. (?) The proposed telegram would also approve Ambassador Young’s proposals for increases in USIA programs relating to the Northeast (and to student activities) and would authorize provision of equipment [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for a pilot project “remote areas program”. The latter is essentially a scheme for improving communications in remote areas by providing regular air services between major villages and large centers.

C. Economic Development. As noted above, most of the proposals in the “socio-economic program” are of the same general sort that we have been conducting in Thailand. The economic team now on its way to Thailand will attempt, as one of its major functions, to determine priority program areas and to prune severely the forty-odd projects we now support. It will review the Young proposals in this light. It will also seek to determine how Thailand’s own resources can be better mobilized for a development effort. Until this team has made its report we would not, under the proposed telegram, approve any of the specific elements of the proposed socio-economic program. We would, however, explore ways in which Thai capabilities for economic planning can be increased and would release additional funds for feasibility studies of economic development projects involving a total potential foreign exchange cost of $100 million. This approach is designed to avoid our commitment now to a series of projects. Such commitment would be inconsistent with our efforts to reorient our aid program.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 6/61–7/61. Secret.

1 For the telegram as sent, see Document 414.

2 The agrimetro center proposal is an idea of Ambassador Young’s. It involves the linking of several villages with roads to form a compound community which would have a modern community center with market place, bus terminal, middle school, clinic, light industry, etc. The center would also be the headquarters for a mobile village defense system. [Footnote in the source text.]

413. Editorial Note 413. Editorial Note

In a June 27, 1961, memorandum to Walt Rostow, Robert H. Johnson raised the issue of consideration of a bilateral military agreement with Thailand, noting that before the SEATO meeting in mid-March 1961 Foreign Minister Thanat had raised the issue with Secretary Rusk. The Department of State considered that the SEATO meeting was the wrong context to raise the issue and Thanat agreed. Johnson thought that the Thais “may feel that the ball is now in our court and be unhappy that we have made no response.” Johnson also stated that the “State people” thought a bilateral treaty would be more valuable in reassuring the Thais than U.S. aid. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. II, 6/61–7/61)

Thanat’s first mention of the idea was reported in telegram 1508 from Bangkok, February 25; the Department of State’s opinion that the SEATO meeting was inappropriate was sent in telegram 1312 to Bangkok, March 4; and an account of the Rusk–Thanat discussion of the matter is in telegram 1633 from Bangkok, March 14. (All in Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–2561 and 379/3–1461)

414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, July 8, 1961, 6:03 p.m.

28. Ambassador and Country Team are authorized (1) present following proposals to Prime Minister and RTG in appropriate manner;1 (2) express President’s sincere appreciation of Prime Minister’s cordial message of June 4;2 and (3) indicate President’s personal interest in moving forward rapidly to develop well-conceived, soundly based joint Thai-US effort to assist Thailand remain strong and free and to develop its great potentialities.

Central objective of US policy in Thailand is to assist RTG to increase national capability to (1) defend Thailand’s independence and sovereignty against Communist aggression, infiltration, insurgency, or subversion; (2) increase safety, stability, and economic status of strategically important northeast, with particular emphasis on greater anti-guerrilla capabilities; (3) vitalize management, organization, and planning in civilian and military fields; and of major long range importance (4) accelerate development of Thai assets and resources for self-sustaining economic and social growth.

In working toward this objective, USG desires assure RTG of our deep interest in continued independence of Thailand, our readiness to honor our treaty commitments, and our willingness to consider, now, new measures of common sacrifice to help allay growing concern of Thai people for security of their borders. In principle we are prepared fully to back concept of special guerrilla warfare deterrent program emphasizing northeast. We now urgently required detailed jointly agreed operating program to integrate required military and non-military measures.

In light Vice President’s and Country Team’s recommendations and above objectives, approval in principle given following general approach intended assist Thailand increase its capabilities and reduce its vulnerabilities. Basic premise is to help Thais to help themselves and not to substitute our leadership, action, or resources for theirs. Specific US actions under this approach are dependent on further staffing and recommendations by Country Team and Washington agencies and are contingent on adequate supporting action by RTG. No specific decisions made re funding aspects, which are subject to appropriation of funds by Congress and to recommendations from agencies concerned, but you are authorized outline to Prime Minister following general areas in which US is prepared contribute towards increased financial outlays required under this approach.

A. Security Reinforcement Measures

Support of current military programs to continue with adjustments as appropriate to increase responsiveness to existing threat and most probable area contingencies.

Following additional measures, approved as necessary to preserve security and stability of Thailand: support requirements now being studied by DOD to develop specific and detailed instructions. DOD will transmit definitive guidance concerning these measures by 10 July 61.

1. Increase capabilities of Royal Thai Armed Forces to conduct counter-guerrilla operations by: a. Effective organization to insure integrated coordinated operations by all security forces and agencies.

b. Activation of additional mobile units suitable for counter-guerrilla operations.

c. Provision of additional communications equipment needed to coordinate and control operations of security forces.

d. Provision of aircraft to improve reconnaissance capabilities and mobility of security forces.

e. Support measures to improve intelligence capability of security forces.

f. Increased emphasis and support of civic action programs.

g. Provision matériel and, training to improve capabilities of security forces to detect and respond to infiltration across land, sea, or river frontiers.

h. Consideration of advisability extending MAP matériel and training support to police or security forces other than armed forces.

2. Increase general combat potential of Royal Thai Armed Forces by: a. Modest increase in manning level of selected units during peacetime.

b. Provide equipment for agreed increase.

c. Re-evaluate current reserve system.

d. Activate units required to provide balanced logistical support.

e. Intensify military and security training tailored to local conditions and threats.

f. Eliminate non-essential units.

3. Manpower and Budgetary Implications

Recognize that increase in manning level selected units and activation additional units requires about 25,000 personnel. US prepared examine with RTG extent to which this requirement could be met by reassignment of personnel from less essential units. Recognize any increase in total manpower will have budgetary implications. Determination of US action relative to these implications must be based on overall examination of Thailand’s use of available resources (See paragraph D below).

B. Provision of Equipment for Pilot Project for Remote Areas Program (will be subject of separate [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] message).

C. Socio-Economic Program

1. US is prepared to explore with RTG requirements and techniques for accelerated improvement of Thai economic planning capabilities to enable Thailand to qualify for long term development loan commitments which may become possible under multi-year authority Administration is now seeking from Congress. Fundamental concept and legislative history of AID require that recipient countries have comprehensive development plan, including specific goals, specific projects implementing these goals, appropriate national economic policies, and plans for financing approved program comprising both external and domestic financial requirements.

2. Pending preparation overall plan, development loans continue to be available for technically sound, high-priority projects where other external financing not available and where self-help criteria are met. To assist Thailand to qualify for project loans from IBRD, AID or other sources, US is prepared offer assistance in engineering and feasibility surveys for promising activities. As an earnest of our intent to assist Thailand to obtain loans for high priority development projects, the RTG should be informed that we have expedited approval and agreed to provide financing from FY 1961 rather than FY 1962 funds for seven new feasibility and engineering surveys of promising, high priority projects in Thailand. Rather than to wait for the appropriation of FY 1962 funds, we are making available at once a total of $585,000 to finance these surveys, of which $275,000 represents a dollar grant additional to the $19.5 million of grant defense support previously provided to Thailand in FY 1961. The balance of the additional FY 1961 assistance will be provided in the form of $310,000 equivalent in baht generated by previous programs. (Details have been provided to USOM Bangkok.) These surveys cover projects of estimated potential cost of $200 million. We understand the IBRD regards several of the projects to be surveyed as most promising and may wish to consider loans for them. Additionally of course we are awaiting the outcome of final engineering studies for 3 irrigation dams in North and Northeast Thailand and of a feasibility survey for Chumporn Nakorn Srithmarij highway in Southern Thailand.

3. While we are not able to make a firm commitment in advance of Congressional action on the FY 1962 proposals for foreign assistance, we hope to be able to provide grant funds in FY 1962 to complete the financing of the three major highway projects now underway with US assistance, (i.e. Bangkok–Saraburi, Korat–Nonkai and the Bridge Replacement project). (FYI $11.3 million has been requested from Congress as Supporting Assistance for the above purposes but pending Congressional action on appropriations and decisions as to world-wide funding requirements, no mention should be made to the RTG of the above amount. End FYI.)

4. Development grants continue to be available to support soundly-planned, concentrated attack by Thailand on human and institutional development, which in turn will increase Thai capacity to utilize loan assistance. Funds have been requested from the Congress to carry out a development grant program in FY 1962; pending Congressional action, however, we are not able to make a commitment as to the size or nature of the program. (FYI. $4.8 million has been identified as a “continuing cost” estimate. End FYI.) President desires it be stressed with RTG that under new foreign aid concept now being considered by Congress all US assistance (present and future, loan and grant) provided to aid Thailand’s development will be subject to critical review to insure it meets new development aid criteria, e.g., is concentrated on areas highest priority; is based on orderly planning; is of scale required for significant impact and is within Thai and US capabilities.

5. US study team has arrived in Thailand in fulfillment of President’s earlier expression of US willingness explore measures to promote economic development and improved mobilization of resources in Thailand. Under Ambassador’s direction and in light new aid concepts, team will undertake such exploration and will review US assistance to Thailand, including specifically such items as (a) Thai self-help actions required; (b) assistance needed in economic planning field; (c) analysis of Thailand’s ability to support additional defense costs; (d) review of long term relationship of increased military program to Thai economic development; (e) community development, including agrimetric centers in border areas, particularly Northeast. In addition team should explore with RTG desirability of joint Thai-US agricultural group to expedite progress of Thai agriculture and educational mission for education reform.

6. Peace Corps personnel will be provided as agreed between our governments.

D. Use of Resources

US recognizes that RTG determination to increase both military and development expenditures has serious fiscal implications. US prepared explore these implications with RTG with view develop financial program to maximize utilization available resources in order effectively achieve our joint economic and security objectives.

This process of exploration with RTG should recognize:

a. Critical importance to US interests of strengthening Thai confidence that US intends prevent Communist expansion in SEA.

b. US intention to meet implications of Vice President’s discussions with RTG.

c. Administration’s advice to Congress of present intention to terminate supporting assistance to Thailand by end of FY 1962.

E. Political Communications Program

To encourage isolated provincial people to identify with nation’s interest and to increase popular understanding of nature of subversive threat to Thailand and means to counter it, US is prepared to consider helping Thais develop information operation primarily targeted to Northeast and to strengthen USIS program. Proposed courses of action would be along following lines: 1. Establishment and training of small communications task force, possibly including Thai “Peace Corps” drawn from university graduates, to reach village headmen, clergy, educators and other news conveyors.

2. Provision of TV receivers for community use.

3. Increased support of Thai psywar efforts by providing special materials, translations, and English-teaching programs near military bases.

4. Realignment of conventional USIS activities affecting area will include reopening of Ubol Information Center, radio and TV programming, film and publication distribution, exhibits at fairs, educational exchange grants.

5. Development of student contact work and increased book translation program to reach university and intellectual groups subject to communist infiltration.

To fullest extent possible, all projects to be seeding-type with view to Thais taking over subsequently.

F. Action by RTG

Approval of foregoing program specifically conditioned on concept that Thailand itself not only desires projects and programs indicated but also provides full evidence this desire by contributions and actions on its own part which are adequate in opinion of Country Team and Washington agencies to warrant matching US contribution.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/7–861. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Swezey and Cleveland; cleared by officials in FE, ICA, DOD/ISA, and USIA and by the Deputy Coordinator for Foreign Assistance; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to CINCPAC. On June 30, Rostow sent this telegram and a copy of Robert Johnson’s analysis and critique of the Young report (Document 412) to President Kennedy. (Memorandum from Rostow to Kennedy; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. II, 6/61–7/61)

1 Young gave Sarit a memorandum based on this telegram on July 28. (Despatch 64 from Bangkok, August 4; Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/8–461)

2 Not found.

415. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 415. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, July 25, 1961.

The current situation with respect to Southeast Asia is stated below. Summary back-up material follows. The relevant tabs are indicated in the text of the situation report.

[Here follow paragraph 1 on Laos (see volume XXIV, pages 315–316) and paragraph 2 on Vietnam.]

3. In Thailand Sarit has been put under heavy pressure by Moscow to accept more aid and shift towards neutralism (Tabs S and T).1 The Thais are worried about our resolution in the matter of Laos; and the outcome in Laos will affect strongly how stiff-backed they are about Moscow and neutralism (Tabs U and V).

4. In Cambodia, Sihanouk came back from Geneva disabused about the Communists; gloomy, as usual; and perhaps more willing than before to work with us and our friends if we have a strong policy in Southeast Asia.

.5. Organization. John Steeves has been assigned to prepare a brief paper on the key issues for decisions in Southeast Asia as a whole; and this paper should be the initial working basis for a Southeast Asia interdepartmental group which General Taylor and I have been trying to get established. A first draft of the Steeves paper will be ready at about Wednesday, July 26.2

[Here follows paragraph 6, “Issues for Decision and Action” (see volume XXIV, pages 316–317). The only issue relating directly to Thailand was the question posed by Rostow: “Pending the outcome of the Laos exercise, how can we reassure the Thais?” Rostow then noted that the issues, including reassurance of the Thais, were among the key matters for the agenda of a Southeast Asia Interdepartmental Group whose creation should not be further delayed.]

Tab S3

SOVIET PRESSURE ON THAILAND, JULY 12, 1961

Soviet government has taken sudden hard turn in Thailand possibly considerable significance. Soviet Ambassador paid two-hour farewell call on Prime Minister today. Shortly thereafter Thanat summarized conversation for me, suggesting I pass it immediately to U.S. authorities in Washington.

Soviet Ambassador’s tone and approach aggressive, menacing and even rude. He demanded Royal Thai Government accept Soviet aid of all kinds or face consequences. These were described in Khrushchev’s words to President at Vienna to effect Soviet government would not only support all “popular movements” for liberation in any country, including Thailand, but would take steps if such movements were thwarted in any way by local government or its outside supporters. Soviet Ambassador vehemently criticized Royal Thai Government, Marshal Sarit and Thanat personally for dependency on U.S., criticism of Soviet Union, and refusal permit Soviets to undertake various programs in Thailand. . . . .

Tab T4

YOUNG’S EVALUATION OF THAI RESPONSE, JULY 14, 1961

Believe . . . that Sarit has made no commitments to Soviets and, in fact, probably contemplates no sweeping changes in Thai-Soviet relations at this time although Thai acceptance Soviet loan of limited scope, if Nikolayev brings back such proposition, appears be possible. With U.S.-Thai consideration military and long-range socio-economic program about to begin, not to be ruled out that this development either inspired by or seized upon by Thais as means stimulating more prompt and more favorable U.S. commitments on aid and keeping open for Thais possible “second door” if they ultimately not satisfied with U.S. cooperation.

Tab U5

THAI THOUGHT IN GENERAL, JULY 19, 1961

FonMin Thanat Khoman made policy address before American association July 19 on “Southeast Asia: Testing Ground for World’s Freedom.”

Of two danger spots, Berlin and Laos, latter more critical. Thai not convinced that danger of armed conflict will materialize over Berlin. (He gave six reasons for this viewpoint.)

Among Laos’ many weaknesses, most important perhaps her lack of known, world-appreciated commodities such as oil, uranium, and other minerals and her lack of foreign investments from West. Therefore West has no incentive to defend Laos. West seems think Laos either indefensible or unworthy of risks a defender would have to assume.

This attitude has encouraged Commies. Western disinterestedness and unwillingness to assume direct responsibility facilitates Commie efforts to undermine Western position in this part of world. Commies’ next step is impress nations of Asia with inevitability their movement.

Following courses all that remain to us who want remain free:

A. Look more to ourselves and less to collectivities which prove ineffective.

B. Re-examine our exposed position as well as our obligations which have become one-sided.

C. Outside aid to be supplemental rather than basic.

D. We must realize it was perhaps mistake cast our glance too far away; immediate neighbors should receive greater attention and be cultivated more closely.

Young comment: Believe this exceptionally good presentation Thai point of view, and that it deserving wide dissemination in Washington. . . . .

Tab V6

YOUNG FROM BANGKOK ON LAOS, JULY 14, 1961

In light extremely grave military situation in Laos with Pathet Lao in control much of country and in position move quickly at any time to banks of Mekong at number strategic points, I believe it of utmost necessity we urgently review all possible contingencies in order be able react without delay and avoid disaster of serious proportions. I have had opportunity discuss Lao situation with Ambassador Brown. He agrees on danger imminent change in Laos and on need prepare ourselves move quickly. . . . .

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Regional Security Series, Southeast Asia, Rostow Report, 2nd Try. Top Secret. This memorandum is a revised version of one that Rostow had sent the President on July 21, which the President had rejected as “too difficult to read.” (Ibid.) Portions of the July 21 version are printed in vol. XXIV, pp. 307–309.

1 Tabs A–R related to Laos and Vietnam. In the July 21 version of this memorandum, the tabs were copies of cables, which no doubt contributed to the President’s conclusion that this memorandum was “too difficult to read.” In this version, the tabs are summaries of the cables; see below

2 The final paper, July 28, is printed in vol. I, pp. 250–251.

3 Secret. Tab S is a summary of telegram 50 from Bangkok, July 12. (Department of State, Central Files, 661.92/7–1261)

4 Secret. Tab T is a summary of telegram 65 from Bangkok, July 14. (Ibid., 661.92/7–1461)

5 Official Use Only. Tab U is a summary of telegram 86 from Bangkok, July 19. (Ibid., 690.00/7–1961)

6 Secret. Tab V is a summary of telegram 57 from Bangkok, July 14. (Ibid., 751J.00/7–1461)

416. Editorial Note 416. Editorial Note

On August 3, 1961, the International Cooperation Administration Study Group, headed by Dr. Howard E. Bowen of Grinnell College, completed its report on Thailand. The group of government and private experts, also known as the Bowen Mission, had been in Thailand since June 26, assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the Thai economy. The group’s summary of their major findings, conclusions, and recommendations was sent to the Department of State by the International Cooperation Administration on August 1. The group’s first finding was that the U.S. Government’s view of Thailand tended to overemphasize the negative—corruption, lack of social dynamism, oligarchy, inefficiency, passive popular attitudes, and restraints to private enterprise—at the expense of the impressive economic, financial, and administrative progress made by Thailand during the last 3 years. The group recommended an interim action program for the 2 years it would take to establish a comprehensive economic plan.

For the long run, the experts suggested that the future development of Thailand depended on what was done in agriculture, industry, education, and economic planning. Thai and foreign assistance efforts should concentrate on these fields.

Given Thailand’s rapidly growing population and its lack of religious and social limitations against birth control, the group stressed voluntary family limitations. Economic planning in conjunction with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and independently by Thailand should be improved. The group cited expansion and improvements in education as prerequisites to economic development. Agriculture, the mainstay of Thailand’s economy, required more efficient farming methods. Finally, the rapid expansion of light industry in Thailand since 1945 was noted by the group as a most encouraging phenomenon. To encourage this trend, the group recommended acceleration of industrial development, reduction of government control of commercial and industrial enterprise, removal of government restrictions on business, elimination of monopolies, and increased emphasis on industrial financing and domestic savings. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/8–161) The complete text of the 180-page study is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, ICA Study, 8/1/61.

417. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) 417. Memorandum From Robert H. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow)Source

Washington, August 28, 1961.

SUBJECT

Communist Potential in Thailand

The attached paper on Communist subversive potential in Thailand is well worth reading.1 I would have only two observations with respect to it.

1. I feel that a fundamental explanation of the lack of any significant Communist movement among the Thai (apart from minority groups) is Thailand’s lack of a colonial experience. This lack of a colonial experience had two relevant consequences. In the first place, Communist movements in the under developed areas of Asia have generally derived much of their appeal from their strong anti-colonial posture, derived in part from Leninist theory, in part from Soviet policy.

Second, the modernization process in Thailand has proceeded under indigenous auspices. The tension between Eastern ways and Western ways has been reduced because the accommodation between them has been more genuine and because Western ways have not been identified with an alien ruler. There have been no discontinuities in the society as a result of the sudden removal of alien rule. There has been no need to make a sudden adjustment between inherited Western institutions and the indigenous ways of doing the business of the society. I believe that the tensions produced by an imperially-imposed modernization and that the discontinuities resulting from the sudden removal of alien rule are important sources of weakness which Communism can exploit. It can hold out the hope of modernization without Westernization because it seems to offer an organization based upon the experience of the West with an ideology which rejects the precepts of Western liberalism. It exploits the tensions produced by the modernization process while seeming to offer a refuge from them.

2. The discussion on pages 11 and 12 argues that Sarit (like the other rulers of Thailand who, since 1932, have regularly attained power by a coup) derives his legitimacy only from his control of the instruments of force. Accordingly, so the argument goes, Communist-oriented subversive elements could overthrow the regime and claim equal legitimacy without arousing public opposition. The legitimacy of governments in Thailand is somewhat more complex. It is based fundamentally upon the fact that the government is drawn from and has the support of some significant element of the “circulating elite” that provides Thailand with its governmental, military and intellectual leadership. Thus, any Communist-oriented subversive movement will have to find support within the elite group. Its ability to do so will depend upon whether other factors are pushing Thailand in a Communist direction.

Bob

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. I, 8/61–9/61 Secret.

1 Not printed. The paper was prepared by Charles N. Spinks of INR/RAS and sent to Roger Hilsman, Director of INR, on August 11. Spinks concluded that Thailand was not likely to fall to armed Communist overthrow. Potential Communist success in Laos would preclude an attempt to subvert Thailand, because of Communist fear of U.S. intervention and worldwide disapproval, especially among the neutralist nations. Spinks concluded that there was no “serious danger” of a Communist challenge to Thailand as the Pathet Lao were challenging the Royal Lao Government. Nevertheless, Spinks did see a potential for a limited armed Communist guerrilla campaign aimed at minority groups and designed to operate within the present order of Thailand. The purpose of the campaign was to undermine the Sarit government and encourage non-Communist opposition. (Ibid.)

418. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President Kennedy 418. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Rostow) to President KennedySource

Washington, October 2, 1961.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting With Foreign Minister Thanat of Thailand

1. The principal problem on Thanat’s mind is the inadequacy of the U.S. commitment to the defense of Thailand embodied in the SEATO treaty. SEATO is unsatisfactory to the Thais not only because of their experience with British and French unwillingness to undertake military action in Laos but also because of the requirement (not embodied in the treaty but established by practice) for unanimity on SEATO decisions.

2. Thanat is determined that, between now and the next SEATO Council Meeting (April 1962), the defects of SEATO shall be remedied either by action to change the SEATO treaty or voting procedures under it or by a new U.S. bilateral commitment to Thailand.

3. The Secretary of State is anxious not to reopen the treaty. He hopes to solve the problem through some form of heightened U.S. commitment to the defense of Thailand, plus the stationing of some U.S. forces in Thailand.

4. In the State Department’s position paper1 it is proposed that you state to Thanat that the U.S. will give full effect to its obligations under SEATO in the event of a Communist armed attack on Thailand and that this commitment is not conditioned on the prior unanimous consent of all SEATO members. It also suggests that you might offer to confirm this statement in writing.

5. The paper proposes that the positioning of U.S. forces in Thailand might take one or all of the following forms: (a) sending a U.S. engineer battalion to assist in the construction of a mutually agreed project, such as the Bangkok by-pass; (b) increasing U.S. training assistance to the armed forces and the Border Police; and (c) training U.S. forces with Thai forces in Thailand on a rotational basis.

6. Thanat emphasizes that the stationing of U.S. forces in Thailand presents something of a dilemma. On the one hand, Thailand wants them to have a constructive job to do. He definitely does not want U.S. troops standing about waiting for a war. On the other hand, if they are there under the cover of training or construction forces, they may not be an adequate deterrent to aggression. This can only be resolved by some kind of enhanced U.S. assurance, plus an explanation of the plate glass window concept.

7. You may wish to raise with Thanat this question: If we get a Laos settlement, what can Thailand and the U.S. do to make it work inside Laos and not give way to a Communist take-over? This may be a line of thought to which he should turn his mind.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Thailand Security. Top Secret.

1 The October 1 position paper, prepared for the President’s meeting with Thanat, anticipated specific issues likely to be raised and the Thai and U.S. positions on them. Also included was a biographic sketch of Thanat and a selection of letters and memoranda exchanged between Thailand and the United States. This paper had a covering memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Rusk, also October 1, in which Johnson informed the Secretary that while he had hoped to have the President offer the Thais a $150-million line of credit as recommended by the Bowen Mission, ICA opposed it and Johnson was prepared to wait until the legislation creating AID (ICA’s successor organization) was passed. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.9211/10–161)

419. Memorandum of Conversation 419. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 2, 1961, 12:03 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Situation in Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

US The Secretary

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary

Mr. John M. Steeves, Deputy Assistant Secretary, FE

Thailand Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Ambassador Visutr Arthayukti

[Here follows discussion of events in South Vietnam and Laos.]

The Secretary then passed to the discussion of a rotational SEATO force in Thailand. This was a subject which received considerable investigation both during the preliminary discussion1 and later at lunch. In order to elicit the Foreign Minister’s frank opinion, probing questions were asked and his very honest opinion invited. The Foreign Minister’s response may be summed up as follows: 1. Thailand has made it very clear that it is not against the stationing of foreign forces in Thailand providing there is a function for them to perform. The stationing of our marine units in Udorn and other American personnel at Thakhli are evidence of the, fact that this arrangement is acceptable to the Thais.

2. The idea of a “training center’ is not appealing. A composite SEATO group in Thailand would not, in the Foreign Minister’s view, be any assurance to Thailand or offer any earnest with respect to SEATO action.

3. The crucial point so far as the Foreign Minister is concerned is whether SEATO will act in carrying out its responsibilities, in which case the forces can come from wherever they are. They do not need to be stationed in Thailand in order to carry out a commitment. To be designated in training status would merely encourage certain countries to hold up permission for their utilization in the SEATO force and, therefore, their presence in Thailand is of no particular value.

4. Domestically Thailand does not look with favor upon the stationing of foreign troops in Thailand who have no definite mission to perform.

During the post-lunch period the discussions came to grips with the deep-seated suspicion which Thailand now has for the SEATO organization. The Foreign Minister expressed himself very forcefully, pointing out that failure to meet its commitments so far as Laos is concerned had convinced Thailand that SEATO was ineffectual and unreliable. In developing his argument he pointed out that France was the member of SEATO that had originally suggested that the Protocol States of old Indo-China be covered by SEATO guarantee, and yet when one of these states was invaded and threatened, France was the very power that made action impossible. Thailand, therefore, could not feel any assurance that the situation would be any different if her own integrity were involved rather than that of Laos. He felt that Thailand had to have a different type of insurance and that she had to have a definite basis for her confidence. This led to a lengthy discussion of the legal interpretation of the basis upon which United States’ responsibility for SEATO action or action outside of SEATO could be exercised. No conclusive agreement was reached, but it was assumed that our interpretation allowed the United States to guarantee assistance to Thailand under its SEATO obligation whether or not the resulting action could be termed SEATO action. The formula which is operative in the OAS was described, whereby treaty action is taken on the vote of a majority of the members, but those responding negatively are not obliged to join in the action. It was during a discussion of these various ways of expressing U.S. assurances that the Foreign Minister remarked that the type of assurance the United States had given to Berlin would be quite sufficient for Thailand.

The question also came up for exploration of a bilateral treaty with Thailand. The Secretary pointed out that our current objections to another treaty were more procedural than they were substantive. Our obligations under SEATO, especially as interpreted to Thailand in private, classified assurances, were undoubtedly all that was needed, but to express this obligation in terms of another treaty was objectionable because of the requirement of negotiation and Senate ratification.

A brief examination took place of the possibility of Asian states themselves joining together in an organization. If they could take this step and then jointly negotiate a security treaty with the United States, this might suffice. The Foreign Minister pointed out that this, although an intriguing idea, was probably impractical inasmuch as some of the states concerned would undoubtedly refrain from being associated with any collective security arrangement.

During the discussions, the Secretary complimented Thailand’s initiative in organizing the ASA.2 Currently this only involves Malaya, the Philippines and Thailand. The Foreign Minister pointed out that it was a small beginning and before thinking of its expansion, Thailand wanted to see it strengthened and become more effective before promoting its extension to other states.

The conversations were characterized by great cordiality and frankness throughout. There is no doubt that Foreign Minister Khoman has come to Washington fully armed to convey his serious doubts concerning the future and effectiveness of SEATO and his strong desire to have these weaknesses corrected or SEATO replaced by something more satisfactory.

* Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Drafted by Steeves and approved in S on October 10. The time of the meeting is taken from the Secretary’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library) After the meeting, Rusk and Thanat retired for lunch on the 8th floor of the Department of State.

1 Reference is to discussion among Thanat, the Thai Ambassador, McConaughy, Steeves, and other officials from FE, also on October 2. (Department of State, Central Files, 692.00/10–261)

2 The Association of Southeast Asia was formed on July 31, 1961, by Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaya as a means of promoting mutual assistance and cooperation in economic, social, and technical fields among member nations. See Documents 5 ff.

420. Memorandum of Conversation 420. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 3, 1961, 10:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

Official Call of Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman on the President to Discuss Situation in Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

Thailand Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Thailand Ambassador Visutr Arthayukti

The President

U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs

W. W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Walter P. McConaughy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

After greetings had been exchanged, the Thai Foreign Minister expressed his appreciation for the opportunity and honor of meeting with the President. He presented a letter, dated September 11, from Prime Minister Sarit to the President.1

The President told Foreign Minister Thanat that our concern at the security situation in Southeast Asia was equal to our concern over Berlin. The issues and the actual circumstances seemed less precise in Southeast Asia, and therefore, in some ways more difficult to deal with; we were anxious that the attention to Berlin not lead to any weakening of the position in Southeast Asia.

U.S. interest in the security and welfare of the area had been reaffirmed through Vice President Johnson’s trip. We have been continuously pressing to bring about an acceptable security situation which would make military intervention unnecessary. The present outlook is not entirely unsatisfactory and certainly we should continue to search for a peaceful solution. Military action at best would be uncertain in its result, and hazardous. The lines of communication would be very long and overland routes would be difficult. There are not enough suitable air bases. Military intervention should be thought of only as a last resort.

Upon reading the letter, the President remarked that the Prime Minister had dwelt at some length on the problem of SEATO and had expressed the feeling that the present SEATO structure is unsatisfactory.

The Foreign Minister said that the effectiveness of SEATO had an important bearing on the security of all Southeast Asia. The weakness of SEATO had been shown by its failure to act in the Laotian crisis. Developments in Laos had proved that SEATO was not quite capable of filling its expected role. Doubt was widespread as to whether SEATO as now constituted can ever fulfill its security responsibilities as planned. If SEATO cannot meet the hopes and needs of the people of Southeast Asia, it is not only an ineffectual organization, but it is dangerous. Its charter must be revised or reformed, or else we must “do away” with the organization. If this should prove impossible, the Thai Government might feel that it could no longer give “false hopes” regarding SEATO to the Thai people.

In answer to a question from the President as to what alternatives he envisaged, the Foreign Minister said that not all the members of SEATO had similar interests in SEATO or in Southeast Asia. Some have declared frankly that they should not be asked for contributions to SEATO. The Thai Government could not understand why any country should belong to SEATO if it is not willing to assume the responsibilities of membership.

They should not be allowed to belong just to gain the prestige that goes with membership.

The President thought that even though some members might not wish to participate in SEATO action, the way was still open for other members who were prepared to do their part. Unanimity was not required. Each member could decide for itself on the basis of its own national point of view.

The Foreign Minister agreed that this was a possible way out, but he still thought it was unacceptable that some members repudiated their obligations under the treaty. It was regrettable that they only wanted the advantages they could get out of membership.

The President said that he did not consider that the SEATO pact should be renegotiated; that would be complicated and might not be a useful exercise to undertake.

The Foreign Minister wondered if reforms short of renegotiation might not be undertaken before the next Council meeting in March, 1962. He felt that the structure of the organization should not “delude the people”.

The President observed that in case of an overt Communist attack on the treaty area, with for instance five SEATO members in favor of military action and two against, there was nothing in the Charter to prevent the five from coming to the defense of Southeast Asia. The U.S. would not feel that it was inhibited by the abstention of the two members. The President also recalled that in our case, there was a supplementary bilateral understanding with Thailand which might be considered as equally important, or more so. The President said he did not want to have to submit any changes in the SEATO Treaty to Congress. A reorganization presumably would amount to a different treaty arrangement, which would have to be submitted to the Senate.

Mr. Johnson confirmed that there was nothing in the Treaty itself which required unanimity for military action. The first SEATO Council meeting had adopted a rule which called for unanimity. In the case of aggression against Thailand, the U.S. would act in any event, as the Secretary had informed the Thai Government, and as confirmed by a U.S. aide-mémoire.

The Foreign Minister acknowledged this, but felt that this would not be a SEATO action. He inquired what was the meaning of SEATO membership in the case of those countries which refused to act. The Foreign Minister agreed that the abstaining countries could not stop action by the other members but they could prevent the use of the SEATO label by the intervening countries. The action would not be on behalf of SEATO, or under the SEATO flag.

The President said the U.S. membership in SEATO has the advantage of committing us by means of a treaty obligation. It gives the U.S.

Government a freer hand. He felt that it would be better to avoid submitting any revision of the SEATO Treaty to the Congress. The unanimity rule had been adopted by mere Council action and could be changed by Council action. Perhaps a two-thirds majority rule could be applied.

The Foreign Minister thought there were two alternatives:

1. A clause might be added which would provide that, regardless of unanimity, any defense action in the Treaty area by a SEATO member would still be a SEATO action.

2. If it should be found that the Organization is not serving its original purpose, a different form of organization could be established.

The Communists had opposed SEATO from the outset and would continue to do so, but this did not matter. The Foreign Minister did believe that propaganda to the effect that SEATO had brought the cold war to Southeast Asia, had done some harm. It tended to complicate relations with some countries. This could be offset if the organization played a useful deterrent role but if SEATO did not increase security what was the advantage of the Organization for members such as Thailand? Perhaps Thailand should look about for some other arrangement which would afford collective security.

The President thought that SEATO would serve as a satisfactory guarantee against outright invasion. It had effect as a deterrent against that. But it does not prevent the sort of infiltration and subversion now going on in Laos and Vietnam. Maybe there is no full answer to the latter problem yet. Some sort of an action program is needed which would control the movement of unauthorized groups and individuals across the borders. The only answer developed so far is to support the local governments in expanded defense and economic development programs. The President agreed that the SEATO members ought to consider and discuss action by less than unanimous consent. If a given country objects, it can stay out but the action by the others would still be a SEATO action.

The unanimity interpretation does not limit our action or remove our obligation under the Treaty. We would not be inhibited even if the action could not be under the SEATO flag. The President agreed that abstention by some would have an unfortunate psychological effect on others. But this would not diminish the right or obligation of the countries who wanted to act.

Mr. Johnson agreed that no one could prevent a SEATO flag or label from being used. But he thought some parties would contend that it was not a SEATO action.

The President thought we could perhaps redefine the rights and obligations of SEATO members but without, any amendment of the actual Treaty, or resubmission to the U.S. Congress.

Foreign Minister Thanat said the American Ambassador in Bangkok had inquired about the Thai view of the desirability of a bilateral defense pact. The Foreign Minister said the view of his government was that the time was not ripe for a bilateral security treaty.

Mr. Johnson observed that the difficulty was that with a bilateral security treaty, there was danger of leaving out such important and valuable allies as Australia. Australia is active, vitally concerned and essential. Australian participation was useful to all. It would be unfortunate to lose the contribution of Australia, which could best be utilized through a multilateral arrangement rather than through a bilateral arrangement.

The Foreign Minister reiterated that he was not making any formal proposal for a bilateral pact. He was not pressing the matter at all.

The President asked if the Foreign Minister thought that area security on balance was increased or lessened by bilateral pacts.

The Foreign Minister thought security might be increased with use of interlocking. In the case of Australia, there could be a link-up through Australia’s membership in ANZUS.

The Foreign Minister reverted to SEATO, saying that even if the operational rules of the Council were revised, this would not remove the basic weakness. The trouble was that some members wanted to assume rights without obligations.

The President thought there should be further correspondence on the matter before the spring meeting of the SEATO Council. Perhaps the discussion of the whole problem should be expanded. Perhaps there should also be a restatement of bilateral assurances and understandings.

[Here follows discussion of Laos in which the President asked for the Foreign Minister’s judgment on the situation. Thanat expounded at length on Laos and then the President and some of his advisers joined the discussion.]

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.9211/10–1661. Secret. Drafted by McConaughy and approved by the White House on October 19. The meeting was held in the White House.

1 The substantive text of the letter, which expressed concern over trends in Southeast Asia, the lack of decisive “Free World” action in Laos, and problems with the SEATO organization and structure, is in telegram 474 to Bangkok, October 6. (Ibid., 660.90/10–661)

421. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 421. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, November 7, 1961, 4 p.m.

693. Deptel 619,1 Embtel 681.2 Progress joint planning, Sarit’s line on “Washington decisions”, his health and Thanat’s inaction explain where we stand today: 1. Sarit has been waiting for announcement increased US military and economic assistance program since Vice President left Bangkok. Considers “$50 million” military aid US commitment made during that visit subject only to congressional authorization, notwithstanding my oral and written explanations to him that we first need agreements on joint planning. Absence Sarit and others Bangkok slows up our pushing program jointly.

2. However, RTG has taken several positive steps (Embtel 681) in response Deptel 283 and my memorandum of July 28,4 which RTG had endorsed officially. Discussions in subcommittee meetings on economic and military subjects have moved considerable distance in joint planning and specific understandings. We have reached stage of Thai undertakings to discuss total FY 62 assistance packages, now if we get Washington and CINCPAC go ahead, this would give more leverage to get specific support from RTG. However, size of local currency needs for mil and economic program still not determined although we are advised RTG seeking arrive at this figure. Have written Sarit to underscore joint discussions on this point.

3. Local currency is critical weakness our whole program in Thailand. Unless we find ways remove this Achilles heel, new program will flounder and joint efforts will not be able shore up Thailand’s overall defensibility during FY 62 and FY 63. There is not much more time left in light situation Laos, Vietnam and now Cambodia.

4. Thanat Khoman has taken no initiative with me regarding Washington talks or aid programs since his return despite my suggestions and promptings for follow-up talks. He said he and I have nothing discuss since Washington talks satisfactory and no disagreement between USG and RTG. He talks only about SEATO reorganization or surgery every time we meet with categoric “or else” attitude. He believes US Govt has officially concurred in changing unanimity rule. Otherwise, he had not himself raised (a) rotational training by SEATO or US; (b) US construction battalion and by-pass road; (c) Bangkok-trade Export-Import loan; or (d) Spiracha harbor loan. Nor has he suggested reconvening Thai-US committee which he chairs for Thais. He has been down with cold and fatigue, appears in dispirited mood and is preoccupied with Cambodia. Now he is preparing for Colombo Plan meeting, leaving Nov 10, Kuala Lumpur for week or so. Since Dept telegrams and memo of conversation Johnson–Thanat talks put initiative on Thanat for these subjects I have not yet prodded him on them. In view above circumstances doubt anything will come from him until after Colombo, unless Sarit or Cabinet steps in.

5. Main problem is Sarit. I will have increasing difficulty seeing him on our business as well as getting coordinated govt views out of RTG. Sarit has slowed down from fatigue and other factors and is resting at seaside for several weeks at his initiative. Besides Thanom and top military have been in Burma. Aid matters, Laos, etc., will need the return Sarit and principal colleagues back together in operation and then I must deal with him directly.

6. Regarding 4a and 4b, RTG apparently uncoordinated and we seeking clarification. Sarit and military approve both, but Thanat argued strongly against SEATO rotational training with General Taylor and myself and has never mentioned battalion or by-pass to me. Resolution awaits return General Thanom and Sarit in Bangkok.

7. Does Dept want written answer from RTG to my memo of July 28 as I have been urging from Thai? A reply in draft by Luang Vichit exists but we have not seen. I do not wish deal directly with him on US aid if it can be avoided, so must follow-up with Thanat as soon as feasible. Also, does Dept want us take initiative press RTG on specifics para 4 and other aspects Deptel 28? Recommend we continue leave balls in their court, since Dept and Embassy have made repeatedly clear our willingness expand aid programs subject various understanding and our interest in specific projects. I don’t like to press RTG in what is in their interest and from our pocketbook.5

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/11–761. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC POLAD.

1 In telegram 619 to Bangkok, October 31, the Department expressed concern about Sarit’s repeated comments that he was waiting for the United States to act in the field of military assistance, since it was waiting for the Thais to act. Young was instructed to make it clear to Sarit, if he had not already done so, that the United States was prepared to provide assistance to improve Thai forces but, without Thai decisions, the United States had no basis on which to provide the necessary funds and equipment. (Ibid., 792.5–MSP/10–3161)

2 In telegram 681 from Bangkok, November 4, the Embassy reported on progress made with the Thais on military assistance, but noted that it was difficult to arrive at clear-cut agreements over the short term. (Ibid., 792.5/11–61)

3 Document 414.

4 See footnote 1, Document 414.

5 In telegram 783 to Bangkok, November 28, the Department suggested that it “may have been asking too much of Thais in expecting to be able to work out with them a complicated arrangement involving increases of some forces and decreases in others and eventual development of a basis for cost sharing.” The Department asked for the Embassy’s view of the idea of the Country Team presenting a unilateral package proposal explaining what Thailand and the United States would do. As for the specific questions asked in this last paragraph, the Department was prepared to leave the tactical handling of the Thais to Young and the Country Team. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.5–MSP/11–2861)

In telegram 999 from Bangkok, January 13, 1962, the Embassy stated that after full consideration of the idea of a package proposal, it was convinced it would be a mistake and would jeopardize work already done with the Thais. (Ibid., 792, 5/1–1362)

422. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 422. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, January 8, 1962, 4:11 p.m.

960. Your 957.1 Deeply appreciate your succinct and cogent description Thanat’s views on Laos. We all seriously concerned by. Thailand’s attitude this issue. We are determined press ahead with our present course as long as we see reasonable chance achieving acceptable peaceful settlement. At same time we must not in the process lose friendship of valuable ally such as Thailand. As in past we counting on you to pull us through this delicate period and will rely on your best judgment on way this can best be handled in Bangkok.

We share view your 9462 that full restatement to RTG of our position on Laos probably called for. Thorough and full discussions may help allay what appear be fears by Thanat that we operating behind Thailand’s back. The following appear to be major substantive issues at stake between us: 1. The Lao Cabinet. As you know we agreed at Paris Foreign Ministers’ meeting3 to accept Souvanna if he lived up to certain conditions. He now very close to having met those conditions with a final settlement hinging largely on formation by Souvanna of government national union. Such government appears impossible and would in any event be fundamentally unsound unless Defense and Interior given to Center group. Present Lao Government cannot realistically expect hold both portfolios. If it insists on one the other must obviously go to PL. We believe PL control over either would be most serious from Thailand’s standpoint as well as our own. Moreover split control over these key ministries, each with its own armed personnel, would almost certainly produce instability in Laos. This would virtually ensure that one of major conditions Thailand seeks to avoid would occur: i.e., that Lao Government would find itself incapable preventing Laos from being used as corridor against neighbors. We therefore believe that Defense and Interior will have to go to the Center group and believe Thailand should support this view in its own best interests.

2. Souvanna. We are aware Souvanna’s limitations but believe Thailand seriously underestimates his abilities. We have every confidence he will do his best maintain independent Laos. He certainly far more strongly anti-Communist and anti-PL than RTG believes. Souvanna will of course require strong outside support to make go of his government. We hope RTG will join us in providing this support. One of surest ways force him to move in wrong direction is for anti-Communist nations obstruct his legitimate efforts or give impression we lack faith in him.

3. Phoumi’s Role. We are particularly gratified by Thanat’s categoric denial that RTG encouraging Phoumi to sabotage formation Souvanna govt. (As you know we are still receiving some evidence to contrary.) You may wish assure RTG that we continue have highest personal respect for Phoumi. He is dedicated leader and his anti-Communist stand has been firm and consistent. Despite our present differences we hope he will continue fill an important role in Lao political life.

Re para H reftel4 you may wish again express our sincere appreciation for Thailand’s invaluable assistance in Geneva conference on Laos and in contingency planning re Laos. You may also wish assure Thai that we have not changed our policies on Laos. As before we are continuing to seek a stable and effective independent government. We have insistently supported adequate safeguards for interests of West in any solution and will continue do so.

In broader context we counting on you to bring home to Thai insofar as possible fact our fundamental objectives in Laos similar and course US now on is in best interests of us both. As you have aptly indicated this not easy task. RTG unlikely fully accept our view re Souvanna but believe we should continue chipping away at this. Hope we can make more immediate progress in narrowing gap between our differing estimates probability of present unstable de facto division Laos being maintained for any extended period and advantages thereof. Thanat appears argue continuation status quo preferable to Souvanna government. Believe we should inform him we do not believe present uneasy situation Laos can be maintained nor that present RLG could withstand major Communist offensive. Situation likely deteriorate in direction inimical Thai interests unless prompt measures taken. Moreover while Thailand not facing immediate problem infiltration through Laos, GVN is. Effective neutral Lao government which Soviets committed as a co-chairman to maintain offers best alternative.

You should assure RTG there certainly no lessening of our concern for SEA or of our determination to meet our obligations in area. Quite opposite is case as shown by our increased assistance to South Vietnam and other measures. We continue of course to view Thailand as one of our best friends and most loyal allies. This is reason for past assurances we have given RTG. Thailand can continue count on our support under these commitments. If you believe it would be useful you may wish to review these with RTG.

You may draw fully on above at your discretion. We need not reiterate that we are aware of need reinforce our position on Thailand. We cannot yet give you firm answers to points referred to in paragraph K of your 9575 but we have been and will continue to press these as top priority issues. Meanwhile RTG should have no doubt as to our continued firm support and our determination to aid Thailand to fullest extent possible.6

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Masters; cleared by Cleveland, Cross, Rice, and U. Alexis Johnson; and approved by Harriman. Repeated priority to the Geneva FECON and to CINCPAC/POLAD.

1 In telegram 957 from Bangkok, January 6, Young reported on his discussion during a “long and solemn evening alone” with Thanat on the issue of Laos. (Ibid.)

2 In telegram 946 from Bangkok January 5, Young predicted “stormy weather” with the Thai Government over Laos, but suggested that “we may be able to ride through it if I again present strong, even categoric statement of US policy.” (Ibid., 751J.00/1–562)

3 Reference is to a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, August 7, in which a unified policy for a coalition government in Laos was agreed upon; see vol. XXIV, pp. 345–353.

4 In this paragraph, Young reported that Thanat complained that the United States was ignoring the restraint, caution, and cooperation Thailand had displayed during the Laos crisis.

5 In this paragraph, Young reported that the Thai Government’s apprehension and difficulties over Laos would be substantially relieved if it knew where the U.S. Government stood on SEATO reform and revitalization, on U.S. military support and assistance for Thailand, and on what the United States was prepared to do to help meet the threat to Northeast Thailand.

6 In telegrams 969 and 970, both January 9, Young reported that he met with Sarit and Thanat on January 9, but because of garbles and delay in telegram 960, he could not use all the points suggested. Young described the meeting as “serious, argumentative, but not nasty.” The Thai leaders believed that U.S. policy in Laos was mistaken, but agreed to disagree with the United States. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–962)

423. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative’s Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Military Representative (Taylor) 423. Memorandum From the President’s Military Representative’s Naval Aide (Bagley) to the Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Washington, January 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Thailand and SEA

1. In connection with the responsibilities of the new Special Group (CI),1 there are three papers given to you by Ambassador Young which are of interest: Tab A— Defensibility of SEA and US commitments.2 This proposes increased regionalization of US policy and the establishment of an “Agri-metro” system of village strong points in NE Thailand. To offset the static nature of the village system, it envisages a leap frog strategy of hit and run operations and Communist territory based on the centers of strength in the “Agrimetro”. The main points made in this paper are underlined.

Tab B— Agrimetro Plan. This paper develops in detail the village plan. Each system would be a self-sustaining complex of villages around a rural strong point with the rural strong points hooked to one agrimetro center. Each such system would be provided with a mobile defense in depth commanded from the agrimetro center. (This is not unlike the Israeli system. An adaptation of this procedure is under joint study by Burma and Israel for placement in the Burma–China border area.)

Tab C—Outline Analysis of the Ambassador’s Memorandum to Sarit.3 This provides the essentials of a US-Thai counter-insurgency program including security and politico-economic measures. It includes the “Agrimetro” Plan.

2. Related to these broad policy papers are the most recent US overtures towards Thailand to arrest their increasing unrest and discontent. These are contained in two telegrams: Tab D— DepTel 1006 to Bangkok, 12 [16] Jan.4 Using the Bowen Economic Mission Report5 as base, suggests joint efforts to develop an economic development program in Thailand. Lists other actions the U.S. is prepared to take in the economic and social fields. (Whatever the reason, this action is long overdue. The immediate task is to assure the follow-up is prompt and is put in some sort of Country Plan context.)

Tab E— Bangkok Tel 998, 13 Jan.6 Text of letter from Amb. Young to Sarit. Outlines U.S. policy and purposes re Laos, and confirms the Amb’s planned meeting with Sarit in two weeks to discuss Thailand security and development. In para 6 of the text, there is further emphasis on the U.S. idea that use of Lao territory for interference in SVN and Thailand will be lessened by Soviet promise to respect a neutral Laos.

3. The State Policy Planning Staff is commencing a study of ways and means to improve relations among the free nations of Asia. Special weight is being placed on a number of bi-lateral contacts and agreements rather than a regional approach. The study is just getting underway, but offers potential usefulness to the SEA problem if new angles are devised. I mention it because this type of work often gets lost at the action levels, after it is distributed by the Planning Staff, unless it gains high level interest.

WHB

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Thailand (#1) 12, T-029-69. Secret.

1 On January 18, 1962, the National Security Council issued NSAM No. 124, which established the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) for the purpose of assuring unity of effort and the use of all available resources in preventing and resisting subversion, insurgency, and related forms of indirect aggression against friendly countries. The group was chaired by the President’s Military Representative, General Maxwell D. Taylor, and had as its other members Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric, Director of CIA McCone, Administrator of AID Hamilton, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Lemnitzer, Deputy Under Secretary of State Johnson, Director of USIA Murrow, and Special Assistant to the President Bundy. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 124) A text of NSAM No. 124 is printed in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, Book 12, pp. 442–444.

2 Neither Tab A nor Tab B was attached. Neither has been found.

3 Apparent reference to the attachment to Document 412. See also footnote 1, Document 414.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 892.00/1–1662)

5 See Document 416.

6 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1–1362)

424. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 424. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, January 23, 1962, 7:26 p.m.

1055. Your 1047.1 Appreciate full report your meeting Sarit and RLG leaders. Sarit’s attitude Lao solution and clear evidence he influencing Phoumi source most serious concern here. Our messages from here and Geneva have given you detailed explanation US position re Laos. This you have presented to RTG orally and in writing. Our stand has also been explained to Sarit in personal letter from President.2 If Sarit still refuses to go along with US stand (and reftel clearly indicates he does) do not believe further debate with Sarit re Lao Cabinet, Souvanna, etc., likely be productive. This clearly case where we reach different conclusions from same facts. Nevertheless in view Sarit’s evidently sincere concern for Thai security, we consider he is entitled to fullest possible assurances re US support for Thailand in case Souvanna solution in fact resulted in increased threat to Thai security.

Therefore if he agrees cooperate with us in achieving Souvanna solution, you authorized follow up last para President’s letter January 203 by telling Sarit that in event Communist aggression by means armed attack against Thailand, US will give full effect to its obligations under Article IV (1) of Manila Pact.4 Commitment under this article is not conditioned on prior unanimous consent all SEATO members. This is fullest commitment US can give RTG and will be confirmed in writing if desired.

You should point out that protection against Communist aggression offered by Article IV (1) of Manila Pact is identical to that provided by other treaties in area, and no commitment under bilateral with Thailand could be stronger. US has always regarded collective security to be not less but greater than sum of its parts. We consider that collective arrangements must support and strengthen individual efforts rather than hamper and weaken them.

FYI. This much broader statement than that included April 1961 aide-mémoire.5 It removes qualification re Laos to which Thanat objected in his talks here last October.6 Article IV (1) of SEATO Treaty deals with aggression by means of armed attack. Operative language this paragraph corresponds generally to language found in Article III of the Korea Treaty and Article V of China, Philippine and ANZUS treaties7 in the recognition by each party that “aggression by means of armed attack in the treaty area against any of the parties or any state or territory which parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter designate would endanger its own peace and safety.” In such circumstances, each signatory agrees that “it will in that event act to meet the common danger in accordance with its constitutional processes.” Action under this language by the US or other signatory would not require prior unanimous agreement of other SEATO members, and thus in effect Thailand has legally all protection under this article that it could reasonably expect from bilateral or possibly more if treaty were to be negotiated under present conditions. End FYI.

Re aggression against Thailand by less than armed attack: In Laos US was faced with large scale penetration, poor logistic situation and doubtful will and capacity to resist by local people. These facts have colored US policy thinking and led us to conclude that free world interests would be best served by a peaceful settlement at Geneva. In South Vietnam however where the people have will to fight and a government prepared to take appropriate measures deal with threat it faces, US is already making enormous effort in men, matériel and money to assist that nation in maintaining its independence and integrity. Obviously there is no reason to think US would do less in case of Thailand. RTG should be guided by these US actions in assessing US policy.

Following fundamental points should be presented with utmost emphasis: 1. We regard Lao situation as case war or peace. As President said, Souvanna government only feasible alternative to hostilities which could involve US and Thailand. Neither of us wants this to happen. There no acceptable alternative as we have repeatedly indicated. US thus fully committed to achieving peaceful settlement at Geneva and formation government of national union under Souvanna.

2. US policy is firm on Lao settlement; while we respect Sarit’s views as ally and friend we are nevertheless fully determined press forward toward solution which we and other powers represented Geneva believe is only feasible peaceful solution. Efforts by RTG change US policy or encourage RLG sabotage settlement will only make solution Lao problem more difficult and might force US resort increasingly strong measures to effect settlement.

3. We therefore urgently request that Sarit inform RLG that RTG fully supports concept of peaceful settlement Laos, and formation government national union along lines tentatively agreed at Geneva. You should tell Sarit that his cooperation this matter will go far in further cementing our mutual relations.

4. The time is short; there is much evidence that unless a Geneva settlement is achieved soon, we may be faced with a new outbreak of hostilities with consequences that are most dangerous.

Sequence and manner in which you present contents this telegram left your discretion. Written confirmation assurances re Article IV (1) Manila Pact would require advance Department approval of text.

Ball

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/1-2162. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Cleveland and Masters; cleared in draft by Harriman, Chayes, and Cross and by Rice, Peters, and McGhee; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Discussed in substance with the President. Repeated to Geneva FECON, to Vientiane, London, Paris, Saigon, and CINCPAC POLA.

1 In telegram 1047, January 21, Young reported a quadrilingual (Thai, Lao, French, and English, often used at once) conversation he had with Sarit; Boun Oum, and Phoumi. Young described it as as “not hopeful.” The principal theme of the meeting, fully endorsed by Sarit, was that if Souvanna became Prime Minister and controlled both the Defense and Interior Ministries, it would be a disaster for Lao anti-Communists and for Thailand. Notwithstanding Young’s efforts to dissuade them, Boun Oum, Phoumi, and Sarit agreed that the RLG could not concede both the Defense or Interior Ministries, despite the fact that Boun Oum had signed a communiqué at Geneva agreeing to do so. (Ibid.)

2 The text of a personal and confidential letter from Kennedy to Sarit, January 20, was transmitted in telegram 1043 to Bangkok, January 20. (Ibid., 751J.00/1–2062)

3 The last paragraph of the January 20 letter reads:

“In closing, I desire to reiterate the determination of the USG to fulfill our obligations as an ally and friend of Thailand which I expressed to your Foreign-Minister H. E. Thanat Khoman. I am very mindful of the observations with respect to our security arrangements which were made to me by the Foreign Minister. They are continuing to receive our attention and we expect shortly to be discussing them more fully with your government.”

4 This article stipulated that an attack on one party to the treaty constituted an attack on all the parties to the treaty and obligated them to act to meet the common danger. For the full text of the Manila Pact, September 8, 1954, see American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents, vol. I, pp. 913–915.

5 Attachment to Document 399.

6 See Documents 419 and 420.

7 For text of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of Korea, October 1, 1953 (5 UST 2368–2376), see American Foreign Policy, 1950–1955: Basic Documents, vol. I, pp. 897–898. For text of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of China, December 2, 1954 (6 UST 433–438), see ibid., pp. 945–947. For text of the Mutual Defense Treaty between the United States and the Republic of the Philippines, August 30, 1951 (3 UST 3947–3952), see ibid., pp. 873–875. For text of the Security Treaty among the United States, New Zealand, and Australia, September 1, 1951 (3 UST 3420–3425), see ibid., pp. 878–880.

425. Editorial Note 425. Editorial Note

The issue of direct Communist aggression against Thailand, which was raised in telegram 1055 to Bangkok (Document 424), was discussed at the daily White House staff meeting on January 25, 1962. According to a memorandum by Ewell, January 25, the discussion went as follows:

“I asked Kaysen why the cable to Thailand reassured Sarit on direct aggression but was much less precise in the field of indirect aggression. He said the thinking on this was that Sarit’s immediate concern seems to be that we would hide behind the British and French in SEATO and not respond if he were attacked, so they reassured him that we consider this a bilateral as well as a multilateral responsibility. The inference is that if Sarit would raise the indirect aggression problem subsequently, they would deal with that problem at the time. It was also mentioned that we have made an economic commitment to Thailand on the irrigation projects. The general approach was that we tell them that if the projects don’t cost more than $40 million we would support them; if they cost more than that, we would have to reconsider whether we would support them.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings, Jan.–Apr. 1962, T-124–69)

426. Memorandum for the Record 426. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, February 1, 1962.

SUBJECT

Minutes of Special Group (CI) Meeting, 1 February 1962

PRESENT

General Taylor, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gilpatric, Major General Parker, and Mr. Helms

Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Bundy, Governor Harriman, and Rear Admiral Heinz were present for Items 1 and 2

[Here follows item 1, in which Hilsman briefed the group on his trip to Vietnam. Hilsman’s report, February 2, is printed in volume II, pages 73–90.]

2. Thailand

Mr. Johnson gave a comprehensive report on conditions in Thailand, with specific reference to the insurgency problem. He concluded that there is a broad political problem and also one of economic development; however, the threat of insurgency is a potential rather than an actual one. The U.S. program now projected would appear to present a workable long-term solution, while the special situation in the Northeast requires some shorter-term actions, a number of which are already in motion.

He touched particularly on Thailand’s fears about SEATO and its uneasy relations with Cambodia. He pointed out that the country is basically stable and fiscally fairly conservative. He noted that the area in the Northeast, and to a lesser extent in the North and in the South, present a possible threat of insurgency. The Northeast is an area which traditionally has supported radicals. It has been generally neglected, and has a lower standard of living than the rest of the country. There is a sizeable number of refugees from Viet-Nam there, who are strongly oriented toward the Communists. Mr. Johnson urged that a positive rather than a repressive approach be taken toward this area. He also noted that conditions in the Northern area could become serious if Communists take over control there, and that the principal problem at this time is communications between that part of the country and the central government. As to the South, he pointed to the problem of a sizeable Malay population which has not been integrated.

He also referred to the Young plan of June 1961 and to the Bowen report.1 He said that it is hoped that these will serve as a basis for a coordinated program with the Thais.

In summing up, Mr. Johnson cited the following major projects which are either underway or programmed:

a. Reorient efforts of the Thai military forces toward the internal security situation;

b. Reequip and strengthen the border police;

c. New roads;

d. Irrigation projects;

e. Political communications programs (USIA);

f. A telecommunications network.

Mr. Hamilton emphasized the fact that Thailand is a promising country for AID programs, particularly because of the cooperative attitude of certain Thai officials and their ability to assure security of financial commitments.

[1 paragraph (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Governor Harriman expanded on Mr. Johnson’s remarks about SEATO, with specific reference to the veto or abstention problem. Admiral Heinz presented figures on training in U.S. schools and in Thailand.

The Chairman suggested that Ambassador Young be told about the existence of the Special Group (CI) and that he be asked whether he is satisfied that enough is being done or is being planned by the U.S. to cope with the problems of Thailand related to insurgency. He suggested that the Ambassador be asked whether the Group can be helpful in any way and that any comments he might wish to make should be solicited.

[Here follows item 3, unrelated to Thailand.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, NSC: Special Group (CI) Mtgs, 6/61–10/62. No classification marking. Drafted by Thomas A. Parrott, the Special Group’s Secretary.

1 See Documents 412 and 416.

427. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 427. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, February 4, 1962, 2:20 p.m.

1134. Embtels 1098, 1124.1 President has agreed that in order relieve at least some of Thai concern re SEATO you should now give RTG full assurances and explanations regarding Manila Pact contained Deptel 1055.2 You should inform RTG these given with President’s personal approval. Suggest that if RTG desires this in writing you develop draft and submit to Dept for approval.

You should make clear to RTG that in view our obligations under SEATO we see no reason for bilateral treaty. View existing commitment under Manila Pact, it would be difficult defend need for such additional treaty to Congress. Feel certain Thanat must be aware of this from his talks here last October. You should stress also fact that RTG has in Manila Pact at least as much and perhaps more from US than we could give in bilateral (Deptel 1055).

Do not understand what Thanat means by “neutral policy outside SEATO” with continued US security guarantees.3 This indicates he does not grasp fundamental fact US guarantees stem from Manila Pact. As you suggested to him Manila Pact is thus indispensable as instrument through which US assurances formalized and given substance. You should point out to RTG in strongest and clearest possible terms that if Thailand destroys SEATO by irresponsible and unwarranted actions such as proposed public statement or boycott Paris meeting it thereby destroys legal basis of our bilateral obligations.4

Appears from reftel that Thanat may actually accept validity US assurances you have given him. We therefore find it difficult understand his concern over whether possible future action by US would be called “SEATO action” or “action taken under the Manila Pact.” We have assured him our commitment under Article IV (1) of Pact not conditioned on prior unanimous consent all SEATO members. US could give no greater assurances at this time through other vehicle. Commitments other SEATO members are additional bonus for RTG. Discussion re what action called therefore appears miss fundamental point.

Regarding voting procedures you should if queried inform RTG we still studying subject and will be prepared discuss in near future.

You might wish remind RTG that as evidence our good faith and determination safeguard Thailand we have in past raised possibility stationing US combat troops in Thailand but this not acceptable to RTG. We now in process sending US engineer battalion to Thailand for road construction in move which has important by product increasing US military presence in area. Our offers build dams, assist in road construction and in many other fields are all evidence our good faith and real concern for continued well-being and friendship Thailand.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–362. Secret.

1 In these telegrams, January 31 and February 3, Young reported that “we are heading into a tangle over SEATO,” and summarized a long list of hostile remarks by Sarit and Thanat about SEATO during the last few days’ discussions on Laos. (Ibid., 379/1–3162 and 379/2–362)

2 Document 424.

3 According to telegram 1098, Young asked Thanat what Thailand really wanted and Thanat answered “some form of Thai neutral policy outside of SEATO.” Young reported that Thanat stated that this solution would be the best thing for Thailand and the United States and assumed that U.S. security guarantees for Thailand would remain in being in some form. Thanat did not express, according to Young, any clear-cut concept and Young did not press him.

4 In telegram 1777 from Bangkok, February 12, Young reported that he orally conveyed to Sarit and Thanat that the Manila Pact was the “indispensable legal instrument” for the U.S. commitment to Thailand, the commitment was not conditioned on prior unanimous consent of SEATO countries, and the United States would help defend Thailand against aggression by means short of armed attack at the same level it was doing so in South Vietnam. Young told Sarit that President Kennedy understood his concern. Sarit stated that an unchanged SEATO was an unacceptable guarantee for Thai security. “America is not SEATO and SEATO is not America,” Sarit maintained, “I don’t like action required by treaty.” (Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1262)

428. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Indonesia 428. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in IndonesiaSource

Washington, February 15, 1962, 9:19 p.m.

1229. For the Attorney General from the Secretary.1 Your stop Bangkok will take place during period real strain in US/Thai relations, stemming mainly from Thai doubts about our policy for peaceful settlement in Laos and Thai unhappiness about “ineffectiveness” of SEATO alliance. Ambassador Young has done his best to convince Thais we have been following right course in Laos and seems to have got the Thais in an acquiescent but clearly not enthusiastic frame of mind.

Thai dissatisfaction with SEATO’s inaction in Laos and Thai fear of similar inaction if Thailand threatened have crystallized Thai hostility toward it. Additional factors lying behind Thai attitude probably include SEATO’s inadequacy as a vehicle for economic aid and feeling that Thai identification with former colonial powers UK and especially France tends to hamper Thai efforts assert leadership among Asian nations or develop closer Asian ties.

Thais have proposed that SEATO should operate under two-thirds majority rule having in mind, we suspect, that this would eliminate British and French restraint over US actions or might even bring about France and UK quitting the alliance. We do not favor this proposal especially in light present Congressional attitudes toward our commitments in Southeast Asia and because of its effect on our relationships with the French and British. We are fully determined keep Treaty intact as an instrument of US national security and as the indispensable legal basis for our security guarantees to the Treaty area.

However SEATO has built up a rather heavy organizational structure including headquarters building in Bangkok with staffs and committees. Thais somehow seem unable distinguish between Manila Treaty, a military alliance with its guarantees against external aggression on the one hand, and SEATO bureaucratic organization, with its preoccupation with nonmilitary matters and its daily frustrations and irritating minor international disagreements; on the other.

FYI only: We have therefore concluded that best way to meet Thai problem is not by a change in voting procedures but rather by building up US relationship with Thailand within SEATO legal framework, at the same time maintaining SEATO as military alliance with necessary military planning and recognizing that the limitations of SEATO’s nonmilitary aspects require serious review. My letter to Thai Foreign Minister (separate message) is a first step in this course of action.2 End FYI.

We would be grateful if you could stress with Thais our genuine concern for Thai security, our conviction that Treaty indispensable means our guarantee this security, and thus our determination preserve Treaty at all costs. Please express to Thanat our hope that he will come to Washington so that we can discuss these matters more fully with him. The President, as you know, is deeply interested in this problem and would also be looking forward to seeing Thanat again.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–1662. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Cleveland; cleared by Harriman, Koren, Czyzak, Peters, McGeorge Bundy (who cleared it with the President), and Rusk; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated priority to Bangkok and to CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, accompanied by his wife, was on a world tour February 4–18, which included visits to Japan, Indonesia, Bangkok, Tehran, Rome, Berlin, Bonn, and the Netherlands with stops in Singapore, Hong Kong, Taipei, Karachi, and Beirut. Kennedy’s stay in Thailand was limited to one day, February 19.

2 See Document 429.

429. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 429. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, February 16, 1962, 9:16 p.m.

1230. Deliver soonest to Foreign Minister text of following letter from Secretary:

“Dear Mr. Minister:

I have been following with interest and increasing concern Ambassador Young’s reports of his recent conversations with you and with His Excellency, the Prime Minister, with respect to SEATO and relations between our two countries. While I know that Ambassador Young has fully presented our views to you, I desire in this way directly to review and discuss these matters with you.

On the part of the United States Government, we deeply value the friendship and support of the Royal Thai Government and, regardless of developments elsewhere, we on our part desire to do all we can to make certain that this friendship is not disrupted through any lack of mutual understanding. We regard the security of Thailand of the highest importance and, in the words of the SEATO Treaty, recognize that aggression against Thailand would endanger our own peace and safety.

Now, with respect to SEATO, I desire to make several points we consider fundamental. First, in spite of any imperfections which it may be considered to have, I think it clear that it has been successful in deterring overt Communist aggression into the Treaty area. While this is not the answer to all of the security problems of the countries in the Treaty area, I would hope that you would agree with me that it is important to maintain this deterrent.

The next point that I would like to make, which perhaps we have not made with sufficient clarity in the past, is that we regard a multilateral collective security pact, such as that of SEATO, as not being less but rather greater than the sum of its parts. By this I mean that we believe that collective arrangements of this nature must support and strengthen the individual efforts of the various signatories rather than weaken them.

Finally, I want to make it clear that the SEATO Pact is the essential and only instrument by which our obligation with respect to the security of Thailand is, within our Constitutional system, given legal validity and substance.

We have, since your visit to Washington last October, given full and careful consideration to your suggestions with respect to a change in the voting procedure of SEATO, as well as to the proposal in this regard Thailand submitted to the Council of Representatives. I appreciate the motives and spirit in which those proposals have been made. However, after a full study of the matter, we doubt whether they would in fact contribute to that increased sense of security and confidence which I know that Thailand is seeking.

As I stated above, we regard the SEATO Treaty as not being less but rather greater than the sum of its parts, as well as the, essential Constitutional instrument for undertaking obligations for Thai security. From this is derived the solemn statement which Ambassador Young has made to your Government, that the United States would give full effect to its obligations under Article 4, Paragraph 1, of the Treaty. In our view, this obligation is not subject to the prior consent of any other signatory to the Treaty.1 Let me point out that our bilateral treaties in the Pacific area are expressed in precisely the same terms. However, I am sure that Thailand would share our view and hope, if unhappily circumstances arose calling for implementation of this Article of the Treaty, that it would be important and of great advantage that as many as possible other members of SEATO also participate in the action.

While at this stage these assurances should remain confidential, I would be prepared to consider with you a suitable form by which they could best be publicly expressed.

With respect to our attitude concerning possible Communist aggression against Thailand by means other than armed attack, I hope that your Government will fully note the actions of the United States in South Viet-Nam. In that country, which has demonstrated the will and capacity of the people and their Government to resist indirect aggression, there have been present the essential conditions for effective support. Although we have not proposed collective SEATO action in that country, we have regarded our commitment to the Treaty area under the SEATO Pact as providing an important basis for our own actions there. It is important to this Government that this basis not be destroyed. Obviously there is no reason to believe that the United States would, in the event of necessity, do less in the case of Thailand than it has in the case of South Viet-Nam.

The President and I would welcome the opportunity of further discussing these matters with you and hope that you might find it possible shortly to come to Washington for this purpose. In the meanwhile, I am inclined to feel that it might be preferable at this time to postpone the SEATO Council meeting now scheduled for Paris in April and am making this suggestion to our fellow Council members.

With kind personal regards and my respects to His Excellency, the Prime Minister, I remain

Sincerely yours, Dean Rusk”.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 379/2–1662. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by U. Alexis Johnson; cleared by Harriman, Chayes, Rusk, Nitze, and McGeorge Bundy (who cleared it with the President); and approved by Johnson. Repeated niact to Djakarta for Robert Kennedy and Unger and to CINCPAC POLAD, Canberra, Karachi, London, Paris, Wellington, and Manila.

1 See footnote 4, Document 427.

430. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 430. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, February 17, 1962, 4:31 p.m.

1234. For Attorney General from Harriman.

1. At direction of President this supplements Deptel 929.1

2. If Sarit becomes “rough”2 President feels not necessary for you just to take it but at your discretion you may “hit back” without of course getting into useless recriminations. Following suggested for your consideration in consultation Young.

3. President is determined on Lao policy of seeking peaceful solution and convinced that it is right one. Long run success of coalition government requires continuing support by all concerned. He feels it in Thai best interests as well as our own. He had thought Sarit had come to agree on this during months of negotiation and was therefore startled to learn that Sarit had at least at one time been advising and encouraging Phoumi behind our back to resist US advice and counsel. It is Phoumi’s intransigence that so far has blocked formation Souvanna coalition government and thus peaceful solution for Laos. Sarit actions vis-à-vis Phoumi are partly responsible for Phoumi attitude and therefore Sarit can be partly blamed for present impasse. We are glad that Sarit has now apparently abandoned this tack despite personal reservations on outcome this policy. All friends of Phoumi and supporters of free independent Laos must speak with one voice to Phoumi. We count on Sarit to use his influence to bring Phoumi to reason. There is great danger in any other course.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/2–1762. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Koren; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to Vientiane.

1 In telegram 929, February 16, Harriman informed Robert Kennedy that he regretted that Sarit involved the Attorney General “in the jungle of Lao problem.” Harriman suggested that if Sarit raised the question, Robert Kennedy should reply that it was not the purpose of his visit to discuss Laos, but he would be prepared to listen to Sarit’s views. Harriman then provided background on U.S. policy for the Attorney General’s benefit. (Ibid.)

2 On February 8, Sarit informed the press he planned to ask Robert Kennedy very direct questions about Laos: what did the United States intend to do; would it allow Laos to go neutral and then Communist; who would rid Laos of the Communists when they took over. (Telegram 1182 from Bangkok, February 12; ibid., 033.1100-KE/2–1262)

431. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 431. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, February 20, 1962, 7 p.m.

1242. Attorney General visit. I took Attorney General Feb 19 to meet with PriMin Sarit. There were also present Foreign Minister Thanat, Finance Minister Sunthorn, General Wallop, Director Armed Forces Intelligence School, and Sarit’s aides—Generals Chalermchai and Egasak. General Chitti, Chief of Staff of Army, joined group later. DCM Unger and Francis accompanied me.

In opening meeting Atty Gen told PriMin President Kennedy was anxious that he explain to Thailand’s leaders administration’s strong feelings for Thailand and its clear commitments to Thailand. He emphasized friendship between two countries, both involved in struggle with Communism, and hoped close working relations would continue.

After brief discussion on Laos (reported Embtel 1231),1 Atty Gen asked about problem of Communism within Thailand. PriMin stated this is serious problem although Communists have no real indigenous organization within country. Their activities in Thailand depend on reinforcement from abroad, principally Pathet Lao. Appeal is to poverty stricken and those ignorant of real nature Communism. Also noted some, but not much, activity by Communists in press.

Sarit stated Thai Govt efforts meet challenge Communists must therefore concentrate on improvement standards of living and removing illiteracy, especially in northeast. For this reason PriMin himself is chairman of northeast development committee through which a beginning is being made improve living situation population there. Success of these endeavors depends in part on timely receipt American aid, currently being discussed between RTG and USOM. If cooperation which has been under discussion with US officials is realized, RTG will be in position to meet danger.

Atty Gen referred to President Kennedy’s strong feeling that our ability to survive in struggle with Communism will depend on being able fight unconventional warfare. He described how President has formulated new policy in this field and instituted extensive guerrilla and counter guerrilla training. In response to his query about what RTG is doing in this, PriMin at first asked Generals Wallop and Chitti brief us in very general terms of Thai Govt intentions and programs in this field which was not very enlightening. Referring to current dangerous situation in Laos, Sarit then explained how he had recently ordered moving of Thai units to border areas adjoining Laos to help control growing threat Communist infiltration. He also referred to Thai personnel currently active in counter guerrilla warfare in Laos, in conjunction with or in cooperation with the US, and other special units such as the Rangers. The Atty Gen stressed the important role of the Border Police.2 General Chitti described the cooperation between this unit, the army and civil volunteer corps. Work in the psychological warfare field was also described.

After some further discussion of the need to develop unconventional war capability, Atty Gen concluded this discussion by referring once more to changes which President had ordered in US military and by offering some of newly trained experts to come to Thailand and help with similar work here. He stressed absolute necessity building up anti-guerrilla forces while there is still time; for at least next ten years military answer is not atomic bomb but counter guerrilla capability and it especially important that Thailand move forward.

The Atty Gen next inquired about Thai Govt efforts on social front and asked PriMin whether satisfied with progress to date. Sarit referred to preparation of various blueprints and plans for activities in educational, informational and other fields which are still at talking stage; important now start to move forward and get beyond planning stage. I reported briefly on last week’s trip to northeastern Thailand and identified small roads, water, health and education as the primary needs, together with knitting of villages together. There was agreement on all sides that as soon as possible actions must be begun to take place of planning. Atty Gen said President Kennedy feels strong need to move ahead these days recognizing some mistakes may be made but forward progress is essential.

Atty Gen emphasized need for cooperation among Southeast Asian countries3 and noted present US administration impressed with determination and fighting spirit of Thailand, as result of which we can work well together. He added same spirit prevails South Vietnam where US is determined that we will win in struggle against Communism. Both he and PriMin agreed free world must go on political offensive and use the truth as the principal weapon in demonstrating that the free and democratic system is revolutionary idea and a forward move in history and that Communism is a backward step.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.1100–KE/2–2062. Secret. Repeated to CINCPAC POLAD, priority to Rome, and to Saigon and Vientiane.

1 In telegram 1231, February 19, Young reported that, at his suggestion, Robert Kennedy took the initiative on Laos and and made an effective, succinct statement based on telegram 929 to Bangkok, February 16 (see footnote 1, Document 430). Sarit responded that while Thailand did not completely agree with U.S. views, it would nonetheless adjust its policy accordingly. Should neutralization of Laos under Souvanna Phouma fail, however, Sarit expected close U.S.-Thai consultation in examining other policies. (Ibid., 033.1100-KE/2–1962)

2 In telegram 1232, February 19, Young added a postscript to the Kennedy-Sarit conversation by reporting that Kennedy had asked about improving and expanding equipment for Border Police during his discussion with Sarit. When Kennedy learned that an agreement to this end had been signed a month ago, he said he would cable Washington and ask that the project be expedited. (Ibid.)

3 Kennedy had called on SEATO Secretary General Pote Sarasin in the afternoon of February 19; see Document 21.

432. Memorandum 432. MemorandumSource

Bangkok, February 26, 1962.

SUBJECT

Comments by Prime Minister Sarit

1. On 22 February 1962 Prime Minister Sarit, after his discussions with Attorney General Robert Kennedy,1 called [1 line of source text not declassified] for an outspoken and frank discussion of the political situation in Thailand and contiguous areas. Sarit apparently desired, to amplify and express his views more forcefully than he chose to do with Ambassador Young and Attorney General Kennedy. During the course of the discussions Sarit was joined by General Suthi Suthisarn Ronakary, Deputy Commander in Chief of the Army; General Chitti Nawisathien, Minister of Defense; Lt. General Wallop Rochanawisut, Director of Joint Intelligence of the Army; and Major General Chalermchai Charuwat, aide to Sarit and Director of Tourism. All Thai participants expressed themselves outspokenly on SEATO, Laos, U.S. aid and other subjects and set forth the following points:

2. SEATO—Sarit stated, “We are not threatening to get out of SEATO, we are getting out.” [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] countered every argument put forth by Sarit and Sarit then called in the generals named above to assist him in his attack on SEATO. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reiterated U.S. policy concerning SEATOand made it clear to them that if the Thais pull out of SEATO they will be playing directly into the hands of the Communists whose aim is to destroy SEATO. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] believes his arguments made an impression, Sarit thanked [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for his frankness and said that he was going to send Thanat to discuss SEATO with the U.S. Secretary of State and the President. He then ordered General Wallop to accompany Thanat.

3. Laos—Sarit and his generals criticized the U.S. position in Laos, complained about sporadic aid to Laos, our foolishness for thinking that Souvanna could form a neutral government, our throwing money down the drain in Laos and other places in the area, and having a very tight purse string as concerns Thailand. They praised U.S. action in South Vietnam but stated that any military commander knows he must protect his flank. In this case, the South Vietnam flank (i.e., Laos) is not being protected but instead is being given over to the Communists who will continue to use it as a route into South Vietnam for their troops. Sarit and his generals claimed that a two-pronged attack is necessary—South Vietnam and up from Thailand into Laos—if Laos, South Vietnam and the whole area, including Thailand, are to be saved. They admitted that Phoumi was not the best soldier in the world but that he is anti-Communist and willing to fight on the side of the free world. However, he has not been given the proper support and assistance. Sarit and his generals maintained that the U.S. does not know how to help Asian people.

4. Needless to say, the discussion was heated. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] did make one thing very clear, that it was the U.S. President’s decision that we should make a supreme effort to have a truly neutral Laos and that it was absolutely essential that the Sarit government give the present plans for the Souvanna government its wholehearted support. The U.S. did not want to put troops in Laos. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] knew that the Thais did not want to do that either and therefore urged that all concerned try to make the planned Souvanna government work. Sarit had many things to say about this, all of which have been reported already either through Embassy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] channels, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] told Sarit “not to be a fool”, that he was only hurting himself by his bullheadedness, that he should whip Phoumi into line. After much heated discussion on this matter, Sarit threw up his hands and said, “You win”, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] asked Sarit to tell Phoumi to stop being so stubborn and bullheaded and give the plan a try (conversation between Sarit and Phoumi on 22 February has been reported [document number not declassified].2 Sarit again spoke of Souvanna, bringing up the usual points and then added, “And I had much of this confirmed to me by an American, Igor Oganesoff of the Wall Street Journal” (Apparently Oganesoff gave Sarit the results of an interview which has been reported by the Embassy in Vientiane.) [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] finally told Sarit that Sarit had no alternative but to go along with the Souvanna government. The only thing he would do by opposing it was to hurt himself and his government.

5. U.S. Aid—Sarit repeated what he had said to Mr. Kennedy regarding aid. He said, “We are not begging for more aid, but what is promised should be expedited and should not be strung out as our military aid is now.” He mentioned specifically planes and tanks, delivery of which is now being spread out until 1964. He stated that, “This year we will only get two tanks.” General Chitti said that the Royal Thai Army is, in fact, a conventional army and since it will always be that it needs all the conventional military weapons immediately. Regarding guerrilla warfare, he stated, “We have sufficient forces now in the form of the Rangers and the police units. Wars are not won by guerrilla units, you have to have conventional forces.” [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] explained the important role of guerrilla warfare in this area, but was positive that this did not change the minds of Sarit and Chitti.

6. Sarit stated that he was very happy to meet with Mr. Robert Kennedy but was sorry that the visit was so short, adding, “Mr. Kennedy has a fine, sharp mind and I would have liked to discuss matters with him at greater length. He is one of the most impressive visitors the U.S. has sent to Thailand but he did not stay long enough.” Sarit grumbled about the fact that he only spent 22 hours in Bangkok, while in Japan and Indonesia he spent many days.

7. Sarit made his usual remarks about Cambodia, especially Prince Sihanouk, and about India.

8. A complete report of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] meeting with Sarit has been made to Ambassador Young.2

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, 13.2 Foreign Policy. Secret. There is no indication on the source text who drafted the memorandum.

1 See Document 431.

2 Not found.

2 Not found.

433. Memorandum of Conversation 433. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 2, 1962, 4:05 p.m.

SUBJECT

Thailand’s Security and Developments in Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

H.E. Thanat Khoman, Thai Foreign Minister1

H.E. Visutr Arthayukti, Thai Ambassador

Lt. Gen. Wallop Rojanavisudh, Director of Joint Intelligence

Mr. Anand Panyarachun, Secretary to the Foreign Minister

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson

Gov. W. Averell Harriman

Mr. Richard B. Peters

Ambassador Kenneth T. Young, Jr.

Mr. Henry L. T. Koren

Mr. Edward E. Masters

The Secretary opened the substantive discussion with the comment that the Seato Treaty forms an important basis for our security relations in Southeast Asia. We consider that the commitments under this Treaty are individual and rest on the United States; they are not just collective on the SEATO Organization. As one example of this the Secretary cited the situation in South Viet-Nam. One important basis through which our obligations in that country are met is the SEATO Treaty. In acting there we did not seek prior agreement of the other SEATO members, but merely informed them of our intentions. We believe the formulation we have suggested in our proposed joint statement2 may help meet Thailand’s security needs regarding direct Communist aggression. We also wish to discuss with the Foreign Minister here and through our Ambassador in Bangkok steps we can take in the social and economic fields to help Thailand resist Communist penetration.

The Foreign Minister said he did not believe the US and Thai Governments are very far apart regarding SEATO. He said Thailand still believes in the principle of collective security. However, its faith in the performance of the SEATO Organization has been shaken. The Thai Government cannot continue to delude the Thai people regarding the effectiveness of the SEATO Organization. His Government, the Foreign Minister said, had been informed that the United States wanted the SEATO Treaty to continue. The Thai are willing to agree to this although changes will be needed in the “understanding” of the Treaty rather than in the Treaty itself. Thailand believes the United States should agree that if the Treaty is to be the instrument for maintaining peace in the area, action under the Treaty should not be dependent upon the consent of all other members.

The Foreign Minister said that Thailand would actually prefer a bilateral treaty with the United States similar to that which the US has with The Philippines and several other Far Eastern countries. Such an agreement would eliminate the problem caused by the presence in SEATO of former colonial powers. These nations “tarnish the luster” of the Organization; they separate Thailand from other SEA nations and make regional cooperation in the area more difficult. However, the United States is apparently not willing to conclude a bilateral treaty; therefore, the Thai are willing to let the SEATO Treaty continue. The Secretary replied that a bilateral US-Thai treaty would create domestic problems for us. We already have a Senate-approved agreement linking us together, and the Congress would almost certainly question the need for a separate treaty.

The Secretary said that the matter of timing is an extremely important factor in the field of security. Northeast Thailand is a case in point. The United States certainly does not want to postpone meeting the problems of the area until they become too difficult. A later remedy would be far more difficult than preventive action now. We, therefore, need to look at what measures our two Governments can take to meet this situation. We also need to be certain that others understand our determination to protect our mutual interests; that they are aware that aggression will be met by prompt counter-measures.

Governor Harriman observed that the United States has, unfortunately, been slow in the past in some fields in its foreign assistance. He expressed the hope that we can now reach a firm understanding that the US will take prompt action on needed programs.

The Secretary mentioned the need for closer regional cooperation in SEA. If relations among nations in the area were so close that any threat to one caused a sharp reaction by the others, then this would be an impediment to aggressive action from the North. An association of countries in the area with strong support from the West could have some advantages. Thailand should not, however, interpret this as meaning that we are not interested in the present arrangement. We only hope that a way might eventually be found to move in the direction of regional cooperation without SEATO being a barrier.

The Foreign Minister mentioned that progress had already begun on a modest scale within the Association of Southeast Asia (ASA). The main problem is, however, that two of the three ASA members belong to SEATO. The recent military takeover in Burma might eventually help strengthen the organization since Ne Win has told Thailand that he is sympathetic to the need for non-military regional cooperation.

Regarding the security of Thailand, the Foreign Minister said his Government is fully prepared to do everything possible in the military and economic fields to ward off the Communist threat. The Prime Minister himself has been paying great attention to the Northeast recently and the Thai Government wants to push ahead as rapidly as possible with development of this area. The Foreign Minister said this is one reason why he was asked to discuss the three irrigation projects during his visit.

Ambassador Young said that he had been informed by AID earlier that day that AID would send several experts to Bangkok within the next week or so to study these irrigation projects.

The Foreign Minister gave the Secretary a copy of Prime Minister Sarit’s letter to President Kennedy.3 He said that the Prime Minister would like a US security assurance from the highest level of the United States Government. Such an assurance would have a strong impact in Thailand and is needed for internal purposes. These assurances from the President could be in the form of a letter or some similar vehicle. The main thing is that they could be published in Thailand. The Secretary replied that the United States would need to consider this carefully to see if the President would need to consult with anyone in the region or confer with other SEATO members.

The Secretary asked the Foreign Minister’s views on the reasons why the Vietnamese fight against the Communists while the Laotians show little willingness to defend themselves. The Foreign Minister replied that the Vietnamese are activists. Some Lao are willing to fight, as for example, the Pathet Lao, but most are more passive. Governor Harriman said that the Pathet Lao which fight are stiffened by the presence of the Viet-Minh. General Wallop commented that he believed Laotians are the same whether they are Pathet Lao or non-Pathet Lao; the essential factor is their leadership. The Lao basically are easygoing; everything depends on their leader who is a symbol for them. The Secretary said he did not believe the Laotians themselves would cause any particular trouble if we can get the foreigners, especially the Viet-Minh, out of Laos. The Foreign Minister said this might be true, but we must bear in mind that the Lao themselves are naive. This is shown by the fact that Katay, who was a member of the Lao delegation at the Bandung Conference, signed an agreement with Chou En-lai that China would not interfere in Laos.

The Foreign Minister reviewed his Government’s position that there are only two groups in Laos rather than three (that Souvanna and the Pathet Lao are one faction). He said that if the present Lao government is forced out, the experience of the Communist takeover in China could easily be repeated. The Foreign Minister also repeated his Government’s reservations on the ability of Souvanna Phouma.

Governor Harriman said the United States believes Kong Le and Souvanna can be separated from the. Pathet Lao. The Secretary observed that this depends partly on the ability to get the Viet-Minh out of Laos. Governor Harriman noted that the United States would not pull its forces out until the other side had done so.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/3–262. Secret Drafted by Masters and approved in Son March 15. The time of the meeting is taken from Rusk’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

1 Thanat visited Washington March 1–6 at Rusk’s suggestion; see Document 429. Just before this meeting with Rusk, Thanat met with Harriman to discuss West New Guinea and Laos. On Laos, Thanat denied that Thailand was trying to “cook up anything” with Phoumi, but Phoumi was difficult to influence. Harriman and Thanat disagreed on whether Souvanna represented a real neutral faction. Harriman warned that Phoumi was leading Laos toward disaster. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/3–262)

2 The joint statement was released on March 6; for text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

3 In the letter, February 27, Sarit informed President Kennedy that despite serious misgivings, Thailand was "making genuine efforts to adjust” its views on Laos to those of the United States. Sarit also requested from Kennedy a unilateral or joint declaration with Thailand “that in the event of an armed attack or attacks by other means against Thailand, the United States will co-operate with this country in the defence of its freedom without waiting for a unanimous decision by the Council of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.” (Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, 16.1 US-Thai Relations)

434. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 434. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource

Washington, March 5, 1962.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with Thanat Khoman, the Thai Foreign Minister

We do not expect your meeting with Mr. Khoman will last longer than one-half hour. When you see him he will already have had two sessions with the Secretary1 well as meetings with McNamara, Harriman, etc.2

Khoman is a diplomat after the French school. He speaks English and French fluently. He was the permanent Thai delegate to the U.N. 1952–57; Ambassador to Washington 1957–59, when he became Foreign Minister. He is one of the few of his generation specifically picked and trained for his profession. He is recognized by all as an able, intelligent representative of his government, but also has been described as blunt, stubborn and emotional [1 line of source text not declassified]. His political power in Thailand lies solely in his relationship with Sarit.

Khoman will be primarily interested in discussing his country’s dissatisfaction with SEATO and Thai relations with its Southeast Asian neighbors. I think it would be helpful by way of background if you read the Department’s brief scope paper.3

As for SEATO, Khoman regards it as a moribund organization and probably will point to its failure to act in Laos. He distrusts the presence of the UK and France in the organization and deplores the great delays in reaching even minute decisions in the Council. He would like to have a 3/4 majority vote carry in the Council instead of unanimity; thereby neutralizing the anticipated negative votes of the UK and France. He would like to have a new bilateral treaty with the U.S. He will argue that Thailand can no longer feel secure under present conditions.

You may wish to reply to Khoman by saying that there are, indeed, many frustrations in SEATO, but that these stem mainly from the nonmilitary aspects of the organization; that in your view this should not be allowed to obscure the military importance this country attaches to the alliance.

As for voting procedures, you might say that it is your considered view that Thailand’s security would not be increased by a change in the present unanimity rule; that there would be no question as to unanimity in the event of an overt armed communist attack against Thailand. With respect to other types of aggression, we are now giving South Vietnam full support, and that if the need arises, we would not do less for Thailand.

With regard to a bilateral Thai-U.S. Defense Treaty, Thailand already has in the SEATO language virtually every guarantee that could be included in a bilateral treaty. Moreover, we already have informed Thailand that we would not be bound by any SEATO member in acting to meet aggression against Thailand.

There is one new idea that you may wish to explore with Khoman: We know there is a threat of communist subversion in northeast Thailand and that SEATO has agreed in principle to establish a new Counter-Subversion Office. The U.S. is prepared to support this move, but we would like to explore with Thailand whether the best way to do it is through SEATO, bilaterally or otherwise. What are Khoman’s views?

As for Thailand’s neighbors—Laos and South Vietnam—I doubt that Khoman will raise any problems not fully familiar to you. Thailand and Cambodia broke relations in October 1961 because of invidious press comments by both Sarit and Sihanouk, and there is little hope that their relations will soon be resumed. You might ask Khoman how he views the recent change of government in Burma.

McGeorge Bundy4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 3/1/62–3/8/62. Secret.

1 Regarding Thanat’s first session with Rusk, see Document 433. The second session took place at the Department of State on March 5, from 3 to 4:18 p.m. Rusk and Thanat agreed on release of their joint statement, discussed strategies on the upcoming SEATO Council meeting, and exchanged views on Laos. On the last topic, Rusk stated that the United States was not giving up its interests in Laos. Thanat outlined where Thailand disagreed with U.S. policy, but stated that Thailand would support U.S. policy. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.13/3–562)

2 Thanat and McNamara met on March 5 and discussed the situation in Vietnam, U.S. military assistance to Thailand, the threat to northeast Thailand, and the importance of good intelligence. (Ibid., FE/SEA/Thailand Files: Lot 66 D 298, 19.3a, Thanat’s visit (March 1–5)) Regarding Harriman’s discussion with Thanat on March 2, see footnote 1, Document 433. Harriman also met with Thanat on March 3 and stated that the President was not going to allow Phoumi, who alone was blocking formation of a government, to dictate U.S. policy and force the United States into intervention in Laos. (Telegram 1331 to Bangkok, March 6; Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/3–662) Thanat met with the Administrator of AID, Fowler Hamilton, on March 5, and they discussed Thai irrigation projects. (Ibid., FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, 19.3a, Thanat Visit (March 1–5)

3 Not further identified.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

435. Memorandum of Conversation 435. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 5, 1962, 4:31–5:07 p.m.

SUBJECT

Thai Foreign Minister’s Call on the President

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister of Thailand

H.E. Visutr Arthayukti, Ambassador of Thailand

Lt. Gen. Wallop Rojanavisudh, Director, Joint Intelligence

Mr. Anand Panyarachun, Secretary to the Foreign Minister

The President of the United States

The Secretary of State

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson, Dpty Under Secretary for Pol. Affairs Ambassador Kenneth T. Young

Mr. H. L. T. Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs

The President expressed appreciation to the Foreign Minister for making this trip to discuss our mutual problems. The President felt the visit had worked out well and the matter of one nation being able to block SEATO action had been taken care of to our two nations’ satisfaction. The Foreign Minister indicated agreement and expressed appreciation to the President for receiving him.

The President said he did not feel that his letter to the Foreign Minister1 should be released until we knew better the course of things in Laos. It might be interpreted as writing off Laos. The Foreign Minister said he thought there should be a reasonable interval; anyway, the Prime Minister would have to reply and then the two Governments could consult concerning the release. He then handed the President the Prime Minister’s letter2 which the President read and expressed his thanks for.

The President then stated to the Foreign Minister his policy on Laos and his reasons therefor. A solution under Souvanna Phouma was the only acceptable course. If his coalition government could not be organized, the cease-fire would be nibbled away and the country would become completely disrupted. Any intervention under a modified SEATO Plan 53 by the nations that might participate would be very hazardous. Most unsatisfactory for all would be a military victory by the Pathet Lao, and under present conditions they could win against the RLG very quickly. This would give them great prestige in Southeast Asia and have bad effects in Thailand. The President could not send U.S. forces just anywhere—he had to have very good reasons. He was not trying to press an unpleasant course of action on the Thai Government, but the British and French were supporting Souvanna and he urged that the Thais do likewise and see how the situation evolved.

The Foreign Minister said that Thailand was not supporting Phoumi as a distant relative of the Prime Minister but because of his strong anti-Communism. The President replied that Phoumi had no military force that could prevent the Communists from taking over if the current truce broke down. If open hostilities broke out the U.S. and Thailand would find it difficult to intervene alone in this land-locked terrain where our great strength in air and sea forces could not be used to best advantage.

The President emphasized he did not want Phoumi to throw in the sponge, but rather support Souvanna and participate in the government. He would hope the Prime Minister would try to persuade Phoumi not to quit but to cooperate in all our best interests. If he refused to participate it would throw the whole picture into imbalance. The Foreign Minister felt the need of safeguards under Souvanna and suggested getting the key posts of Defense and Interior into safe hands, not those of Souvanna Phouma, but perhaps Phoumi. The President agreed there were dangers in Souvanna but said we should put our faith in him.

Secretary Rusk referred to the Geneva agreements which called for the departure of foreign elements from Laos which would include the Viet Minh. The Foreign Minister said there were two categories of Viet Minh, the regular and the clandestine forces, and it would be hard to root out the latter. He added that he was not asking the U.S. to commit itself to war or the intervention of U.S. troops but he did feel other solutions should be tried such as Phoumi’s King’s Council idea. The President answered that we had been at this problem for eleven months now and had reached agreement on Souvanna. Perhaps it might have been possible six months ago to talk of the King solution but now it was much more difficult. Time was indeed running against us. The President reiterated the urgency of persuading Phoumi not to quit but to cooperate, and he hoped the Prime Minister would help. They should tell Phoumi that the U.S. was not unfriendly to him. We respected his character and if he left the chances of holding the line would become less and less.

The Foreign Minister said he would report all this to his Prime Minister and he was quite sure the latter would follow the President’s desires. The President’s views carried a great deal of weight in Thailand. He also expressed the hope that there would not be too long a delay in publishing the exchange of letters between the President and Prime Minister after the Prime Minister had sent his answer.

On behalf of their Majesties and the Thai Government, the Foreign Minister invited the President and Mrs. Kennedy to visit Thailand sometime in the near future. The President said they would be delighted to see Thailand. The Foreign Minister also expressed the hope that Mrs. Kennedy might be able to stop in Bangkok after visiting India. The President expressed thanks but explained Mrs. Kennedy’s trip was already too long and was being cut.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.13/3–562. Secret. Drafted by Koren and approved in S and the White House on March 15. The time of this meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 The text of the President’s letter is in telegram 1351 to Bangkok, March 8. In the letter, Kennedy expressed appreciation for Thanat’s visit and his expression of Thailand’s concerns. Kennedy noted that the Rusk–Thanat joint statement reflected his position as well as that of the United States. (Department of State, Central Files, 033.9211/3–862)

2 See footnote 3, Document 433.

3 See footnote 2, Document 405.

436. Editorial Note 436. Editorial Note

Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Lyman Lemnitzer were in Athens for the North Atlantic Council meeting of Foreign and Defense Ministers May 3–6, 1962. According to Lemnitzer’s recollections, they received instructions from President Kennedy to go at once to Thailand and determine: 1) whether the Mekong River would be considered an effective barrier to Pathet Lao/North Vietnamese advance and 2) whether Thai forces had the capability of preventing a Communist forces invasion of northern Thailand. Lemnitzer recalls that he and McNamara traveled non-stop to Bangkok and then transferred to a C-47 aircraft. They flew along the Mekong River at heights of 100–200 feet and quickly realized that the river posed no obstacle at all. It was the dry season and the water level had dropped so low that McNamara and Lemnitzer saw people wading across the river. They then inspected some Thai military posts and concluded that, as currently positioned, Thai troops would not be able to block a Communist crossing. (Interview of General Lyman Lemnitzer by Walker S. Poole, JCS History Division, December 16, 1976; as cited in Walker S. Poole, The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, volume VII: 1961–1962, Part II, The Succession of Crisis, pages 126–127)

McNamara, Lemnitzer, Young, and others met with Sarit and leading Thai military and government officials on May 9. They discussed Laos, Thai defense needs and plans, the U.S. response to the Laos crisis, suggested Thai actions, and U.S. assistance to the Thai military. In the discussion of how to respond to the crisis in Laos, McNamara specifically asked whether the presence of U.S. troops in Thailand caused any political problems. Sarit answered that it did not. (Memorandum of conversation, May 9; Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, 19.1 US Visits to Thailand, January through July 1962)

437. Editorial Note 437. Editorial Note

On May 10, 1962, at 4:30 p.m., the President met with his advisers in the White House to consider actions to arrest the deteriorating situation in Laos. Assistant Secretary of State Averell Harriman and other Department officials recommended to the President that the United States move the Seventh Fleet task force to the Gulf of Siam and send the 1,000-man U.S. Army battle group from Korat to the Nong Khai near the Thai border with Laos. The battle group had been in Thailand for a Thai-U.S. training exercise, codenamed Air Cobra. Finally, with a view to possible Thai participation in Laos, the Department of State recommended that the United States institute a longer range program of improved communications (especially roads) leading up to the Laos border. President Kennedy observed that Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and JCS Chairman General Lyman Lemnitzer were returning from South Vietnam to Washington within 2 days. Kennedy decided to await their return before making any final decisions, but he agreed as a “purely preparatory move” that units of the Seventh Fleet should be moved to the Gulf of Siam without public announcement. A May 10 memorandum from Michael V. Forrestal to the President with attached paper and a memorandum for the record, May 10, are printed in volume XXIV, pages 729–735.

On May 12, McNamara and Lemnitzer returned to Washington and met with the President and his advisers in a meeting at 4:30 p.m. Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested that units of the Seventh Fleet already ordered into the area be given specific instructions on their deployment in Thailand. Secretary of Defense McNamara recommended that the Seventh Fleet’s aircraft carriers Valley Forge and Hancock (with escort vessels) be ordered to the vicinity of Bangkok. Airborne units in Okinawa and Clark Field should be alerted in support of the naval move. The President agreed with these recommendations and the Joint Chiefs of Staff sent the instructions to the Commander in Chief, Pacific, Admiral Felt. A memorandum of conversation, May 12, and JCS telegram 4527 to CINCPAC, May 12, are printed ibid., pages 745–746 and 754–755.

On the question of transferring the U.S. battle group to Nong Khai, Harriman recommended that the move be postponed for a day or two unless the situation in Laos deteriorated rapidly allowing time for a démarche with General Phoumi Nosavan and other Lao leaders. A memorandum from Forrestal to Kennedy, May 12, is printed ibid., pages 746–747.

438. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 438. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, May 12, 1962, 9:10 p.m.

1742. Eyes only for Young and Harkins and Brown and Thompson and Nolting. Joint State-Defense message.

1. General Harkins proceeding immediately to Bangkok. You should seek on most urgent basis appointment (you and Harkins) with Sarit.

2. Request from Sarit permission to land and deploy in Thailand following U.S. troops with mission as indicated:1

(a) Offload Valley Forge BLT and helos Bangkok and move to Udorn.

(b) Move one Marine attack squadron to Udorn.

(c) Move Battle Group (minus) 27th Inf to Ubon.

(d) Reinforce Battle Group (minus) to self-contained unit strength.

(e) Reinforce 9th Logistic Command Unit now at Korat as necessary to support operations of Battle Group Reinforced.

(f) Move one USAF Tactical Air Squadron plus necessary supporting units to Thailand, exact location at your discretion provided satisfactory to RTG.

(g) Move CJTF-116 and necessary elements his staff, his component commanders and their staffs to Thailand. Assign all US combat units Thailand to his operational control

Interim mission forces concerned is to give clear indication US intentions carry out commitments assist in defense Thailand, precautionary impact these actions on situation in Laos, and to position US forces for faster reaction time for possible further actions subject to future decisions.

3. Inform Sarit appointment Harkins as over-all commander US forces Thailand (COMUSMACTHAI) in addition, present duties as COMUSMACV. Task Force 116 (Richardson) and CHJUSMAG (Johnson) report direct to Harkins.

4. Seek assurances from Sarit of Thai cooperation and specifically facilities support such as use their airfields, port facilities, rail and road communication nets as required.

5. Discuss with Sarit possible additional Thai force deployments along Lao border and advise what he proposes.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1262. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Koren; cleared by Harriman, McNamara, and Forrestal; and approved, by Rush. Repeated priority to Moscow and niact to Vientiane, CINCPAC, and Saigon.

1 In JCS telegram 4527 to CINCPAC, May 12, Admiral Felt was sent these instructions with the proviso that they were contingent on the conclusion of necessary diplomatic arrangements. No forces were to enter Thailand until that diplomatic clearance was obtained. (Ibid., 751J.00/5–1362, and OSD Historical Office, Secretary of Defense’s Cable File, Thailand 1962) See also Document 437.

439. Editorial Note 439. Editorial Note

On May 13, 1962, at 4:50 p.m., President Kennedy met with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Attorney General Kennedy, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, Assistant Secretary Harriman, General Taylor, Director of Central Intelligence McCone, Charles Bohlen, Roger Hilsman, McGeorge Bundy, Carl Kaysen, and Michael Forrestal. Most of the discussion at the meeting concerned Laos, but the related question of deployment of U.S. troops to Thailand was also discussed. According to Forrestal’s memorandum of conversation: ‘The President requested that an intelligence estimate be prepared on the reaction of SEATO nations to a request from us for their cooperation in our proposed military moves in Thailand. The President asked that in any press coverage, the question of our military intentions with respect to Laos be left open. The President desired to maintain vis-à-vis the Communist bloc an attitude of Veiled ambiguity’.

“The President asked the Secretary of State to get the approval of the Thai Government to the proposed landings. General Taylor suggested that an attempt be made by General Harkins, who is to be the Commander of the U.S. Forces in Thailand, to obtain from Marshal Sarit a promise of cooperation. The President asked that the Secretary of State get in touch with the Congressional leadership to inform them that he was planning to authorize the landing of American forces in Thailand.”

The meeting concluded with the following discussion of the military moves in Thailand: “The President said that cables should go to Ambassadors Brown, Young and Nolting explaining the military movements. The Secretary of State observed that these military moves should be taken under the SEATO umbrella but that formal SEATO approval would not be requested at this time.

“The President repeated that he wished to retain the element of reversibility in all military actions. He wanted no public announcement of landings until after he had ordered such landings. Furthermore, he wanted it again made clear to the Lao that we were undertaking no new commitment towards them.”

The full text of this memorandum is printed in volume XXIV, pages 758–760.

440. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 440. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 14, 1962, 1 a.m.

1760. CINCPAC niact by other means. For State and Defense. Eyes Only. From Young and Harkins. Deptel 1742.1 We saw Sarit Sunday evening. DCM and Gen Johnson accompanied us. FonMin Thanat, DefMin Thanom and top Thai mil staff present. I outlined points in reftel and added question of press treatment if RTG approved.

Sarit asked me to convey appreciation to President for his interest in Thailand’s security and for this decision. Sarit agreed to all movements in para 2 reftel. He said question of exact locations could be worked out jointly tomorrow. He requested we deploy troops to field rather than locate them in cities or towns, and take particular care to develop good relations with local people to prevent unpleasant incident and create good will on both sides. He also requested maximum use air transport to avoid burdening rails or roads or interfere with civilians. We agreed in principle with his request. Sarit assured us of full cooperation in use of facilities within above understanding.

Gen Harkins suggested and Sarit agreed we send small forward elements immediately to Bangkok to plan facilities, etc. Harkins deputized CHJUSMAAG act for COMUSMACTHAI. Recommend advanced detachment arrive as soon as possible. Gen Harkins also said his HQRS staff would be small.

Sarit told us Nam Thai affair seriously jeopardizing Thailand’s security, adding burdens in caring for refugees and moving army units to frontier, and requiring additional actions to counter any ChiCominspired insurgency or subversion in Thailand. He and Air Marshal Dawee described FAR route, lack of will to fight, and demoralization Lao troops in crossing Mekong.

I asked about additional Thai deployments along frontier but Sarit said they had not yet decided on sending more than units now deployed: inf bn at Chieng Khong, inf co at Chieng Saen, RCT hdq Chiengrai, mtn pack inf co at Pua, inf co opposite Paksane, inf co at Nakorn Panom. Parent battalions are on alert to support companies, and entire 4th Division in north also on alert.

Thais agreed on importance adequate and timely public announcement by RTG regarding US deployments, with release by USG in Washington same time. Sarit suggested explanation be related to Rusk–Thanat communiqué.2

But third mission, i.e., to position US forces for faster reaction time for possible further actions subject to future decision, holds important implications for RTG which Sarit and Thanat immediately seized on. They pressed me for details on US views regarding this contingency in Laos. I ducked it by stressing first two missions and USG policy press on for successful political settlement. Sarit said he is very worried about future in Laos because he concludes from his inspection of FAR Saturday3 that Phoumi’s strategy is not to fight for cities and areas in north half Laos, including Luang Prabang and Vientiane, and move south if forced to. This would be serious blow to Thailand, Sarit emphasized. He hoped USG would prevent it, and seemed assume the US forces we are now agreed to deploy to Thailand for its defense will also contribute to this objective of his. I report this point because it obviously was important consideration underlying Sarit’s approval tonight.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Niact. Received on May 13 at 6 p.m. and relayed to the White House. Repeated priority to Moscow, Saigon, and Vientiane.

1 Document 438.

2 See footnote 2, Document 433.

3 May 12.

441. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 441. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, May 13, 1962, 11:25 p.m.

1747, Eyes only Ambassador from Secretary. Reference your 17601 and satisfactory talk with Sarit. Purpose of troop movements is to reinforce position and morale of Thailand and to send message to Moscow that major breach of cease fire could be dangerous business. Our problem is to make certain that Phoumi does not read into such moves any idea that we are prepared to back him in final analysis if he remains obdurate. Very important therefore that you make Sarit understand with utmost clarity that military moves should not be understood by him or by Phoumi as commitment to Laos where our policy continues to support neutral and independent Laos under coalition government.

Since timing of actual moves and public announcement2 are related to diplomatic contacts with Moscow you will receive further instructions on both points. However, we will prefer general reference to SEATO rather than specific reference to Rusk–Thanat conversations since, latter would raise spectre of secret deals which as you know did not exist apart from what was said publicly at time. This bears also upon President’s position with Congress since SEATO was approved overwhelmingly by Senate.

Please do not call SEATO meeting pending further instructions.

We shall be interested in SEATO flavor of any moves made. SEATO capitals are being informed of situation. We believe it may become important to have other SEATO flags flying in Thailand and have in mind, for example, that elements of Air Cobra may need to be returned to Thailand. You should obtain Sarit’s full concurrence to idea so that we can approach other governments.

Sarit’s attitude toward further Thai deployments to north of considerable importance. He must understand that US and Thai forces must act together if need arises for defense of Thailand. Commitments President made to Thanat of course stand. But Thai forces are far more suitable both on military and political grounds for rooting guerrillas out of villages or for types of action which could cause local population to resent actions of white foreign forces. In absence of organized enemy action, best role for US forces is in support of Thai forces. Have no doubt Sarit will appreciate force of this argument but we shall need a joint plan for defense of Thailand in near future under which both would make maximum effort in accordance capabilities and proper roles.

Regarding Sarit’s concern over possibility Phoumi following policy of de facto partition, we remain convinced that security Thailand best served by political settlement which gets all foreign military elements out of Laos. Laotians left to themselves will be little or no threat to anyone. It is impossible to predict future events but we are not supporting idea of partition which would leave northern Thailand exposed to Viet Minh or Chicoms. However, events may force upon us choice between partition and all-communist Laos, a result we are trying to avoid.

You are receiving info copies traffic Vientiane which bear out Sarit’s estimate incompetence and demoralization Laotian government forces. Neither he nor we can base a policy on fighting capacity or will these forces or on Phoumi’s qualities of leadership. Basic problem Laos has always been there has been so little to support. This is crucial difference between Laos on one side and Viet Nam and Thailand on the other. Sarit should not judge our determination with respect to Thailand by course of action in landlocked Laos where so little evidence of aroused people determined to fight for their independence.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared by Harriman and Forrestal. Repeated priority to Vientiane and to Moscow and CINCPAC POLAD.

1 Document 440.

2 The public announcement as made by President Kennedy on May 15 is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 1094. A statement issued by Thailand, also May 15, is ibid., p. 1093.

442. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 442. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 14, 1962, 8 p.m.

1775. Eyes only Secretary and Ambassadors. Re Deptel 1742 and Embtel 1760.1 Supplementing my report on our conversation with Sarit, I wish point out he and his mil colleagues were concerned over US Govt’s selection of Udorn and Ubol for deployment US combat forces. That is why Sarit asked for further discussion on defining exact locations.

Firstly, he repeated his view Commies will fight guerrilla war here. So, he and Secy McNamara had discussed locating battle group presently in Thailand somewhere along east-west highway to give mobility into north or northeast and be close to Lao frontier.2 Thai military especially worried about salient pointing into Thailand at approx 17 degrees 30 mins latitude and 101 degrees longitude. Therefore Sarit seemed surprised that we were now suggesting battle group for Ubol, when he thought we wanted it north for counter guerrilla operations. If USG strongly desires Ubol location for battle group I would appreciate guidance on arguments to be used with Sarit and Thai military.

Secondly they are also interested in improving road maintenance and accessibility for mil purposes in north and northeast and asked whether battle group would have engr bn organically attached when deployed here. Gen Harkins confirmed battle group would, but he made it clear its construction capabilities quite limited and we avoided any further discussion of its deployment. Hope of this kind of help was reinforcing Sarit’s desire have battle group in Thai north central area.

Thirdly, Sarit and Thanat convinced it would be better for local community relations as well as basic Thai/US relations if combat troops could be located and housed outside of urban areas such as Udorn and Ubol where large numbers Americans already concentrated. This is of course common sense for all of us. But in addition we have just gone through nasty incident with three Air America civilian pilots at Udorn who shot up King’s photo in their house when intoxicated, as I have reported [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. While Sarit has managed so far to keep this explosive case of lese majeste and inexcusable conduct out of Thai press, incident is generally known in Udorn and in govt and newspaper circles in Bangkok, and thus to Commies’. With this background Sarit wants to make doubly sure that influx of American personnel is controlled and indoctrinated to prevent similar explosive and dangerous incidents. Gen Harkins and I discussed question troop morale and indoctrination and believe nothing should be left undone from top mil authorities down to unit commanders to insure fullest briefing on Thailand for every individual arriving. Also indispensable are good command leadership, discipline and creative imagination to build up good relations and prevent or handle bad cases vigorously and quickly. In this connection, PriMin praised example 809th Engr Construction Bn and its Commander Col Hardin.

Sarit approved deployment because he said he agreed with their three missions as I stated and explained them several times at outset last night’s discussion, particularly first two. Evident that appreciation of these missions by Sarit and his colleagues was important factor in overcoming their concern about possible local incidents, Communist or left wing propaganda attacks and puzzlement of Thai population which has never had foreign mil forces stationed here in recent times except for unpleasant Japanese occupation WWII. In agreeing to US proposal Sarit asked us to keep these last three factors in mind in order to help govt minimize their repercussions. Of course our motivation of defending Thailand is strong reason in dangerous circumstances for Thais departing from historical precedent or recent reluctance.

It was also clear last night that Sarit had thoroughly discussed possibility of US deployment to Thailand with Thanat and senior mil advisors before our arrival. His response to my presentation was carefully worked out in advance and forcefully and systematically delivered.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Priority. Received at 1:45 p.m. and repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

1 Documents 438 and 440.

2 See Document 436.

443. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 443. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, May 14, 1962.

Laos

At the off-the-record meeting today on Laos Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Assistant Secretary Harriman, Mr. McCone, Generals Lemnitzer and Taylor will be present.1

The main purpose of this meeting is to give you recommendations for the immediate future which have been agreed upon between the Departments of State and Defense.

State and Defense recommend that orders be given to land U.S. forces in Thailand around 10 o’clock tomorrow evening (our time). The number and types of these forces are given in the attached schedule;2 but generally 1800 men plus an Air Force fighter squadron and a Marine air squadron would land tomorrow. Ten to 14 days later additional elements of the existing army battle group would arrive by sea, after which the total American force in Thailand would be between 5,000 and 6,000 men. It is recommended that the Air Force squadron would go to Udorn, approximately 30 miles south of Vientiane, and Ubon, further to the south, about 50 miles from the Lao border opposite Pakse.

The State Department is preparing a joint U.S./Thai communiqué to be issued simultaneously in Bangkok and Washington. It will refer to the Manila Pact but not the Rusk/Thanat communiqué, because the Manila Pact had Senate approval. It may also include some language taken from the announcement at the time of the Lebanese action.

A circular telegram to SEATO capitals is also being prepared by State.3 A SEATO Council discussion is envisaged later, and the introduction of a SEATO presence into the operation is contemplated by calling back the Air Cobra Exercise units. State believes U.K. and France may oppose formal SEATO involvement.

The State Department will inform NATO of the operation.

Governor Harriman is opposed to the reconvening of the Geneva Conference at this time on the grounds that it will (a) freeze the Soviet position before we know what it is, and (b) result in a lot of adverse propaganda. The possibility, however, is being contemplated of asking the Indians, because of their interest in the ICC, to discuss the matter in Hanoi.

The State Department is researching the question whether the United Nations must be informed, since it appears that there may be a requirement for this under the Charter and the Manila Treaty. Governor Harriman is meeting with a representative of U Thant.

Secretary Rusk may see Ambassador Dobrynin tomorrow morning simply to inform him of our actions.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Countries, Laos Security, 5/11/62–5/28/62. Top Secret. There is no indication on the source text that Forrestal drafted this memorandum, but the last sentence in the fifth paragraph was added in his handwriting.

1 See Document 444.

2 Not printed; for text, see vol. XXIV, pp. 768–769.

3 The telegram was sent to Bangkok as 1756 and repeated to SEATO capitals and CINCPAC POLAD, May 14, 11:24 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, 751J.00/5–1462)

444. Memorandum of Conversation 444. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, May 14, 1962, 2:30 p.m.

Present were: Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Assistant Secretary Harriman, Director McCone, General Taylor, Mr. Bundy and Mr. Forrestal.

Director McCone summarized the latest SNIE on the situation in Laos (SNIE 58–4-62, 14 May 1962).1

The Secretary of Defense recommended the following military movements:

(1) An Air Force squadron to deploy to Takli;

(2) Marine air support and Marine battalion to deploy to Udorn;

(3) The Army battle group to be deployed to an area 40 miles west of Korat and to be joined later by additional men and heavy equipment.

The President assented to the above deployments and suggested that a communiqué be drafted for release the following day after a morning meeting with the Congressional leadership.2 The President agreed with Secretary of State that SEATO capitals should be informed. The purpose of our putting forces into Thailand is to be prepared to take whatever action may be necessary under the Manila Pact. No formal SEATO action, however, is yet contemplated. The President asked that the State Department carefully consider the SEATO problem.

The President asked Secretary McNamara whether the actual orders to the military should not be held up in order to avoid leaks. Secretary McNamara replied that he believed that orders could go out immediately without being leaked to the press.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Laos, General, 5/17/62–5/25/62. Top Secret Drafted by Forrestal on May 23.

1 See vol. XXIV, p. 769.

2 See Document 446.

445. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State Rusk 445. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, May 14, 1962.

As I said this afternoon,1 I think this matter of SEATO consultation is of great importance, and I am glad you are seeing the French and British Ambassadors. I hope you or Averell—presumably the latter—will see all the other SEATO Ambassadors before noon tomorrow.2 It seems to me very important for their Governments to know that we are increasing our forces in Thailand before they read it in the papers.

My suggestions for the message that we might convey are these: 1. That the breach of the cease-fire in Laos creates a question both about further intentions of the Communists and about our own resolution. We think it is important to improve our tactical position and to give substantial reassurance to the Thais.

2. We are continuing to work for a restoration of a cease-fire and for a resumption of Laotian negotiations for a unified government.

3. We are undertaking this action on our own responsibility, but we hope our SEATO partners will understand that it is a part of our common concern for the Southeast Asia areas. Australian and New Zealand Ambassadors should be reminded that the greatest present need for support; advice, and assistance is in South Vietnam, and that the more SEATO cooperation we get there the better for all of us. It should be emphasized to the ambassadors of other nations that their help is most needed in Thailand.

John Kennedy

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/5–1462. Top Secret; Eyes Only.

1 See Document 444.

2 In circular telegram 1945, May 15, 5:05 p.m., the Department reported that each SEATO Ambassador had been briefed and asked to make a contribution of a small military unit as a demonstration of SEATO solidarity. The addressee SEATO posts were instructed to emphasize, as the Department did to SEATO Ambassadors, that sending troops to Thailand was not an implied or direct commitment to do anything in Laos. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–1562)

446. Editorial Note 446. Editorial Note

On May 15, 1962, from 9:15 to 10 a.m., President Kennedy, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Assistant Secretary Harriman, Director McCone, General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and Michael Forrestal met with the Democratic and Republican leadership of the Senate and House. According to Forrestal’s memorandum of the discussion, written on May 23, the meeting opened as follows: “The President opened the meeting by expressing concern over the deterioration in Laos and its possible effect on Thailand and stated that the purpose of the meeting was to explain moves decided upon in interests of meeting our commitments to Thailand.”

McNamara and McCone then briefed the congressional leadership on the Lao military situation and Rusk provided information on the political situation. Rusk then turned to Thailand: “Meanwhile, Secretary Rusk continued, we are much concerned over Thailand. Thailand has a long common border with Laos, and the sensitive situation in Northeast Thailand combined to create a situation in which the fall of Nam Tha has shaken the confidence of the Thais. But there is a need for some encouragement to the Thais, and it is largely for this reason that we are now recommending some build up in the forces in Thailand. We are also planning to seek the support of certain SEATO countries in this undertaking. Secretary Rusk then turned the discussion over to the Secretary of Defense.

“Secretary McNamara reviewed his meeting with Marshal Sarit and outlined the dangers of the exposed border, and then explained in detail the planned troop deployment in Thailand. He said that this build up of force would lead to a total level of about 8,000 Americans.”

The Senators and Congressmen asked general questions, but Senator Richard B. Russell and Congressman Leslie C. Arends asked specific questions about Thailand: “Senator Russell asked the Secretary of Defense why our engineers should be engaged in building Siamese roads, and Secretary McNamara replied that he did not believe that we should use U.S. personnel, on a permanent basis, for road-building in South Asia. The Speaker asked whether South Koreans might be used in Southeast Asia. The Secretary of State remarked that it would be better for them to stay where they were, if there were going to be any serious test in that part of the world.

“In answer to Representative Arends’ question, General Lemnitzer stated that the Thais had four divisions and three regimental combat teams well equipped by the United States but under strength—60% to 70%. These troops are well trained, but their will to fight remains questionable and will only be known when it is actually tested.”

Senator Thomas H. Kuchel asked about the authority for the move into Thailand and the conversation ended as follows: “Senator Kuchel asked under what obligations we were moving in Thailand. Secretary Rusk answered that we had both multilateral and bilateral commitments here. This was a precautionary movement of forces, and not a movement which could rest formally on either paragraph 4(1) or 4(2) of the SEATO Treaty. Senator Dirksen asked what we would do ‘if it caves in Laos.’ The President replied we would then try to hold in Thailand. Senator Saltonstall asked about Cambodia, and the President replied that this was a neutral area but not one which appeared immediately and sharply threatened.”

The full text of this memorandum of conversation is printed in volume XXIV, pages 770–774.

447. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 447. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 21, 1962, 4 p.m.

1808. Saigon pass COMUSMACTHAI. Reference: Department telegram 1810.1 I saw Sarit 0900 today and informed him several times in strong language highest authority of US considers it absolutely essential that RTG quickly accept force contributions offered by their SEATO partners, specifically Australian, New Zealand and UK offers now outstanding. I stressed political importance of immediate tangible demonstration alliance solidarity from standpoint world, US and Thai public opinion.

Sarit replied he fully understood important political aspects and within next two or three days would reach agreement (and immediately publish it) on acceptance outstanding Australian, New Zealand and UK offers of assistance. At my request, he agreed I could so inform President today

He added that there would be further discussion of actual composition of these forces to insure they fit into overall picture as well as possible (and at this point Marshal Tawee [Daweel] mentioned engineers would be particularly welcome). When I pressed point on need having forces arrive promptly Sarit agreed that aircraft, particularly transports, and some paratroops could come immediately after reaching agreement.

Thanat and Sarit concerned now over formula of acceptance and correct terminology for them. They insisted RTG will not be placed in position of “requesting” token forces and will not use term “request” in official or public communications. They want agreement based on fully mutual and equal terms. They expressed disappointment over repeated US press ref to “Thai request.” However they said that formula employed with us, namely mutual consultation—Thai invitation—joint agreement, should be used also with others. I stated they should use at least this formula and urged public announcements be issued today or tomorrow. Sarit and Thanat replied they would issue statements as soon as agreements completed with each govt in next two or three days.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2162. Secret; Niact. Repeated priority to Canberra, London, Wellington, and Saigon and to CINCPAC POLAD, Karachi, Manila, and Paris. A copy was sent to William Bundy in the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

1 Telegram 1810, May 19, instructed the Embassy to inform Thanat “that USG considers it absolutely essential that Thais accept force contributions offered by their SEATO partners.” (Ibid., 792.00/5–1962)

448. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 448. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, May 24, 1962, noon.

1844. Saigon pass COMUSMACTHAI. Now that deployment US forces substantially completed in Thailand and Thais inviting SEATO forces, I feel I must raise four policy questions on which contingency planning and guidance may be necessary.

(1) The right bank problem. The area between the Mekong River and the Thai-Lao international boundary in northwest Laos (Sayabouri) is extremely sensitive and matter of deep concern for Thai officials. If PL/VM regular forces move across Mekong into this area or take up positions on Mekong across from it, Thai reaction time will be quick and Thai response will probably be movement of Thai military forces across Thai-Lao boundary into that area. [3 lines of source text not declassified] Thanat described same Thai concern at breakfast with Secy McNamara. PriMin Sarit described problem Tuesday1 to me with maps. And yesterday Phya Srivisan, who is member of Privy Council and will become Sarit’s special assistant, also pointed to this dangerous wide-open flank west of Mekong in northwest Laos. He also expressed concern over similar area in southwest corner Laos across Mekong from Pakse. [4 lines of source text and footnote not declassified]

It is our estimate here that Thais would move their military forces into Sayabouri area even if PL/VM units in strength took positions on left bank or, in Thai view, threatened to infiltrate or move across river. Thais would undertake preventive occupation and/or request RLG to do this by mutual agreement. I feel certain Thais will do everything possible to prevent PL/VM from getting any semblance of toehold or foothold on west bank Mekong.

I don’t know if there is any specific instruction the Dept needs send me in immediate future but some contingency guidance should be considered in case Commies do infiltrate in large numbers or move overtly towards or into these sensitive areas.

(2) Additional Communist cease-fire breaches. While presence American forces appears to have stabilized situation SEA, there is always possibility they might again undertake something on order of Nam Tha action such as rumored over past weekend east of Thakhek. My question is what contingency guidance should Gen Harkins and I have as to use in Laos of US combat forces now in Thailand. If Communists do make another military seizure and breach cease-fire, Thai Govt and public will press for some sort of US combat employment across Mekong at least for pre-emptive occupation.

I realize this extremely tricky and difficult question but even if it is not feasible at this stage to issue any instructions or guidance, I feel higher authorities should have this contingency well in mind for immediate action during next few months if necessary.2

(3) Withdrawal US forces. Question is put every day by correspondents as well as people in general here, as to how long US forces will stay in Thailand and what will be the circumstances permitting the departure. Have been answering this in general noncommitting terms. But for political and military planning purposes it would be helpful to work initially on time span of ninety days as a confidential working assumption.

When situation in Laos and SEA stabilized enough to permit some withdrawals, I would recommend USG revert to a plan of cycle rotational training for US combat units. Those now here could be replaced at least in part by similar or other units, particularly in dry season beginning next fall. Question of withdrawal will have to be worked out carefully with Thais, who may be, pulled in two directions, having some qualms about permanent presence forces but at same time wanting to keep some US combat forces deployed in Thailand and perhaps also envisioning permanent stationing foreign troops for SEATO role.3

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/5–2462. Top Secret. Passed to William Bundy and repeated to Vientiane, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

1 May 22.

2 In telegram 1849 to Bangkok, May 25, the Department of State instructed Young: “Highest authority directs that there should be no bilateral US-Thai contingency planning re operations which would contemplate movement Thai forces into Laos, especially Sayaboury area as described reftel. We must avoid any implied obligation to support Thai occupation Lap territory.

“For present, all contingency planning against deterioration military situation Laos will be exclusively US. Adm. Felt, Generals Harkins and Tucker will be so instructed by JCS.” (Ibid., 792.00/5–2562)

3 In telegram 1855 to Bangkok, the Department of State informed Young: “US position re withdrawal forces from Thailand must remain characterized by maximum flexibility. For public purposes, draw on President’s comments May 23 press conference.

“For your confidential planning, we would expect at least some of these forces remain in Thailand until satisfactory progress made in Laos or establishment government national union, withdrawal foreign military forces, and integration-demobilization process Lao forces.

“This process may take at least six months and is indication for your guidance.” (Ibid.)

In his comments to the press on May 23, President Kennedy refused to predict when U.S. troops would leave Thailand, but stated that the United States would make a judgment based on the situation in Laos and Thailand. The transcript of the press conference is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pp. 431–437.

449. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 449. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, June 11, 1962, 7 p.m.

1965. Eyes only Secretary. Deptel 1898 and Embtel 1918.1 After visiting US troops here in the field for the second time June 7 and 81 am satisfied that their living conditions are acceptable if austere and on the whole not appreciably more difficult than in the field elsewhere, including many parts of CONUS. This is friendly country with no major health or security hazards barring actual combat if each person takes proper care.

On negative side, northeast Thailand is remote, underdeveloped rural area offering few diversions. Physical conditions vary from hot and dusty in dry season to hot and muddy in rainy season, now just beginning. There is some hazard from disease such as malaria and dysentery; poisonous snakes and leeches are encountered; insects abound. Patrols or training exercises in forests or jungle will be rough and tough. Terrain for most part is flat, but frequently flooded and covered with thick growth. Only negative factor on human side is Communist propaganda, mainly in form of radio broadcasts and whispering campaigns, attempting put US troops in worst light, sow suspicion, confusion, discord. But so far no overt evidence of Commie infiltration or incitements to attacks on individual Americans.

Under these conditions, living in field and engaging in strenuous field exercises is no picnic. On other hand, troops are well equipped, well supplied with American foods and PX goods, and well-officered under very competent leadership. Thais from top through local officials to general population have received our men in outstandingly cordial, friendly and cooperative spirit. In most areas where our troops now located, American GI is no stranger. He has been in Korat and Ubol before on SEATO military exercises; in Udorn he operated helicopter lift for Laos several months last year. Thais remember him as generous, friendly, responsive and willing to lend a hand. They welcome him back. They are respectful, interested in him, ready to help or trade, happy and relaxed with him in their midst. This has buoyed troop morale. Americans again are responding in typical easy manner but with care and tact. Every officer and enlisted man I have met has told me how impressed and grateful he is for Thai friendliness. Evidently it contrasts somewhat with his experience elsewhere.

Prospects on balance are for maintaining present favorable situation. Of course, rainy season, rigorous training, fading of novelty, different basic cultural values, attraction of less desirable commercial and professional elements to camp areas; and covert Communist action (propaganda among simple rural people, infiltrated agitators) may give rise to discontent, frictions and incidents. However, everyone in authority here, American and Thai, military and civilian, fully aware of problem and taking every precaution.

All major aspects of impact of troops on Thailand subject to joint Thai-American scrutiny and cooperative action: procurement of supplies to avoid disrupting local economy; selection of gun and training sites; security; joint training; public relations; civic action; incidents involving Americans and Thais; etc. Local joint Thai-American committees for community relations already are operating with outstanding success to date. Plans being laid for recreational activities including mutual entertainment programs. Civic action projects by troops, already under way (medical treatment for Thais, help to level school yard, erect market area, put out fire) will soon go into high gear along lines of friendship program suggested by King. Continuous training will help keep men active and alert.

Our main problem will include effects of boredom, staleness, Communist propaganda and homesickness. Working closely with Thais I believe we can readily cope with them here; however, should troops remain over protracted period some scheme of rotation may be necessary.

In conclusion would like to stress that living conditions, while rough and requiring considerable adjustment on part of men, are not unmanageable. Worth noting that Army Battle Group after two months’ field experience in Thailand has successfully overcome all obstacles and is in fine shape. Officers feel “Wolfhounds” getting along as well or even better here than in Hawaii. There have been no major incidents, to date.

We have excellent assets here: superb cooperation from Thai officials; what I believe to be outstanding American military leadership from Gen. Harkins and his commanders down to the many bright; self-confident and knowledgeable non-coms with whom I have spoken in the field; competence and experience of our USIS officers at Korat, Udorn and Ubol who have been exceptionally helpful to the military; basic friendliness and tolerance of Thai population. I am confident that with care and foresight on the part of all concerned US troops will make out all right in Thailand.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5411/6–1162. Top Secret; Priority

1 In telegram 1898 to Bangkok; June 2, the Department of State informed Young: “The President would appreciate receiving your own firsthand observations and impressions of living conditions now, and likely to confront our forces in Thailand, particularly in the rainy season.” (Ibid., 792.5411/6–262) In telegram 1918 from Bangkok, June 4, Young promised his assessment after he made an inspection trip to the U.S. Marine Battle Group. (Ibid.)

450. Memorandum of Conversation 450. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Bangkok, June 11, 1962.

* [Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298/19.1 US Visits to Thailand, January to July 1962. Secret. 6 pages of source text not declassified.]

451. Memorandum for the Record 451. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, June 13, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report of Meeting at the White House, 13 June 19621

1. A meeting was held at the White House on 13 June to discuss certain aspects of the situation in Southeast Asia. The following were present:

The President

Department of Defense Secretary McNamara

General Lemnitzer

Mr. Gilpatric

Mr. Nitze

Mr. W. Bundy

Department of State Secretary Rusk

Governor Harriman

White House Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. Forrestal

Agency Mr. Cooper

2. The principal matter for discussion was Secretary McNamara’s proposal to improve the US logistic position in Thailand by providing that country with additional transport equipment (including rolling stock), a pipeline for POL, and airfield improvements. This program is to cost approximately $20 million. It will also necessitate the despatch of approximately 1,500 additional US military personnel (primarily construction personnel) to Thailand.

The President subscribed to this proposal and suggested that it be implemented in the form of a civil aid program. [Here follows discussion of Laos and Korea.]

Chester L. Cooper
Deputy Assistant Director
National Estimates

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files. Secret. Drafted by Chester Cooper.

1 The meeting was held from 11:55 a.m. to 12:25 p.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book) For another record of this meeting, see vol. XXIV, pp. 846–848.

452. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 452. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, June 15, 1962.

In connection with the “$20 million Thailand logistic support program”,1 I stated to the President that: a. We would handle the project in such a way as to limit the net gold drain to $2 million.

b. All movements of both matériel and personnel would be made without publicity.

c. The personnel movements associated with the project would be both delayed and supported within the present strength of U.S. personnel assigned to Thailand. The latter objective can be met by substituting construction units for combat units.

Further, I told Dean Rusk we would discuss the personnel movements with State before undertaking them.

Robert S. McNamara2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 6/1/62–6/15/62. No classification marking. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy at the White House. Notes on the source text, which is McGeorge Bundy’s copy, in his hand read: “Hold for President Monday” and “President approved June 18.”

1 In joint State-Defense telegram 2089 to Bangkok, June 27, the Department informed the Embassy of the approval and explained that the program was meant to increase the readiness and ability of U.S. and allied forces to act promptly if the need arose. The U.S.-financed program would provide Thailand with additional railway rolling stock, a petroleum/oil/lubricant pipeline, improved airstrips, depots at Korat and Udorn for prepositioning and storage of heavy engineer equipment, a floating crane, communications equipment, 7 HU-1 helicopters, and prepositioned aircraft repair and U.S. Army engineering equipment. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/6–2782)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

453. Editorial Note 453. Editorial Note

Director of Central Intelligence John McCone visited the Republic of Vietnam, Thailand, and the Republic of China June 2–14, 1962. On June 11, McCone met with the Country Team in Bangkok to discuss the status of U.S. support to the Thai Border Patrol Police and the counterinsurgency effort. McCone was assured that training of the Border Patrol Police was proceeding well and that equipment was reaching Thailand with one problem: Transceiver radios for village-to-village communication were going to South Vietnam as a first priority rather than to Thailand. McCone promised to recommend in Washington that delivery of these radios to Thailand be expedited.

Finally, McCone and the Country Team discussed the requirement for short takeoff and landing and other aircraft in northeast Thailand. (Memorandum from the CIA to the Special Group (CI), June 14; Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/McCone Files).

McCone prepared notes of his impressions of Thailand. They read as follows: “a. SEATO—Despite the establishment of a token allied force, Thailand will continue to be skeptical of the organization’s worth (particularly the membership of France and the UK) and will look primarily to the US for its protection.

“b. Neutralism—Beneath the currently strong Western orientation is an historical propensity to adjust to prevailing trends in the areas. A deterioration of the Laotian and South Vietnamese situations would bring Thailand to a re-examination of its stance. If the political orientation of Laos and Burma moves to the left, the Thais will probably tend toward neutralism and disengagement from the West in order to accommodate to the evolving situation. In doing so they will blame the US.

“c. The succession problem—While Sarit exercises the power of a military dictator and has every intention of doing so during his lifetime, he is not well (reports have given him one to two years). There is no assurance that, should he die, there would be an orderly succession, and hence a difficult situation might result.

“d. Subversion in the northeast—It is probably only a question of time before an anti-government movement in northeastern Thailand manifests itself, inspired and abetted by North Vietnam through Laos. Thai efforts thus far to counter what probably is now only a rudimentary subversive apparatus in the northeast have been largely negligible. The Thai government is aware of the threat and is requesting assistance from the US in meeting it.

“e. Communist terrorists in the south—The remnants of terrorists from Malaya in the southern border area, while small and relatively quiescent, will continue to be a problem.” (Ibid.)

On June 18, after his return to Washington, McCone met with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric at 11:30 a.m. to discuss his Far Eastern trip. Richard Helms accompanied McCone. McCone stated, that U.S. military forces in Thailand should have training as their basic mission and expressed concern that the prospective Laos agreement might eventually force their withdrawal. McCone also stated that he feared Thailand would move toward neutralism and seek accommodation with the Communist bloc should the U.S. position in Southeast Asia show additional signs of weakness. McCone concluded with the observation that U.S. programs in Southeast Asia were “essentially holding actions which would buy time,” but would not succeed over the long run. As McCone put it, “we were merely chipping away at the toe of the glacier from the North.” (Ibid., DCI/McCone Memos for Record)

Later that day, McCone and Helms met with Secretary of State Rusk at 3:05 p.m. and had a similar discussion. McCone made the same point about the need for U.S. training of Border Police and Thai military, and he noted that Prime Minister Sarit had agreed to an increase in the Police Aerial Reconnaissance Unit. McCone also discussed security in the Embassy and the problem of procuring equipment for northeast Thailand. (Ibid.)

454. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) 454. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Heinz) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)Source

Washington, June 26, 1962.

1–18117/62

Mr. Gilpatric called me this noon and desired I pass along the following to you in regard to Thailand:

The President decided this morning that he wants to take some portion of our combat elements out of Thailand.1 This would be a token affair, amounting to 1,000 of the 3,000 Marines. The Marines would be moved to Okinawa, but would be ready to move back in on very short notice.

In regard to Sarit, we would tell him that it is not desirable to have so many combat personnel sitting in Thailand during the rainy season with little to do. It would be much more desirable to have part of them training in Okinawa, and in a position to move back in very quickly should they be needed. In addition, we desire to move in some logistic personnel to accomplish our build-up (pipe line, air field construction, storage depot).2

To the Russians we would say that this move is made to make it easier for them to carry out their part of the bargain in regard to the Laos settlement.

To the public we would say that this is a more or less routine shift of personnel, that we are constantly making shifts in answer to varying situations.

Another factor influencing this decision is that we do not want to get committed on a definite number of U.S. troops in Thailand, and do not want to be frozen as to the numbers that we have there, either with Sarit or with anyone else. No definite ceiling was established for U.S. troops in Thailand. We will introduce logistic forces as necessary to do the job.

Mike Forrestal is drafting necessary cables on this to be cleared with State and Defense.

L.C Heinz3
Rear Admiral USN

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Thailand, 334–384, 1962. Also sent to William Bundy and Frank K. Sloan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Affairs (ISA). The source text is Bundy’s copy with a note on it indicating that he saw it.

1 In a telephone conversation on June 25 at 5:20 p.m., Ball and McNamara discussed the President’s desire to withdraw troops from Thailand. Ball stated that there were a series of reasons why the troops should not be withdrawn, noting that the effect on the Thais would be disastrous and it would make the Chinese Communists believe that they had scared the United States out. (Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Thailand)

Ball then called Forrestal at 5:30 p.m. and explained the background of the President’s concern. For some time, according to Forrestal, the President had wanted to remove some troops and envisioned a gradual withdrawal that could be explained to Sarit as nothing more than a gesture. Sarit could be assured that the troops could come back in a day’s notice. (Ibid.)

2 When informed by Harkins and Young of the plan, Sarit concurred with the redeployment with the comment, “we have no choice. We have jumped into pool with you and we now swimming together.” Sarit also approved of the improved logistical program for Thailand. (Telegram 2113 from Bangkok, June 29; Department of State, Central Files, 751K.00/6–2962)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

455. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 455. Memorandum From Attorney General Kennedy to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, July 11, 1962.

In the course of a conversation in my office, Georgi1 said that Khrushchev personally would be most appreciative if the American Government would pull its troops out of Thailand. He said he understood that the reason the troops had been sent in initially was because of the trouble in Laos and now that that had been settled, it certainly would be a great step toward peace in that area of the world if the troops that had been sent into Thailand were withdrawn.

I said I would take the matter up with the President.

After speaking to the President, the next day I told Georgi that within ten days we would start to withdraw the troops from Thailand and that I would keep him advised. He asked me if that meant that all the troops would be taken out. I replied that we would have to have some discussions and conferences with our allies; that we would start to withdraw the troops; and that I would keep him advised as to what progress we were making. I did not make a commitment that they all would be withdrawn although it was clear this was what Georgi was interested in.

If you need any further information in connection with this, give me a ring.2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 7/16/62–7/31/62. No classification marking. Drafted and initialed by Robert Kennedy. Bundy sent this memorandum to Ball under a covering memorandum that stated that this memorandum was also for Rusk and Harriman. Bundy stated that the Attorney General’s office records suggested that these two meetings which Kennedy described took place on June 18 and 19.

1 Reference is probably to Georgi N. Bolshakov, Information Counselor at the Soviet Embassy and editor of the magazine USSR. According to Pierre Salinger, Bolshakov was an intermediary in unofficial exchanges between President Kennedy and Khrushchev. (With Kennedy, p. 191)

2 On July 17, Bundy told Ball that he was not sure that Rusk was abreast of this private channel, which the President had used on the Thai troop withdrawals. Ball told Bundy that. he had informed Rusk of it. Bundy told Ball he was sending a copy of Robert Kennedy’s memorandum, not to circulate in the Department of State, but for Ball, Rusk, and/or Harriman’s use. (Memorandum of telephone conversation, July 7; Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Telephone Conversations, Thailand)

456. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 456. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, July 12, 1962.

You will be seeing the Ambassador of Thailand at 11 this morning. Attached are the State Department papers on the subject.1 The important points that you will want to make are two.

1. You wish to welcome the Thai acceptance of the International Court of Justice decision on the temple in dispute between Thailand and Cambodia. The court awarded the temple to Cambodia.2 Attached at Tab 1 of the first paper is a proposed press release to be issued following the Ambassador’s call.3

2. You will want to praise him for the cooperation of the Thai delegation at Geneva (which, in fact, has been somewhat uncertain). It is important to mention that the agreements on Lao neutrality will be signed on the 23rd in Geneva, that Secretary Rusk will be there and that you know Secretary Rusk looks forward to seeing Foreign Minister Thanat. It is still not certain whether Thanat will come. We want him to very much and your mentioning it to the Ambassador will help.

At Tab 2 of the first paper is the letter which the Ambassador will deliver to you.4 The State Department does not think it needs an answer.

CK

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office File, Countries, Thailand Security. Confidential

1 The briefing papers, July 8, were attached. Copies are in Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/7–862.

2 When the International Court of Justice ruled on June 15 that the disputed Temple of Preah Vihear was in Cambodian rather than Thai territory, the reaction in Thailand was strong and emotional. Prime Minister Sarit sent reinforcements into the area and placed the border police on alert. Thailand also initially boycotted SEATO and Geneva Laos Conference meetings. Extensive documentation on the case is ibid., 751H.022.

3 Issued as a White House Press Release on July 12.

4 The letter, transmitted by the Thai Embassy on July 6, is in the Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Thailand Security.

457. Memorandum of Conversation 457. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, July 12, 1962.

SUBJECT

Call of Thai Ambassador on the President

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H. E. Visutr Arthayukti, Ambassador of Thailand

Mr. H. L. T. Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs

The Ambassador presented a letter from Prime Minister Sarit to the President which the President read and then noted his agreement on the necessity for our two countries to work together toward common goals.1 The President said he did not feel that the letter called for an answer, but asked the Ambassador to express his appreciation to the Prime Minister.

The President said he felt that Thailand had handled the difficult problem presented by the World Court decision very well and thought that Thai acceptance of the decision should help to expand acceptance of the principles of a world rule of law. The Ambassador noted that the Government had worked very hard to settle this internal affair in the best way possible. The President agreed that this method was far better than resorting to firing guns, and again complimented the Thai Government and Prime Minister on their decision.

The President referred to the U.S. logistic support program proposed for Thailand and said he thought this intensive effort would mean a lot to Thailand both economically and militarily. The Ambassador expressed appreciation for the State Department’s assistance in arranging for the important loans for irrigation projects in north Thailand.

The President spoke of the recent redeployment of some of the Marines from Udorn. He said we were watching the progress at Geneva, and further phase-outs would occur if developments over the Accords so warranted. Marines withdrawn could, of course, be returned on short notice if necessary.

The Ambassador thought that the formation of the Lao coalition government would improve the situation. The President replied that he looked forward to seeing Souvanna Phouma and making our views known to him during his forthcoming visit here. The President said that the task in Laos was not an easy one, but we were going to stay with it and make it work. In this connection he appreciated the efforts of the Thai Government and the Prime Minister to assist us in the Lao tasks.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 7/16/62–7/31/62. Secret. Drafted by Koren.

1 See footnote 4, Document 456.

458. Summary of Discussion 458. Summary of DiscussionSource

Undated.

SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS AT HONOLULU CONFERENCE JULY 23–24, 1962

I. Plenary Session with Secretary McNamara

Thai Military and Paramilitary Forces

McNamara questioned whether more Border Patrol Police were needed. Ambassador Young said an additional 2,000 were required and could be profitably utilized. In reply to a similar question regarding the Volunteer Defense Corps, the Ambassador said this organization needs to be beefed up. The VDC is included in the Thai countersubversion plan, but the name may have to be changed for political reasons.

McNamara inquired concerning the strength of paramilitary forces in the eleven Mekong provinces. Ambassador Young said there were 1500 to 1800 BPP and a maximum of 5,000 provincial police. McNamara said this seemed totally inadequate for a 1,000-mile frontier and for an area including probably 2 million people. Police and the VDC are spread too thin. In addition, subversion will not necessarily follow the river. Thai forces must also be built up in the interior areas.

McNamara said as a first step we must lay out a skeleton of our ultimate program and identify the steps toward this goal. It is essential that we see the whole package from the border police through the army. We must list all countersubversion forces and decide what we want. We should work out 1) the number of people desired in each type of organization, 2) first steps toward achieving these goals, and 3) responsibility within the US Government.

McNamara said he assumed the BPP and National Police would remain the responsibility of AID. The VDC would be the responsibility of MAAG for training and equipment. This would be true regardless of whether the VDC was under the Interior or Defense Ministry.

McNamara said he would be willing to consider the reserve division which MAAG had previously recommended, but that he was critical of this concept.

Bundy suggested that the provincial police might possibly be the central organization for our countersubversion effort. He suggested that AID support for this organization might be raised substantially. McNamara said our package program would probably require a huge expenditure. Perhaps we don’t want to pay this much. However, we can’t talk to the Thai until we get our own house in order. Moreover, at some point we may wish to suggest to the Thai that they must do more for themselves or else we will find it necessary to reduce our expenditures.

Describing further the type of report he wanted, McNamara said we should assume that the US would provide forces to aid Thailand in case of overt attack. What he wanted was a listing of what the Thai needed for their own efforts to counter subversion or insurgency.

Communications Equipment

Communications equipment should be included in the new concept. We agreed to provide some communications facilities; did we go far enough? Ambassador Young outlined the program to provide 243 village transceivers. He said an additional 2,300 would be required in critical areas. McNamara said these should be included in the FY 63 program. He said DOD would fund them under MAP in order that production could be started now.

Regarding SEATELCOM, McNamara requested that his staff provide him with frequent reports on the progress of this project with particular emphasis on whether deadlines were being met.

$12.6 Million Commitment

McNamara asked whether we actually have a commitment. Ambassador Young said we do have one of a general nature. McNamara said this is impossible; either we have a commitment or we don’t Ambassador Young said we do.

McNamara then suggested that we hot discuss further whether or not we have a commitment. What we must do is lay out a program which will fulfill the obligation. This should include whatever we expect from the RTG. Ambassador Young said the Thai agreed in their discussions with the Vice President to provide 10% of $50 million as their contribution to the joint effort.

General Johnson said the Thai believe the $12.6 million commitment was to be an annual expenditure for an indefinite period. McNamara said we obviously could not agree to this. He suggested we might tell the Thai that we believe the commitment was for one year, but since they have a different understanding we would be willing to phase down the expenditure over a two or three year period. It might be done on a basis of $12 million the first year, $6 million the second, and $2 million the third or some such arrangement. (At another point the Secretary suggested $12 million–$6 million-0 as a possible solution.) He suggested we have as our objective the use of this commitment to establish units needed for countersubversion work.

Admiral Felt said the airborne group and similar units are very expensive. We need to decide now that we will follow through on these units. McNamara said if we start them, we will carry out the program.

US Troops in Thailand

Harkins and Felt expressed the view we should get our forces out of Thailand as soon as possible. They said, however, that they would like to send smaller units of troops in for periodic training in the future. McNamara and Ambassador Young agreed.

McNamara expressed the view that we should reduce our troops to the absolute minimum in Thailand, then we could build them up for training the VDC or other purposes. We could also add people to carry out construction of the recently approved logistic programs. He asked Felt and Harkins to prepare a paper for the JCS which would then be cleared with State and the President.

McNamara suggested that equipment for the battle group be left in Thailand if the battle group pulls out. He said it took four weeks to get the equipment in place. We should store it there in case we need to increase our forces in Thailand at some future date. General Johnson said he believed this would be acceptable to the Thai.

Mr. Johnson said pulling out US forces had political implications both in Thailand and in Laos. He felt it would be preferable to maintain a battle group in Thailand at least for the next few months. He said he would discuss this with the Secretary of State.

US-financed Logistic Facilities

McNamara expressed the view we should have a written agreement with the Thai that we can use the rolling stock and other facilities if the need arises. Mr. Johnson suggested there should be an exchange of notes and asked Ambassador Young to work out a draft with Harkins.

Harkins said he was dissatisfied with the pipeline proposal. The line to be built was a temporary facility which would last three or perhaps a maximum of five years. A member of Admiral Felt’s staff said it might last up to ten years, but agreed that this was not a permanent facility. It was designed primarily to get a line in quickly. Building a permanent pipeline to Korat had been rejected as too expensive and too time-consuming.

McNamara said that at least the portion through Bangkok should be permanent. The CINCPAC representative suggested that this could be permanent and that pipe for the extension to Korat could be stockpiled in Thailand. In case of need, this line could then be laid above ground in about ten days’ time. McNamara said this was a good idea and suggested that it be discussed with the RTG.

AID Programs for Thailand

Following a discussion of the AID Program for FY 63 the CINCPAC representatives expressed dissatisfaction over the absence of any funds for military construction. AID said this could not be funded by them since it involved local currency. Following a discussion, the local currency needs for FY 63 in Thailand were outlined generally as follows: $10 million for military construction

8 million possible FY 63 portion of the $12.6 million

2 million internal costs of the logistic projects

4 million baht portion of ISP

$24 million

McNamara said Thailand and South Viet-Nam would have first priority on any foreign exchange expenditures by Defense. He said DOD might be able to divert funds from elsewhere. Bundy suggested Defense might transfer money to AID which could then procure local currency. McNamara said DOD would study this suggestion.

[Here follow sections II and III, accounts of a discussion among Admiral Felt’s staff and a working meeting among U. Alexis Johnson, Ambassador Young, William Bundy, and other officials.]

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 790.5/7–2362. Secret. Drafted by Masters. At President Kennedy’s request, McNamara, U. Alexis Johnson, and William Bundy met at Camp Smith in Honolulu with military and diplomatic officials responsible for Southeast Asia. The meeting was primarily about Vietnam; see vol. II, pp. 546–556.

459. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 459. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)Source

July 24, 1962, 4:20 p.m.

McNamara said he wanted to thank Ball for sending his boys out to Honolulu yesterday, that he had been very useful to him. He said that while he was there he had talked to the Commanders and others about our troops in Thailand and he thought—they came into two points of agreement—first, that the Marines should be moved out as rapidly as Ken could negotiate appropriate removal with Sarit. McNamara said he understood this morning the President would like them out by no later than July 30. He said he was not sure Ken had that as an instruction and this was primary reason for the call to Ball. He thought it would be very helpful if Ball could cable him today.1 He would be back there tonight or tomorrow morning.

Ball agreed—said he thought we told him—the President—that he wouldn’t be able to see Sarit before Thursday.2

McNamara said he had sent word to the Chiefs to be prepared to have them out by July 30, assuming that the appropriate negotiations took place.3 So our preparations are under way and if they met on Thursday4 he thought that was entirely satisfactory, but he also thought it was extremely important that Ken have a specific date that he was negotiating to.

Ball said he would get that right off.

McNamara said this was very good and secondly, for Ball’s own information, we would have to work further on this here and get some paper to Ball. He had talked to the Commanders about removing the battle group associated personnel from Thailand. He was most anxious to get the combat personnel out of Thailand for a variety of reasons and there had been quite a bit of resistance to it in Washington. Harkins and Felt both supported a move of the battle group out in the very near future, next week or two for example. So McNamara proposed to call the Chiefs together tomorrow or so and get them to try to endorse this. If they wouldn’t endorse it, he was still going to recommend it. He said they would process it through the State Department at the appropriate time.5

Ball said this would be fine.

* Source: Kennedy Library, Ball Papers, Thailand. No classification marking. McNamara was in Honolulu; Ball was in Washington.

1 Telegram 127 to Bangkok, July 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/7–2562)

2 July 26.

3 The Joint Chiefs of Staff informed Admiral Felt that, after Young’s talks with Sarit; assuming they were successful, Felt should be prepared to withdraw the remaining Marine Expeditionary units from Thailand as soon after July 26 as possible. (JCS telegram 5432 to CINCPAC, July 25; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. III, 7/16/62–7/31/62)

4 According to telegram 163 from Bangkok, July 27, Young met with Sarit on July 27. Sarit acquiesced in the withdrawal but would not agree, implying that he could not stop the United States from doing what it had decided to do. Young sensed a “perceptible change” in mood on the part of top Thai officials, reflected by Sarit’s “sour attitude.” (Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/7–2762)

5 At 6 p.m. Washington time, the United States announced the withdrawal of the remaining U.S. Marines stationed at Udorn and noted that the withdrawal was “discussed” with the Thai Government. (Telegram 143 to Bangkok, July 27; ibid., 792.5411/7–2762)

460. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 460. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State BallSource

Washington, July 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

Withdrawal of Battle Group from Thailand

The Army battle group presently in Thailand at Korat is scheduled for rotation by August 18. With the withdrawal of the remaining Marines the additional withdrawal of the battle group would result in no combat ground forces being left in Thailand. The question that we will therefore have to face prior to August 18 is whether this battle group should be replaced (a replacement group is available and earmarked). In discussing this subject at Honolulu,1 I took the following position:

(1) We should seek the removal from Thailand at the earliest possible date of all our combat ground forces, thus reducing the problem of “American presence” there and giving us full flexibility of action;

(2) However, the presence of our ground forces in Thailand is importantly related also to the situation in Laos. The first and most immediately critical period for the Geneva Agreements with respect to Laos2 is the 75-day period following July 23. Therefore I felt that our actions with respect to our ground forces in Thailand should be closely related to the development of the situation in Laos during this critical period.

We will shortly be receiving a proposal from DOD with regard to this battle group. I think it likely that the DOD will propose that it not be replaced.3 At Honolulu it was agreed that the CINCPAC and the Army will urgently look into the possibility of storing in Thailand the heavy equipment of this battle group at such time as a decision is made not to replace the personnel. If this is possible, it would very materially reduce the reaction time if we again introduced ground forces into Thailand and should constitute an important psychological reassurance to the Thais. It was generally agreed in Honolulu that whatever was done with respect to the battle group we would, for the time being, retain our air unit in Thailand and urge that the New Zealand, Australian and UK air units similarly be retained.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.56311/7–2562. Top Secret. Copies were sent to Harriman, G/PM, and Rusk, who was that day returning from the Geneva Conference on Laos.

1 See Document 458.

2 For text of the Declaration and Protocol on the Neutrality of Laos, July 23, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1075–1083.

3 See Document 461.

461. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy) 461. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, August 13, 1962.

Dean Rusk believes that Sarit would oppose withdrawal of the battle group from Thailand at this time. Therefore, I agreed to leave the group or its replacement in Thailand, at least for the present.1 However, we should be planning on withdrawing the personnel at the earliest possible moment.

Assuming that the North Vietnamese forces are withdrawn from Laos by the end of the 75 day period, we should be prepared to discuss with Sarit a “package deal” involving withdrawal of the battle group and its replacement with approximately 1700 construction personnel, periodic training exercises involving the introduction of combat personnel, the assignment to Thailand of counterinsurgency training teams, and the storage in Thailand of a complement of heavy equipment for a battle group.

Would it not be wise to defer the movement of the construction personnel to Thailand until Sarit has agreed to a plan providing for the withdrawal of the battle group?

Please discuss this entire subject with the State Department.

RMcN

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 65 A 3501, Thailand 334–384. Confidential.

1 At a meeting with McNamara on August 6, the JCS conceded that although there was no military requirement for the battle group in Thailand, they felt that political and psychological factors merited its remaining, especially given the situation in Laos. McNamara complained that Sarit and the Thais did “not have the slightest concept about the type of war going on in SEA and Thailand has no plan for this type of war which makes it difficult for our personnel to produce one.” McNamara decided to postpone temporarily a decision and discuss with Secretary of State Rusk the political and psychological factors involved. (Memorandum for the record by Heinz, August 6; ibid., Thailand 200–320.2)

462. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President Johnson 462. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Assistant (Burris) to Vice President JohnsonSource

Washington, September 17, 1962.

RE

Changes in Thai Policy Toward The West

During his visit in Southeast Asia, General Taylor held extensive conversations with Prime Minister Sarit and other leading Thai officials.1 As was anticipated, the current impasse between Thailand and Cambodia was perhaps the most controversial. The recent U.S. decision to provide limited amounts of military equipment for the Cambodians has had the undesirable effect of aggravating U.S.-Thai relations. General Taylor attempted to present the idea that armed support for Cambodia was necessary for the over-all defense of Southeast Asia. Sarit replied that the Thai people would never accept this reasoning since U.S. aid to Cambodia would simply be interpreted as a sword pointed toward the Thais. Sarit would not accept General Taylor’s view that U.S. aid to Cambodia would not precipitate trouble.

Discussions with the Foreign Minister, as well as military officials, clearly indicated to General Taylor that Thailand is determined to follow a more independent policy, certainly one less responsive to Western suggestions. This trend is not new. It was present during the crisis in Laos when U.S. troops were dispatched to Thailand, and it was further evident when the Thais boycotted the Geneva meetings.

* Source: Johnson Library, Vice Presidential Security File, Memoranda to the Vice President from Burris, July 1962–April 1963. Confidential.

1 After President Kennedy nominated Taylor to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, of Staff and after his Senate confirmation hearing on August 9, Taylor visited countries in the Far East August 31-September 21. (Taylor, Swords and Plowshares, p. 256) Ambassador Young provided a summary of General Taylor’s conversation on September 14 with Sarit and other Thai officials in telegram 501 from Bangkok, September 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/9–1662)

463. Paper by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor) 463. Paper by the President’s Military Representative (Taylor)Source

September 21, 1962.

IMPRESSIONS OF THAILAND

1. Sarit

(For interview with Sarit, see attached cable.)1 For his press reaction to interview, see attached clipping.2

Sarit is undoubtedly fed up with Sihanouk and all his works and he is being egged on by Thanat in his threats to go it alone without the U.S. However, he is a wise, old pro who is unlikely to do anything extreme from emotion or loss of temper. My present hunch would be that Sarit will not leave our side unless we should lose in SVN. However, he may be expected to pursue a more independent policy as time goes on with less heed to U.S. wishes.

2. National Security Organization

The Thais have moved ahead in organizing a National Security Organization to cope with the potential insurgency problem in the north-east. It provides a useful device for receiving and channeling U.S. assistance earmarked for counter-insurgency purposes. The present plan calls for setting up four Joint Development Centers in the area by September 1963 which will be regional centers for civic action kinds of activities. One has already been established at Ban Na Ko which is expected to cost $60,882.

3. The Military Aid Program

The objectives of the Military Aid Program, contained in CINCPAC letter serial 0307, dated June 2, 1962,3 are as follows:

“The primary mission of the JUSMAG is to support COMUSMACTHAI in assisting the RTG forces and paramilitary forces to attain the capability to: a. Maintain internal security against Communist-inspired external aggression.

b. Provide maximum feasible initial resistance to Communist-inspired external aggression.

c. Make a modest contribution to the collective defense of the SEATO area.”

In attempting to find what force level was being used as the goal to meet the requirements of b. and c. above, I found that the yardstick was the requirement of approved SEATO war plans. If certain Thai forces are included in any of these plans we undertake to provide the military aid to support them. This fact emphasizes the need to look carefully at SEATO and bilateral planning to see how realistic they are since they generate MAP expenditures. In most cases, it is the planning requirement to be ready for massive Chicom attack which runs up the cost of the MAP program.

4. The 5-Year Internal Security Program With Included Master Defense Plan

Ambassador Young has had great difficulty in producing the above plan in a form satisfactory to Washington. The Master Defense Plan, drawn up by Major General Briard P. Johnson, was submitted separately on August 15, 1962 to meet a DOD deadline. There was not time to reflect in it the Secretary of Defense’s guidance given at Honolulu on 23 July 1962 to the effect that we should plan Thai forces without regard to the requirements of a large scale war with the Chicoms. Hence, the cost of the MAP is high—1/2 billion dollars for 6 years—with the largest hardware costs allocated to modernizing the Air Force. The orientation of effort away from conventional forces towards internal security is slight because of the fundamental assumption that the Thai force must be tailored to support the requirements of approved war plans. The Ambassador has not commented on the plan.

A moot point in the Master Defense Plan is the inclusion of about $60 million for troop support, a change from the past policy of refusing to pick up these costs. Ambassador Young is opposed to this change except for the so-called LBJ commitment of $12.6 million which Young would spread over three years.

The military construction program within the MDP contains about $60 million for the improvement of airfields (items beyond the SLAT program) to permit jet operations against Red China.

Young has had great difficulty in getting from AID a satisfactory socio-economic program to go with the MDP One sticking point has been AID resistance to putting up any local currency since they told Congress they would not but now it is planned to propose that local costs may be shared 50–50. To the unhappiness of the AID officials, Young has included in the MDP funds to be provided by AID for the border and provincial police. AID people complain that they were not consulted about these sub-programs.

The present status of the Internal Defense Plan is as follows:

Master Defense Plan: Has been submitted to Washington. Young is about to send forward his comments.4 He has had no Washington reaction except word that no comment there is feasible until the socio-economic plan is received.5

Socio-Economic Plan: Submitted to Washington in form of long-range plan not approved by the Ambassador; a specific program for FY 63 will follow during the week of 17 September. The State request for additional information on priorities and currency requirements will be met by the Embassy within a week.

5. Future MA Programs

We are at the crossroads of decision with regard to further military aid for Thailand. The MFP [MDP?], if approved, will be a heavy load to carry and will generate fixed charges in maintenance at around $20 million a year. Any effort to streamline the program, even if justified militarily, will compound our growing difficulties with Sarit and his Government.

The following military points should be looked at in reviewing future MA programs for Thailand:

a. The assumption with regard to the responsibility for defending Thailand against Chicom ground, air and sea attack. If the U.S. were willing to provide the necessary additional forces to defeat a Chicom attack in SEA, the local MAP could be greatly reduced in Thailand and other Asian countries.

b. The need to build up a logistic and airfield base in Thailand to support a general war against Chicoms. This question arises regardless of who may use the facilities—U.S., Thais, or SEATO.

c. The advantage of putting more stress on the use of missiles rather than of manned aircraft for air defense to offset the Chicom superiority in the air.

d. The need for the Thai Navy to be able to conduct ASW patrols in the Gulf of Thailand without U.S. assistance.

e. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

f. The relative weight being accorded conventional weapons versus paramilitary forces.4

6. Withdrawal of the U.S. Battle Group From Thailand

The 2d BG, 35th Infantry is well installed in Khorat where it can do useful training while exercising a stabilizing effect on the Laotian situation. Its withdrawal would be very disturbing to Sarit who is unsure of U.S. long term intentions in SEA and who is already looking around for some new place to go. He will never feel that the 1500 “logistical package” is an offset to the withdrawal of the battle group—indeed the argument should not be advanced. Whatever our decision, we should inform Sarit well in advance of troop movements in and out of Thailand.

7. VOA Transmitter

Although the Thais have agreed in principle to permitting the installation of a large VOA transmitter for use against targets outside of Thailand, they are now insisting on Thai ownership, operation and manning with complete control over allocation of broadcast time. U.S. officials hope to compromise by agreeing to Thai manning but with U.S. direction. We could promise the Thais some broadcast time.

8. U.S. Command Set-Up—SVN/Thailand

There is uncertainty as to the U.S. military command set-up in SEA both for the present situation and for active military operations. Admiral Felt, anticipating the withdrawal of CJTF 116 from Thailand, would prefer to relieve Harkins of his responsibility for Thailand and pull back to Honolulu US and SEATO planning for Thailand and Laos. He would make General Conway senior US Commander, Laos, but with only coordinating authority over PACOM units rotating through Thailand.

If this arrangement is not acceptable, Admiral Felt would like Harkins in present role but would give him Conway as his Chief of Staff for Thai affairs. Harkins would exercise operational command through component commanders in Thailand and South Vietnam as appropriate.

Neither of these suggestions look good to me. Harkins should be retained as overall commander with three subordinate commanders: CG, AF, SEA; CG, US Army Thailand (also Chief of MAAG); and COMUSMACV (less air component). Harkins would remain COMUSMACV and would receive a staff augmentation to meet his responsibilities for area planning.

General O’Donnell feels that Harkins needs a senior AF officer as his advisor in air matters. I would give this task to CG, AF, SEA.

9. Ambassador Young is swamped. He wants and needs a principal assistant to man the internal defense program. Further, it is obvious in Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and Saigon that State would receive less local oriented recommendations if the three Ambassadors could meet regularly and talk over their overlapping problems.

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Far East Trip, Sept. 62, T–022–69. Top Secret. Taylor presumably drafted this paper en route to Washington.

1 See footnote 1, Document 462.

2 Not attached.

3 Not found.

4 Some of Young’s comments are in telegram 601 from Bangkok, September 27. He listed positive and negative factors affecting U.S. policy and concluded that for the next 2 years the positive outweighed the negative. Over the long run, the negative factors could predominate. Young could not, therefore, recommend that the United States commit itself irrevocably to a $700-million program over the next 6 years. Since it was a U.S. policy decision to develop Thailand as “a security base in SEA,” the United States would have to continue programs in this order of magnitude, but it should emphasize local flexibility and initiative and ensure that the programs did not become “interminable and inelastic.” (Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/9–2762)

5 In telegram 294 to Bangkok, September 11. (Ibid./792.5/9–1162)

4 Some of Young’s comments are in telegram 601 from Bangkok, September 27. He listed positive and negative factors affecting U.S. policy and concluded that for the next 2 years the positive outweighed the negative. Over the long run, the negative factors could predominate. Young could not, therefore, recommend that the United States commit itself irrevocably to a $700-million program over the next 6 years. Since it was a U.S. policy decision to develop Thailand as “a security base in SEA,” the United States would have to continue programs in this order of magnitude, but it should emphasize local flexibility and initiative and ensure that the programs did not become “interminable and inelastic.” (Department of State, Central Files, 792.5/9–2762)

464. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 464. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 24, 1962.

The United States and Marshal Sarit

I understand that you have asked what we are doing or intend to do in light of the reports from Bangkok that Marshal Sarit has been becoming disenchanted with U.S. policy.1

The best explanation of Marshal Sarit’s behavior seems to be that he has become angry at us for not having fought his war in Laos for him. He seems to feel that he was badgered into signing the Geneva Accords and is now having some second thoughts. There are also indications that some of the Thai military leaders are jockeying for power or at least a redistribution of the spoils of office. In such a situation Sarit may need an issue behind which he can unify squabbling factions. In any event there is no doubt that he has temporarily chosen the United States as a whipping boy.

It is difficult to foresee how far he will go on his present line of threatening to “reorient” Thailand’s foreign policy. Much of what he has been saying may be intended to frighten us into increasing our military assistance to him and modifying our policy toward Cambodia and Laos.

Averell’s reaction, which I share, is that we must not permit ourselves to become Sarit’s satellite. He feels that Ambassador Young may not be taking a detached enough stand with Sarit and is in the process of cabling him to that effect.

There will be several opportunities in the near future to observe whether Sarit is just barking or whether he intends to bite. We are in the process of negotiating with him on several practical matters, such as the radio station in Bangkok and the police program in North Thailand. His attitude in these negotiations should telegraph to us his real intentions. In the meantime we do not intend, unless you disagree, to react to bombast from Bangkok.

MVF

* Source: Kennedy, Library, President’s Office Files, Laos Security, 9/1/62-12/31/62. Secret.

1 Reports and commentary on the deterioration are in [document numbers not declassified]. (Ibid., National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. IV, 9/62)

465. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman) 465. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Koren) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, September 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Troop Withdrawal from Thailand

It is my understanding that at the meeting with President at 11:30 this morning1 Secretary McNamara may raise the question of troop withdrawal from Thailand and the proposed logistic build-up in Thailand. I am not sure what recommendation Defense will make, but a draft I saw last night proposed a tentative date of between November 15–30. They would recommend working out with the Thais now the details of the logistics build-up and beginning it as soon as possible. I told Bundy’s office I was sure we would go along with such a recommendation. We have, however, a complication if it is true as per para. 4 of Bangkok’s 598 (attached)2 that Sarit wants the troops out right away. Though he may have said this, I think he could be persuaded to the November date if the situation were fully presented to him.

The British are very anxious to get our reaction to their proposed withdrawal of their air squadron sometime between Oct. 7 and 25. They already have Thai blessing from Thanat. I see no reason we should not concur in a date around the middle of October and would recommend it be done without publicity.

I recommend you take the position that our troops remain until about the middle of November, that this be worked out in detail with Sarit, but be talked over fully with Thanat when he is here next week. I recommend we also talk with the Thais on the logistics build-up soonest. Finally, I recommend that I be authorized to tell the British that we have no objection to their proposed withdrawal.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.551/9–2862. Secret.

1 The meeting with the President at 11:30 a.m., attended by Ball, McNamara, Gilpatric, Nitze, Harriman, Hilsman, McCone, [text not declassified], Taylor, Lemnitzer, and Forrestal, was mainly concerned with Laos, but the President approved the retention of U.S. combat troops in Thailand pending a further review of developments in Laos. A record of the meeting is printed in vol. XXIV, p. 904.

2 Dated September 27. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/9–2762)

466. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 466. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, September 28, 1962.

Conference with SEATO Secretary General

You are scheduled to receive Pote Sarasin, Secretary General of SEATO, at 4 p.m. today.1

Sarasin is an unusually friendly Thai official and far more restrained in his views than other Thai, especially Foreign Minister Thanat. I had lunch with Sarasin last Tuesday; and he said that in his opinion the main source of our current difficulties with the Thais is the fact that we failed to consult with them in advance of the withdrawal of the Marines from Udorn. As a result of this, according to Sarasin, a succession of other unrelated events (the Temple, Cambodian aid, etc.) became magnified out of proportion.

You may wish to give Sarasin a brief personal message to convey to Sarit, which would have the effect of enhancing Sarasin’s prestige and indicating to Sarit your personal concern over the difficulties which have arisen.

For example, you might describe to Sarasin in a general way the circumstances under which we withdrew the Marines. You will recall that, having put the Marines in, in response to the fall of Nam Tha, we were anxious to demonstrate rather quickly to the Soviets that we still wished to push the Geneva Accords to conclusion. If Sarasin were able to convey some of the atmosphere surrounding your decision discreetly to Sarit, it might serve to smooth ruffled feelings.

A cable came in last night which may confirm Sarasin’s identification of the troop withdrawal as the source of Sarit’s annoyance. Bangkok’s 585 is attached,2 in which Sarit has suggested the desirability of consultation on the withdrawal of the battle group presently near Korat.

Mike

* Source: Kennedy Library, President’s Office Files, Thailand; Southeast Asia Addendum. Secret.

1 See Document 467.

2 Dated September 26. (Department of State, Central Files, 751H.00/9–2662)

467. Memorandum of Conversation 467. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, September 28, 1962, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

US-Thai Relations

PARTICIPANTS

The President Mr. Pote Sarasin, Secretary General, SEATO

Gov. W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Edward E. Masters, Officer-in-Charge, Thai Desk

[Here follows discussion of SEATO issues; see Document 36.]

Turning to the US military presence in Thailand, Mr. Sarasin said US forces had made a very favorable impact. The people liked the Americans and the government was deeply impressed by the fact that US troops arrived within 48 hours. This proved the US could and would come to Thailand’s assistance quickly in event of need. He said Prime Minister Sarit had asked him to convey. Sarit’s appreciation for the prompt US response to Thailand’s request for military support.

The President asked Mr. Sarasin to tell the Prime Minister that he regretted the fact that there had not been adequate time for full consultation before our Marines were withdrawn. The President said the Marines are an amphibious force which belongs at sea. These are special units which must maintain their flexibility. The Prime Minister should not believe that the withdrawal was in any sense a lessening of our interest or responsibilities in the area. If consultation was inadequate, this was only a mechanical failure and did not represent any US intention to disregard Thailand’s wishes.

Mr. Sarasin said our objectives in sending in troops were good and these objectives had been achieved. This movement showed the US could get in quickly. The Thai Government does not mind withdrawal of the forces; it hopes only that adequate consultation will be held before this takes place. Mr. Sarasin suggested it might be useful to issue a joint US-Thai communiqué at the time of withdrawal which would explain the purpose of the forces and emphasize their ability to return quickly if needed.

The President agreed that issuance of such a joint communiqué might be helpful. On the future of the US forces, the President said it might be useful to keep the Battle Group in Thailand for a little while until we see what happens in Laos. We will soon want to discuss this with the Thai Government to see what it thinks.

The President asked whether it would not have been possible to induce the Philippines to participate in the introduction of troops last May. Gov. Harriman explained that the Philippines offered to send troops if asked by Thailand, whereas Thailand said it would accept troops if offered by the Philippines. Mr. Sarasin observed that the Government of Thailand knew that movement and maintenance of troops would be expensive and wanted to save the Philippine Government the expense. He believed, however, that if the Thai Government had made a formal request the Philippines would have responded.

The President said he realized that the ICJ decision on the Phra Viharn temple, the unfortunate timing of the arrival of the T-28s in Cambodia, and other developments had created problems for Prime Minister Sarit. Regarding the ICJ decision, the President said that Dean Acheson, attorney for the Cambodians, is an independent figure and not a member of the Administration. The US Government was not involved in any way in influencing the ICJ decision.

Mr. Sarasin said his government understands the reasons for our military aid to Cambodia, but the people may not understand our motives. President Kennedy said the Cambodian Government released the news of the delivery of our T-28s before we could alert Prime Minister Sarit. The Cambodians probably hoped to play up these arrivals to cause problems in our relations with Thailand and South Viet-Nam. Mr. Sarasin said he did not believe the Government of Thailand actually feared Cambodia. It was only that there should have been earlier and more thorough consultation so the Thai Government could alert the people beforehand. President Kennedy assured the Secretary General there would be the fullest possible discussion in the future.

The President said Sihanouk is volatile and mercurial, but this does not mean we should not help him. Although we do not agree with many of his actions, we believe it is in the interests of the Free World for him to obtain military equipment from us rather than from the communists.

The President said he hoped the Thai Government and people would look at the satisfactory things that are being done and not over-emphasize the negative. The President asked Mr. Sarasin to tell Sarit that our assurances to Thailand, the Rusk-Thanat communiqué, the movement of US forces, and the planned logistics program all demonstrate our intention to continue to meet our commitments. Our main objective in Southeast Asia is for a strong Thailand, a strong South Viet-Nam, a neutral Cambodia, and, we hope, a neutral Laos.

In response to a general comment by Mr. Sarasin, the President said he would send the Prime Minister a letter covering some of the topics which had been discussed.1

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/9–2862. Secret. Drafted by Masters and approved by the White House on October 15. The meeting lasted until 4:42 p.m. (Kennedy Library, President’s Appointment Book)

1 Text of the letter was transmitted in telegram 692 to Bangkok, October 15. (Ibid., Central Files, 611.92/10–1562)

Pote Sarasin also met with Rusk at the United Nations at 9:15 a.m. on September 29. Rusk asked if Thailand’s view of SEATO had improved. Pote Sarasin answered that it had not because the deployment of troops to Thailand was “more a bilateral than a SEATO action.” Rusk stressed the U.S. commitment to SEATO and, in response to Pote Sarasin’s fears about the future of Laos, noted that it “has not gone Communist yet.” The two men discussed Thai relations with its neighbors and U.S.-Thai relations. Pote Sarasin stressed the need for more consultation and expressed the belief that U.S. ground forces and the British air unit could be withdrawn. (Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

468. Memorandum of Conversation 468. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, October 2, 1962, noon.

SUBJECT

US Troops in Thailand and State of US-Thai Relations

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister of Thailand

H.E. Visutr Arthayukti, Ambassador of Thailand

Mr. U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs

Gov. W. Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

V. Admiral Herbert D. Riley, Director, Joint Staff, JCS

Mr. William P. Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense

Mr. Henry L.T. Koren, Director, Office of SEA Affairs

Mr. Michael V. Forrestal, Senior Staff Member, NSC

Mr. Edward E. Masters, Officer-in-Charge, Thai Desk

The Foreign Minister first raised the matter of the Friendship, Commerce and Navigation Treaty between the United States and Thailand.1 He said his government would like to issue notification under the present Treaty of its intention to terminate the agreement in one year. The Thai Government would like to take this action in order to strengthen its hand in dealing with other countries on FCN matters. The Foreign Minister said his government was still awaiting US comments on the counter-draft of a new FCN Treaty which had been given to our Embassy at Bangkok in February 1962. Mr. Johnson said he would look into the possible termination of the present agreement as well as the status of negotiations on the new Treaty and inform the Foreign Minister further.2

Turning to the US troop presence, Mr. Johnson said we wished to explore this with the Foreign Minister. We would not attempt to reach any decision at this time, but wished to exchange views fully and frankly. Detailed discussions would be held later in Bangkok.

Mr. Johnson said there are two important aspects to this matter from our standpoint. These are the internal implications of these troops within Thailand and, secondly, their impact on Laos.3 He said we believe the presence of allied forces in Thailand serves to maintain pressure on Laos. We would not want to give the impression through withdrawal of our forces immediately after October 7 that we have lost interest or that we necessarily approve developments in Laos. We do not wish to keep these troops in Thailand indefinitely, but at the same time withdrawal should be accomplished at such time and in such manner as to create no adverse effects in Thailand or in Laos. We both have the same interests in Laos; US troops in Thailand have furthered these interests, and we need to ensure that withdrawal of these forces does not have a counter-productive effect in Laos.

Mr. Johnson mentioned Prime Minister Sarit’s desire to maintain the US air units in Thailand. Mr. Johnson said we had always considered our air and ground forces together. The air units are particularly flexible and could be returned even more rapidly than ground forces in the event of an emergency. It might therefore be possible to remove them at the same time the ground forces are taken out. However, we want Thailand’s views on this and will discuss the Prime Minister’s suggestion further with him. Mr. Johnson mentioned also that to hasten the reaction time of our ground units it might be possible to leave the heavy equipment for the Battle Group in place at the time of withdrawal.

The Foreign Minister said the troop presence was purely a matter between friends; Thailand is the host and the US the guest. He said his government would like to know our plans so we could concert our actions and policies. The Foreign Minister agreed that the presence of US forces had contributed to stability in Laos. He said his government was fully aware of US responsibilities in Southeast Asia and desired to strengthen our hand in the area. He said we need to work together to stabilize the situation in the region and at the same time reduce the onus on Thailand from a foreign military presence.

The Foreign Minister said his government did not fear the US troops becoming “occupiers.” US forces had created a favorable impression within Thailand and he was not aware of any local resentment against them. He said it was the foreign repercussions of this troop presence that bothered Thailand. Some Asian states are accusing Thailand of being an “occupied” country. Thailand is afraid of losing its independent status and its international prestige.

Gov. Harriman said the important thing is for us to work together. A favorable solution of the problems in Southeast Asia is possible only if the US and Thailand work closely with one another.

The Foreign Minister agreed and said we should have in mind a mutually agreeable target date for withdrawal of the troops. He suggested October 15 on the grounds that trends in Laos may be more apparent by that time. If in the meantime there were a renewal of fighting, a Pathet Lao offensive, or some other serious development, a continued US presence in Thailand would of course be desirable. However, if the present “twilight situation” continues, we should at least be able to announce by that time that the US and the Thai Governments have agreed to withdrawal at some future date.

Mr. Johnson said we would look at the situation by October 15 and would discuss the matter with the Thai Government with a view to reaching agreement on a target date for eventual withdrawal which would take account of developments in the area. The Foreign Minister indicated his agreement to this suggestion.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.927/10–262. Secret. Drafted by Masters and approved in G on November 13.

1 Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation, signed at Bangkok on November 13, 1937, and entered into force on October 1, 1938. (53 Stat. 1731; TS 940)

2 According to an October 3 memorandum from Johnson to Harriman, Johnson confirmed to Thanat on the night of October 2 that the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok would negotiate, termination of the treaty. The Embassy’s problem was Thai, unwillingness, to accept International Court of Justice jurisdiction in a new treaty, but Thanat made it clear, that Thailand could not accept such a provision. Usually the existing treaty would be terminated by a provision of the new treaty, but Johnson understood that Thailand wanted to terminate it sooner for tactical reasons, which it was entitled to do. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.9242/10–362)

3 Thanat Khoman discussed Laos in a separate conversation with Harriman on October 2. Harriman stated that events in Laos since the signing of the Geneva Agreements on July 23 were about what was expected. When asked by Thanat if the United States would withdraw its MAAG from Laos by October 7, the deadline for withdrawal of foreign troops according to the agreement, Harriman answered affirmatively. Thanat asked what the United States would do if the “Viet-Minh” did not withdraw, and Harriman suggested that the United States would use maximum diplomatic pressure. (Ibid., 751J.00/10–262)

469. Summary of Discussion 469. Summary of DiscussionSource

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Document #2

SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS AT HONOLULU CONFERENCE

October 8–9, 1962

I. T-A Comprehensive Internal Security Plan for Thailand

A. Ambassador’s Review of Situation

Ambassador Young set the stage with the following comments: 1. Thailand is an essential US operational base in Southeast Asia.

2. Our efforts must be subordinate to and in support of those of the RTG.

3. Despite uncertainties in current US-Thai relations, the basic relationship is sound and will probably remain so if Thailand respects our power and needs our resources.

4. It is extremely important to develop programs which will get the Thai Government out to the villagers. We have a maximum of 24 months to accomplish this. (This is based on a projection of two dry seasons. The Ambassador said by 1965 the threat will be such that it will be too late if our projects are not complete.)

B. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Political Situation

Although the Communist Party is outlawed it is nonetheless organizing. The Northeast and the North are the most vulnerable. Since the Kong Le coup in Laos in August of 1960 six subversive groups have been detected in the Northeast and some 380 persons have been arrested. The Thai Exiles Association in Laos backstops the efforts of subversives within Thailand. This Association aspires to take over the Northeast, oust foreign troops from Thailand, get Thailand to leave SEATO, and replace the Sarit government.

Other vulnerabilities are as follows: 1. The Chinese are a likely target for communist penetration due to the economic influence.

2. Some 35 to 40,000 Vietnamese remain in the Northeast. This group is solidly pro-Hanoi. DRV reluctance to conclude a new repatriation agreement may be due in large part to the fact that the communists wish to keep these people in Thailand.

3. The KMT Irregulars are a source of instability.

4. The Shans which operate against the GUB embarrass the Thai Govt.

5. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

On the positive side, there is no evidence of significant communist inroads among the Buddhist clergy. There is also no evidence of serious disaffection among students.

[1 paragraph (3-1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

The communists are now making some propaganda efforts against US troops in Thailand. Leaflets have been issued criticizing these troops. There have been no known efforts to conduct sabotage against them.

Prospects: For the foreseeable future the communists will continue their organizational phase. No militant action is likely. Sarit and his government are aware of the problem and are starting to do something about it. Thailand is not an easy target for the communists. The Sarit government is stable and the Prime Minister is highly respected. The popular monarchy is also a force for stability. There could however be an insurgent situation in three to five years if remedial action is not taken now. The real danger is Thailand’s wavering confidence in US determination to beat the communists in SEA.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] no group is now in a position to oust the Prime Minister. His future depends on his health. [1 line of source text not declassified] If he died or were incapacitated, he would probably be succeeded by Defense Minister Thanom with Praphat exercising a strong role in the background. Chitti and Krit are potential successors, but it is likely that Thanom would be the immediate replacement for Sarit.

C. The Internal Security Plan

The Ambassador briefly outlined the LAS, Master Force Plan and priority list, all of which were submitted to Washington in September.1 He said the Country Team has developed a triangular approach (by including (1) political development to win the allegiance of the people in remote areas; (2) socio-economic development to improve living conditions; and (3) preventive security through para-military and military forces).

Mr. Ewer2 surveyed the AID portion of the Plan. He said there are now 800 kilometers of feeder roads in the program at about $30,000 per kilometer. This program will be submitted to Washington in detail later this month. Mr. Ewer said the SEATELCOM contract had not yet been signed, but that completion of SEATELCOM was still set at 11 months from date of signature.

Mr. McNamara said if the contract were not signed by a reasonable date SEATELCOM should be funded under MAP. Admiral Felt demurred on the grounds that alternative facilities are already under way by the military. Following a general discussion Mr. McNamara said the matter should be left as follows: If the contract is not signed by October 19 (expiration date for the current bids) the Country Team should bring the matter to the attention of State and DOD with recommendations on what should be done to expedite action.

Gen. Conway3 said the Master Force Plan was re-examined in light of DOD comments. The force maintenance and force improvement sections are the same as in the FY 1963 program. The para-military elements and certain equipment items are additive. [1 line of source text not declassified] a maximum of 7500. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Thailand could recruit and absorb that many if the money were available. [less that 1 line of source text not declassified] the limit on the build-up was money rather than other factors. SecDef said the USG would supply the money if Thailand can recruit the people.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we should not provide troop support for the BPP if this is not provided for the army. Preferential treatment for the BPP could have adverse political implications.

Mr. McNamara suggested the following: 1. We include in the AID program for FY 1963 enough money for equipping a 7,000-man BPP.

2. We leave to Country Team discretion the authority to make this proposal to Sarit or hold it depending on their assessment of his political views.

3. We leave to Country Team the problem of finding a solution to the army-BPP matter.

We believe this increase in the BPP is important. We should give the Country Team maximum flexibility in negotiating with the RTG. The Country Team should first try to induce the RTG to pay troop support. If the RTG cannot do this, we could perhaps raise baht by provision through MAP of some military equipment desired by the RTG. AID would reimburse MAP for this equipment.

Gen. Conway said we aspire for a well-trained and well-equipped provincial police of 28,000. SecDef said that if weapons were needed DOD would transfer these to AID at low cost. He said DOD could give 28,000 M-1s at a cost of about $14 each. If the M-1 is not satisfactory, the DOD should be informed what is needed. We want 28,000 well-equipped provincial policemen.

Gen. Conway recommended MAP funding for the Volunteer Defense Corps. Sec Def said this organization has third priority on total AID and MAP resources and we should proceed as rapidly as politically feasible in improving the VDC.

Gen. Taylor questioned whether a VDC was needed for Thailand. He said we established a proliferation of preventive organizations in Viet-Nam and asked whether we needed to duplicate this in Thailand. He expressed the belief that we need a clear idea of the mission for this organization and suggested it might duplicate the provincial police. SecDef said this is nonetheless priority #3; our program should include such manning increase and equipment as the Sarit government will accept.

In a discussion of the military force levels under the MFP, SecDef questioned why we should press the Thai to raise the manning level to 80%. He said additional conventional forces are not needed for GI work. What we need is improved training and equipment for the existing forces. He said we would supply the equipment for an airborne battalion, a psywar battalion, and an engineer unit, but the Thai must provide the personnel. They can establish new units or convert existing ones.

Carrying this further, SecDef said that unless the RTG is willing to provide troop pay we will not support additional recruitment with equipment. As a matter of principle, we should not give troop support nor does Thailand require $81 million (from the MFP) in troop support over the next six years.

SecDef said in the earlier executive session it had been agreed that there was no “Johnson commitment.” He said the Ambassador will clarify with the RTG the fact that this was a misunderstanding and not a commitment. SecDef said we would give the Ambassador some “sweetener.”

Referring to the $10 million CI Fund, Gen. Conway said we could get the Thai army into the field six months per year for $1 million. SecDef said we absolutely would not pay for this.

Referring to earlier SecDef criticism of the MFP, Gen. Conway said we need to bear in mind the political factors. The RT Army is reluctant to create competing para-military units. This is the reason why para-military forces were not given a greater role in the MFP. Gen. Conway added that he did not believe the RTA was over strength in view of the size, long border, lack of roads, and other factors in Thailand. Regarding SecDef criticism that the para-military build-up was too slow, Gen. Conway said the CT and the RTG had believed that growth acceleration depended on US troop support.

II. T-B Improvement of National Intelligence Effort

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the most effective intelligence collecting organizations “are: (1) the police, (2) the DCI, and (3) the military, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] these sources are now beginning to pool their information. However, Sarit still deals directly with them and coordination leaves much to be desired. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Sarit recently permitted JUSMAG to send advisers to Thai Army intelligence organizations; 17 US personnel are now out with Thai divisions.

SecDef said we should take a given province and put down all we know about it. This should include the local security apparatus and attitudes of the people. We should try to develop a set of techniques and programs to meet these vulnerabilities. Adm. Felt suggested that Sakorn Nakorn province be used as an example.

III. T-C US Troop Presence

SecDef said retention of the US combat, troops in Thailand was a political matter on which he would abide by State’s decision. Following a discussion with Gov. Harriman he said we should plan on leaving the Battle Group in Thailand until the status of the Viet-Minh in Laos is more apparent. On October 15 or shortly thereafter Ambassador Young will be authorized to discuss this matter with Sarit. When the Battle Group is withdrawn we will then consider whether to leave the air unit behind. SecDef said his personal preference would be to pull both out together, but that he would like the views of State and the RTG.

SecDef said some 200 members of a Cavalry Reconnaissance Squadron, now attached to the Battle Group, are due for rotation October 11. He suggested we proceed with removal of this unit. SecDef expressed the view that the Battle Group might be in Thailand for a long time if we intend to maintain it for leverage against Laos.

SecDef suggested that the equipment for the CR Squadron be left behind in Thailand. Subject to confirmation on his return to Washington, SecDef said new equipment would be sent to Honolulu for this unit after its withdrawal from Thailand.

IV. T-D SLAT Program

Adm. Felt said JTF-116 had reached agreement with Dawee on October 5 on a new site for the Nakorn Phanom airfield. This location is some eight miles from the river and is located on higher ground than the earlier position. Dawee agreed also to provide the necessary real estate.

Adm. Felt said the cost of the SLAT Program had been reduced somewhat. He outlined the revised program as follows: 1. Rolling stock $4,325,000

2. Floating crane 330,000

3. Nakorn Phanom airfield 2,334,000

4. Permanent pipeline 5,950,000*

5. Preposition pipeline 6,500,000

6. Preposition Battle Group equipment, PSP, etc. (9,500,000)**

Transportation 898,000

7. Construction of storage depots Approximate total MAP cost 669.000

Total US troops—1422 $21,000,000

*—Includes $1.95 million for material and $4 million for the US Engineer Battalion.

**—Service funding.

V. L-A Various Contingency Plans for US and/or SEATO Action in Laos

SecDef said we should consider how we might best lay the basis for Thai participation in a bilateral effort with the US in Laos. Whenever the political situation is appropriate, US military authorities are prepared to talk on a contingency basis with the Thais. It might also be possible to include an Australian, New Zealand, and UK contribution. State should advise DOD what action, if any, is appropriate to brief the Thai on our plans.

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 S 298, 1.B.3 Personnel. Secret. Drafted by Masters. The participants at the conference also discussed Vietnam; see vol. II, pp. 688–691.

1 In telegram 613 from Bangkok, September 29, Young commented on the Master Force Plan prepared by JUSMAG. The theme of Young’s detailed comments was to encourage the counterinsurgency capability in Thailand. (Department of State, Central Files, 795.2/9–2962) For a summary of the plan, see Document 472. In telegram 586 from Bangkok, September 26, the Country Team provided a priority list of military assistance programs to meet U.S. objectives in Thailand. (Department of State, Central Files, 792, 5/9–2662) The Long-Range Assistance Strategy has not been found, but a memorandum from Hilsman to Bell, August 10, 1963, summarizes it. (Ibid., EA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 500, Thailand, July-December)

2 John C. Ewer, Director of the AID Mission, Bangkok, since April 30, 1962.

3 Major General Theodore J. Conway, Chief, Joint U.S. Military Assistance Group, Thailand; also Deputy Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Thailand.

470. Memorandum of Decisions 470. Memorandum of DecisionsSource

Washington, October 11, 1962.

Document #1

HONOLULU CONFERENCE

OCTOBER 8–9, 1962

The following decisions were made during the Conference

1. If the SEATELCOM contract is not signed by October 19 (expiration date for the current bids), the Country Team should bring the matter to the attention of State and DOD with recommendations on what should be done to expedite action.

2. We should bring the BPP to 7,000 in FY 1963, if possible. We should offer Sarit equipment for this increase as an inducement to get him to put up troop support. If the RTG is unable to pick up the troop support item, we should be prepared to do so through an AID transfer under MAP. This increase is important; we should give the CT maximum flexibility in negotiating with the RTG.

3. DOD will provide 28,000 M-1s or other suitable weapon to AID at low cost ($14 was suggested for the M-1) to arm the provincial police.

4. The following objectives should have top priority on total AID and MAP resources: 1) Raising the BPP to 7,000 men.

2) Forming a well-equipped and well-trained provincial police.

3) Increasing and improving the VDC in both the provinces and villages as rapidly as politically feasible.

5. We will supply the equipment for an airborne battalion, psywar battalion, and an engineering unit, but the Thai must provide the personnel. They can establish new units or convert existing ones.

6. As a matter of principle, we will supply only equipment but not troop support to the Thai Armed Forces.

7. There was no $12.6 million Johnson commitment. This was merely a “misunderstanding.” Ambassador Young will clarify this matter with the RTG. We will give the Ambassador a “sweetener.”

8. We should take a given province and put down all we know about it. This should include the local security apparatus, and attitudes of the people. We should try to develop a set of techniques and programs to meet these vulnerabilities. Admiral Felt suggested Sakorn Nakorn Province as the example.

9. The Battle Group and the Tactical Air Units will remain in Thailand until the Laos situation is further clarified. Consultations will be held with Sarit on October 15 or shortly thereafter. When the Battle Group is removed we will then decide whether to leave the Tactical Air Unit behind.

10. Subject to RTG concurrence, we will pull out now a Cavalry Reconnaissance Unit of roughly 200 men subject for rotation on October 11. At the same time we will introduce about 200 Seabees under the logistics program.

11. Subject to later confirmation from Washington, we will leave in Thailand the equipment for the Cavalry Reconnaissance Unit.

12. The SLAT Program was approved subject to further discussions with the RTG to reach satisfactory arrangements on maintaining the floating crane. The new site for the Nakorn Phanom airfield was also approved.

13. State should advise Defense when and if the RTG should be filled in on our contingency planning for Laos, particularly on the possibility of integrating Thai forces into Plan 32–63.1

* Source: Department of State, FE/SEA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 298, l.B.3. Personnel. Secret. Drafted by Masters.

1 Not found.

471. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs 471. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Far Eastern AffairsSource

Washington, November 7, 1962.

THAILAND

Summary Statement

Thailand is an essential US operational base in Southeast Asia. Its continued cooperation is vital to success in Laos and to achievement of many of our other objectives in the area. Despite friction on specific issues, the basic US-Thai relationship is sound and will probably remain so for the foreseeable future as long as Thailand is convinced of our determination to meet our obligations in Southeast Asia. The success of our efforts in South Viet-Nam and Laos will contribute significantly to conditioning Thai attitudes. During the past two years there has been a major increase in the size and tempo of US assistance to Thailand. We now have a significant investment in maintaining Thailand’s internal security and improving socio-economic conditions.

Major Foreign Policy Issues

Relations between the US and Thailand have improved during the past month or so. Prime Minister Sarit has been more cooperative in discussions with US officials than previously, and he extended full and prompt support for the US during the Cuban crisis. Nonetheless a number of problems remain.

1. Confidence. The Rusk–Thanat communiqué of March 19621 and introduction of US combat forces in May went far toward reassuring the Thai of our determination to stand by them. However, doubts still persist that over the long run the US might pull out of Southeast Asia, leaving Thailand in what it regards as an increasingly exposed position following the recent Laos Agreement. Statements by some Members of Congress and prominent US journalists aggravate these fears. To meet this concern we have stressed the following among others: (a) The general size and scope of our efforts in Thailand and South Viet-Nam.

(b) The ability and willingness of US forces to move into Thailand rapidly in the event of need, as shown by the introduction of US troops in May.

(c) Our program to improve Thailand’s logistic capabilities and the eventual presence under this program of more than 1,000 US military construction personnel.

(d) The Rusk-Thanat communiqué regarding SEATO and our willingness to agree to some type of abstention arrangement in SEATO voting.

2. Laos. Thailand continues to have serious doubts about the ability of the present Laos government to resist communist efforts. Recent events, such as the failure of the Viet-Minh to withdraw, have aggravated these doubts. The Thai fear that Laos may well provide the communists additional channels for subversive activity against Thailand. Nonetheless, Thailand has taken a constructive attitude toward the new Laos government, and the recent visit by Souvanna Phouma to Bangkok appears to have been successful. We have taken every opportunity to impress on the Thai our determination to do everything possible to help the new government succeed. We have also stressed the essential fact that, Thailand itself must support the Souvanna government to strengthen his hand against the communists.

3. Cambodia. Recent Thai dissatisfaction with the United States has centered primarily on our policy toward Cambodia. To get to the root cause of difficulty between Thailand and Cambodia we have supported the establishment of a UN presence in the area. In response to a Thai overture which was supported by Cambodia, the UN Secretary General recently sent Nils Gussing as his personal representative to consider the Thai-Cambodian situation. We are extending all possible support to Mr. Gussing consistent with his UN role and hope his presence will develop into a more or less permanent UN involvement in Thai-Cambodian problems which could serve as a buffer between the disputants.

4. US Consultation. The Thai have recently become seriously concerned by what they regarded as inadequate advance consultation by the US on issues affecting their interests. Cambodia and withdrawal of the US Marines from Thailand were cited as particular examples of the United States treating Thailand as a “second-class ally.” As a result we have taken steps to improve our consulting arrangements. Ambassador Young has discussed with Sarit the future US military presence in Thailand. He has also outlined to the RTG the nature and general size of our anticipated assistance this fiscal year. Consultation will be held on other issues wherever possible.

5. US Troop Presence. Prime Minister Sarit has recently taken the position that US ground forces should be withdrawn from Thailand since their presence has served its purpose. Sarit would like, however, to retain the 250-man Tactical Air Squadron. On November 5 our Ambassador informed the Thai Foreign Minister that, barring unforeseen developments, we would be prepared to withdraw the Battle. Group by December 1. The Fighter Squadron was excluded from this arrangement and the future status of this unit will be reviewed by the US in late November.2

Retaining the air unit in Thailand for an additional period beyond December 1 offers several advantages. Presence of this unit in Thailand would indicate our continued interest in developments in Laos. It would also be responsive to Sarit’s wishes and would provide a basis for maintaining the presence of Australian and possibly New Zealand units in Thailand. The Australians in particular have indicated their willingness to remain in Thailand as long as US forces stay.

We have also discussed with Prime Minister Sarit the possibility of future rotational training in Thailand by US forces. Following withdrawal of the Battle Group we hope to agree on an arrangement whereby US units can be brought in for short bilateral training exercises.

US Support Programs: MAP—$76 million, AID—$32 million

Thailand does not now face a serious internal or external security threat. However, it has a number of serious internal vulnerabilities and its future security will depend significantly on events in Laos. We have adopted a three-fold assistance program designed to backstop Thailand’s own efforts to meet this security threat. Our support includes (1) political development projects to win for the Thai Government the allegiance of people in remote areas, (2) accelerated socio-economic assistance to reduce economic vulnerabilities, and (3) preventive security measures to improve paramilitary and military forces.

Our FY 1963 assistance to Thailand has not been finally approved, but will probably total about $108 million. The $76 million proposed under MAP emphasizes mobility and communications, the movement of Thai forces into remote areas, and the creation of new types of units useful for counter-insurgency as well as conventional operations. It includes new types of equipment and construction of military facilities intended to encourage the movement of additional Thai troops from central Thailand to remote areas.

The FY 1962 and 63 MAP also include the special logistics programs intended to increase the speed and effectiveness with which US and other SEATO forces might be deployed. Detailed discussions on this program are underway with the Thai Government.

The FY 1963 AID includes programs to improve communications into remote areas, improve the functioning of local officials especially those in vulnerable areas, raise economic standards, and improve the size and quality of the Thai police force. It is hoped in the current fiscal year to raise the strength of the Thai Border Patrol Police from the present 4800 men to 7000.

Our FY 1963 military and socio-economic assistance programs are geared to meeting the objectives in the Internal Security Plan for Thailand prepared by the Country Team at Bangkok. Ambassador Young outlined the FY 1963 program to Prime Minister Sarit on October 29. The Prime Minister indicated his general concurrence and suggested detailed discussions through the joint Thai-US committees to ensure effective integration of our support into the over-all Thai effort.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. IV, 11/62–12/62. Secret. According to the Department of State copy, this paper was drafted by Masters and cleared by Koren and Harriman. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.92/11–762) It was transmitted to the White House under cover of a November 7 memorandum from Brubeck to McGeorge Bundy in preparation for a meeting with the President. The meeting was held from 4 to 4:30 p.m. on November 8 and was attended by McNamara, Heinz, and William Bundy for Defense; Harriman, Koren, and Sullivan for State; Janow and Hamilton for AID, Taylor and Clay for the JCS, and Cline and Hepworth for CIA. The topic of Laos dominated the discussion. Apparently the only decision taken at the meeting concerning Thailand was that Young should emphasize to Sarit that it was crucial that he should continue to counsel Phoumi to cooperate with Souvanna Phouma. For accounts of the meeting, see vol. XXIV, pp. 911–915.

1 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, p. 1093.

2 Reported in telegrams 782 and 792 from Bangkok, November 5 and 9. (Department of State, Central Files, 792.00/11–562 and 792.00/11–962)

3 Reported in airgram A-267 from Bangkok, October 30. (Ibid., 792.5/10–3062)

472. Paper Prepared in the Embassy in Thailand 472. Paper Prepared in the Embassy in ThailandSource

Bangkok, undated.

UNITED STATES PLAN FOR PROMOTING THE INTERNAL SECURITY OF THAILAND

Summary

(Note: This document constitutes a statement of unilateral US goals. It has not been discussed with the Thai Government. It does not represent what the Thai Government will necessarily agree with or, even more important, what the Thai Government will necessarily put into effect. Therefore, implementation of specific programs may fall short of US objectives and goals projected in this Plan. It will be reviewed accordingly.)

Thailand is a hub of United States security efforts in Southeast Asia. It provides indispensable facilities which cannot be established or made available elsewhere on the Asian mainland between Japan and India. Thailand is now subject to Communist subversion and threatened by insurgency. Thailand has many of the dynamic elements necessary for starting and sustaining national modernization and development.

The purpose of the United States Plan to Promote the Internal Security of Thailand is to marshal all of our efforts and resources—political, economic and military—in order to discourage, prevent and, if necessary, cope successfully with subversion and insurgency. Simultaneously, the United States Plan aims to stimulate the Royal Thai Government to make a maximum effort in proceeding with dynamic programs of development and defense calculated to strengthen the country as a free and growings nation in the shortest possible time. This dynamic planning means modernization of many institutions, training of large numbers of professionally skilled people, widespread social and economic changes, raising of real incomes, realignment of security forces, establishment of communications to permit rapid movement of products, people and ideas, and voluntary participation of the people in the villages and cities in an expanding representative process of decision and consent.

The focus of the Plan is on rural Thailand and its remote areas, since the village and the villager—particularly minority groups—are the immediate targets of Communist subversion by political alienation. The villagers also represent the basic elements for building a stronger Thailand. Fundamental to the Plan is the requirement that the Thai Government assume primary responsibility for developing dynamic administration, extensive public services, and versatile security in rural areas.

The Plan envisages an initial phase of two years for the completion of an inter-related triangular series of political, socio-economic, and security programs. Greatest emphasis is put on programs of short-term impact. Long-range programs, however, are included and must be pursued vigorously. Highest priority is assigned to the following immediate targets: (1) secure the national allegiance of the Thai and non-Thai peoples to their government; (2) improve the collection of intelligence and police patrols in border provinces; (3) improve the economic and social situation of the people in vulnerable areas; (4) develop the counterinsurgency capabilities of the Thai security forces.

The total demand on Free World resources envisaged by this Plan for the period 1963–1967 is estimated at approximately $800,000,000 of which about one-half would be for social and economic assistance. $150,000,000 of this $400,000,000 will have to come from US sources. The second $400,000,000 required to complete the establishment of an effective Thai security force, of a para-military as well as military nature, will have to come mainly from US sources.

As for Thai resources, this plan accepts the Thai Government’s ratio of expenditure of 75% to 25% between non-military and military-police programs. Within this proportion of an expanding government budget, the Plan projects an increasing Thai share of the costs for development and defense as government revenues increase at least 8% per year and the GNP grows at the rate of 4–5% per year. This Plan also points toward sharing the cost of development and defense of Thailand increasingly with United Nations agencies, other governments, and private foundations.

For the long run, the role of the United States envisaged by this Plan is to serve as a “transient catalyst” to enable the Thais to take over many programs and thereafter sustain themselves with their own cadres and institutions. If effectively conducted, this Plan will lessen and eventually eliminate much US aid to Thailand and reduce the size of US organizations substantially.

Since the Thais themselves must lead any effort to strengthen their capabilities and reach a self-sustaining, viable position, a modified version of this Plan will be presented to the Thai Government as a basis for joint US-Thai action. The Plan will remain subject to modification as circumstances change and experience points to more effective ways of achieving objectives. The Plan and its component programs will therefore be kept under constant review with particular attention by the US to opportunities for increasing Thai responsibilities, increasing the aid of other Free World sources, and reducing American resources and personnel involved.

[Here follow the 28-page Plan, divided into 5 sections, and an appendix. Section I is “Background,” section II is “Definitive Statement of Thailand’s Stability and Vulnerabilities,” Section III is “Policy and Objectives,” Section IV is “Course of Action,” and Section V is “Programs and Source Requirements.” A chart depicting Section V is the appendix.]

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 7925/12–2862. Secret; Priority. This plan, condensed and revised, was sent to the Department of State in airgram A-238 from Bangkok, December 28. The airgram explained that the plan incorporated contributions from major elements of the Mission in Thailand and provided a framework for a coordinated effort to assist Thailand in strengthening its internal security capabilities. The plan would be presented to Thailand in modified form as a basis for joint Thai-U.S. planning and action.

473. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 473. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, January 10, 1963, 2 p.m.

1012. Saigon for Harkins. Reference: Department telegram 991.1 I informed Thanat yesterday that we proposed reduce USAF Tactical Fighter Squadron to nucleus of 6 aircraft with corresponding personnel about Feb 1. Thanat said there would be no political objections on part his govt to this move and proposed that details be taken up in usual military channels.

As outgrowth brief discussion this matter Thanat expressed hope US continued to view SEA, specifically Laos and effects of situation there on Thailand and Vietnam, as critical area warranting closest attention. I assured him we did and cited retention nucleus of combat squadron in Thailand which could be rapidly reinforced and that program now going into high gear.

He referred to recent arrests of Communist subversive suspects in northeast noting that this is evidence of increased Communist infiltration into Thailand and from Laos. He recalled this was precisely what Thais foresaw at time of Geneva neutralization agreement. With some bitterness he claimed Thailand is bearing brunt of “experiment” West pursuing in Laos and asked what if anything we proposed to do about growing subversive/insurgent threat to Thailand. I cited many obvious evidences of US determination to help, including support for number of Thai programs designed to strengthen northeast against subversion: feeder roads, mobile development units, emphasis on increasing counter-insurgency capability of military and para-military forces with training and equipment, community development, etc. Thanat remained skeptical, likening this action to greater effort required to regain lost military position than to have retained it in first place. However, as usual he did not specify what he thought alternative to Laos settlement could have been.

Comment: Embassy assessment of current subversive developments Thailand in process.2 Thanat is correct about fact of increasing Communist infiltration.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 792.5411/1–1063, Secret. Repeated to Canberra, CINCPAC POLAD, London, Saigon, Vientiane, Wellington, Karachi, Manila, and Paris.

1 In telegram 991, January 3, the Department of State informed Young that while it was desirable to announce publicly the Special Logistics Action, Thailand (SLAT) program before announcing the reduction of the Tactical Fighter Squadron, it could not agree to making it an absolute precondition because of allied participation in SLAT. (Ibid., 792.5411/12–2962)

2 In telegram 1027 from Bangkok, January 14, Young reported a conversation with Prime Minister Sarit in which Young obtained Sarit’s evaluation of the situation in the northeast based on the Prime Minister’s recent trip there. Sarit stated that the situation was growing worse, his government was concerned, and quick action was required. Sarit specifically requested equipment and supplies for Thai Mobile Development Units. Young recommended quick response to this appeal. (Ibid., 795.5/1–1463)

474. Central Intelligence Agency Information Report 474. Central Intelligence Agency Information ReportSource

Washington, March 25, 1963.

[document number not declassified]

SUBJECT

Security Situation in Thailand (Situation Appraisal as of 23 March 1963)

APPRAISAL

Commentary

1. This [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] appraisal of the current situation. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is not an official judgement of this agency or any component. It represents the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] interpretations of a staff officer based on information available to him at the time of its preparation. Prepared for internal use [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], this commentary is disseminated in the belief that it may be useful to other agencies in assessing the situation for their own purposes.

2. There is increasing evidence to suggest that Thailand is in the classic phase one of insurgency development. Aided and abetted by Pathet Lao and other hostile elements in Laos—the privileged sanctuary—there continues to be a discernible increase in subversive activities within Thailand. This activity has been manifest in terms of increased organizational, indoctrination and training activities, including the training of persons in guerrilla warfare tactics.

3. Within recent months there has been a definite increase in Communist activity in the Malayan border area. Communist activity in the southern border area is directed to both the Communist terrorists organization as well as the Moslem irredentist movement in the four Moslem southern provinces. Both the Moslem irredentist movement and the Chinese terrorists are apparently receiving both financial as well as arms support from the Parti Komunis Indonesia (PKI) [2 lines of source text not declassified] The Chinese Communists may have recently augmented the Chinese terrorists organization with an infusion of new cadres. Vietnamese Communist control over the approximately 40,000 member Vietnamese communities continues unchallenged and constitutes a latent threat of considerable significance. Communist propagandists have been active among certain of the northern Thai hill tribes, the Akha and Lahu, and have apparently provided training in guerrilla warfare tactics to some Meo tribal leaders. Besides training in basic insurgency tactics in Thailand, the Communists have definitely been training Thais in Mahaxay in southern Laos, Xieng Khouang and Phong Saly. There is some reason to believe they may also be training Thai Meo cadres in North Vietnam.

4. [4-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] the Chinese Communists consider Thailand the key to Southeast Asia. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], other than the Chinese there are three principal movements in Laos targeted against Thailand: the Pathet Lao, the Vietnamese and the Thai Exiles Association (TEA), the latter [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] a weak puppet-type organization. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] present plans call for a continuation of organizational activities but no hostilities during 1963. While Thailand is divided into five areas for purposes of Communist organizational activities and control, the north and northeast have (portion garbled—being serviced) equal priority. Influential persons among the farmers, youth, teachers and governmental authorities are to be recruited and trained during this organizational period. From 600 to 1,000 Thais will be trained in Phong Saly in Laos and Dong Hoi in North Vietnam for a period of six months in political indoctrination and guerrilla warfare prior to being returned to Thailand as cadres.

5. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Mit Sattanon, the head of the TEA, has been active in Nam Province for the past 18 months and has succeeded in developing an organization of from two to three hundred Meo, at least eight of whom have completed a six months guerrilla warfare training program in Phong Saly. Other information reports that certain Meo leaders have received extensive off-shore Communist training and have been returned to north Thailand. Communist training of Thai cadres has been underway for several years in Mahaxay and apparently at Xieng Khouang and Phong Saly as well. [22 lines of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (10-l/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

7. All conditions for rapid development of a subversive mechanism are present in the northeast. Democracy is meaningless to these people as they have not in the past and are not now being effectively reached by the government. Disaffection has permeated the area. The government officials lack the means and the facilities to effectively reach them with government services. The people are being exploited and manipulated by clever propagandists and dishonest government officials. The people are hungry, thirsty and sick. Unless the Thai Government is able to develop boldly conceived and effectively implemented socio-economic programs of a nature adequate to satisfy the people’s demands, complemented by effective psychological warfare programs encompassing all media, this situation will continue to deteriorate further to the point of insurgency. For the Thai Government to succeed in a security sense, they must rapidly implement extensive positive programs which have effective impact at the basic level. Time is now of the essence. Without such programs becoming effective by possibly one year, we can anticipate that within from one to two years the situation may deteriorate to the point of active insurgency. It is believed that Prime Minister Sarit is well aware of the seriousness of the situation in the northeast and is endeavoring to take remedial action. The Mobile Development Units (MDU) may represent the mechanism by which the Thai Government could begin to counter otherwise significant trends in the northeast.

8. This situation must be viewed in context of a continuing deterioration in the security situation in Laos and Burma as well as extensive graft and corruption throughout the highest levels of the Thai Government. This corruption is well known and weakens the moral fiber of the government and inadvertently further exposes the governmental apparatus to Communist propaganda and agitation. The effect of the current Pork Federation scandal is very serious and could well result in major changes in the ruling hierarchy, including ministerial-level changes. Sarit has publicly announced his intention to clean up the corruption in the Pork Federation, but it is problematical as to whether he will have the courage to take significant remedial action.

9. [1 line of source text not declassified]1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 1/63–4/63. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Routine.

1 In a March 28 memorandum to U. Alexis Johnson, Koren and Masters commented on this CIA assessment. They believed it was “credible” in its description of the security situation and the need for preventive action, but it fell short in “occasionally overdrawing conditions in the Northeast” and “failing adequately to take account of programs underway” As examples, they noted that a local commitment to Thai nationhood was what was important in the northeast. While people were dissatisfied and vulnerable, Koren and Masters did not believe disaffection had “permeated” the area. They stated that new programs were not the answer; what was required was a Thai sense of urgency in implementing the already adequate programs. (Department of State, EA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 500, 13.1 Internal Stability, Jan.-June 1963)

475. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 475. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, March 29, 1963, 7 p.m.

1477. Policy. Part I. Assessment.

Communist subversive efforts in Thailand are accelerating and we must quicken our pace to meet growing threat. This is our updated estimate based on review developments since our evaluation of last Sept (Embtel 586).1 Fol represents Country Team consensus:

Recent developments in area including deterioration in Burma and Laos point up urgency and seriousness of threat of insurgency facing Thailand on which internal security plan based. Communists now appear be vigorously engaged in organization, indoctrination and recruitment of cadres for future activities in Thailand, particularly stepping up propaganda, agitation and subversive training efforts in remote areas of northeast while concurrently increasing efforts in south and north.

Disturbing signs of progress Communist subversive operations reported by varied sources:

Statements to RTG authorities by Sawang Trachu, defector from Thai Communist refugee organization in Laos, highlight importance Thailand in ChiCom planning and organizational activities (FTB 7235).2 Sawang and other CAS sources point up organizational efforts among Meo in North Thailand, Commie training of Thai cadre in Laos and recruitment of villagers for subversive activity. Thai police estimate members subversive organization Sakhon Nakhon (where 79 persons arrested last June) at 500–600 and number Thais from northeast who received subversive training in Laos during past two years at up to 3,000 (of whom, 20 cases documented as having returned to Thailand and 200 suspected, while most apparently remained with Pathet Lao).

CAS also notes increase Communist activity along Thai-Malay border probably supported by Indonesian Communist Party, activity Communist propagandists among northern hill tribes, and apparent guerrilla training given some tribal leaders (FTB 7235).

PriMin’s party encountered outright indifference and hostility in Sakhon Nakhon Province during visit to northeast last Jan (Emb A-485).3

Observations US officials on recent trips to remote areas northeast confirm that Peiping, Hanoi and clandestine Thai radio broadcasts have generally strongest signal and wide listening audience there.

Mobile information teams and others travelling in remote areas northeast encountering teams itinerant peddlers medicine and cloth who show marked unfriendliness to Thai officials and evidently peddling Commie propaganda; MIT met with uncustomary cool reception in village earlier visited by peddlers. (Emb A-691)4

The Hanoi-controlled Vietnamese refugees in the northeast have been organized into tightly-knit groups which constitute a substantial subversive potential in Thailand’s most vulnerable regions. (Emb A-669)5

We are only too aware Thai shortcomings in mobilizing to meet threat, though they seeking to redress them. Critical aspect of our task is to impress our sense of urgency on Thais since it is they in final analysis who must exert principal effort to defend their own country. We believe that in past year they have come long way in developing heightened sense of awareness of danger and of what must be done to meet it. Prime Minister is not unlike LaGuardia, as Newsweek writes, in alerting countryside and galvanizing govt. Thai work on joint internal security plan is encouraging. But action still not sufficiently responsive to need.

However, we must put our own house as much in order as we can before blaming our allies here. Thais are confused and discouraged about US. Unofficial statements emanating from Washington suggesting “reassessment” of our security interests in SEA and desirability reducing our aid commitments here; notification to RTG of our intent eliminate consumables from military aid program; pressures for general reduction our grant and loan programs here, delays in approvals, deliveries or contracts; all these dishearten Thais at very time when they feel encircled by danger and confusion and confronted with growing subversion within.

Thailand could become another Vietnam. We hope public pressures at home will not force penny-wise and pound-foolish reductions in our aid effort here while Communists make continuing headway in spreading their influence in the countryside.

In candidness, all this in Thailand in 1962/63 is beginning remind me uncomfortably of US cutbacks and delays in Vietnam in 1959/60 just before Viet Cong sprang terror and insurgency on peaceful recovering countryside.

Part II. Conclusions

Foregoing assessment leads us to fol conclusions: 1. Time factor is critical. Strengthening Thai capability to counter subversion, infiltration and possible insurgency must be largely accomplished within next year and a half; this confirms estimate made in Embtel 586 of last Sept that Thailand had to attain capability within fol two years of withstanding possible Communist insurgency compounded by intense Communist diplomatic pressure.

2. Extraordinary efforts must be made to cut drastically time schedules for review, approval and deliveries under all types of programs for Thailand. Programs must be administered on an urgent basis.

3. Special provision must be made for Thailand in application of our world-wide policies on curtailment of aid programs. Unless this is done and programs are administered on an urgent basis, we will have much reduced chance of leading Thais into changes, reforms and measures essential to end growing subversive threat to Thailand.

4. We must also give more attention to psychological impact on Thai of US actions and statements. Outbursts FonMin Thanat, while exaggerated, reflect growing concern by Thais at critical dependence on great power who to some responsible Thai officials appears to begrudge its help and belittle Thai contributions to common cause. Their anxiety deepened by feeling that Thailand’s strong open commitment to Western bloc impairs its standing in Asia and exposes it to stronger Communist pressures. Though American press and legislators free express critical views on Thailand, Thais hold US executive branch responsible for keeping public informed of Thai contributions. More statements by Washington officials favorable to Thailand and effective publicity exploitation of such statements and of favorable press accounts are needed to bolster Thai confidence in our support for them as suggested in Embtel 1298 of March 4.6

5. We have rare opportunity not only to prevent Thailand from becoming another Vietnam but also to break new ground in political, social, economic and security development in Asia. While eliminating elements of our aid programs with marginal impact on US objectives, we are at same time redoubling efforts to stimulate Thais bring villagers close to central govt by maximizing and integrating priority programs in agriculture, community development, mobile development unit operations, village health, feeder roads, police and local leader training.

We must emphasize concrete felt needs: roads, water, medical care, schools, cash crops and more income. Effective long-range development programs are also necessary, though increased emphasis at this time must be on short term impact security programs.7

We undertaking review USOM programs with security implication to see if additional assistance inputs can be effectively absorbed and whether such increases would in fact accelerate contribution which programs can make to achievement our objectives. Our recommendations may involve reconsideration present trend of reduced dollar grants and reduced USOM staff in some fields.

Young

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, CSM 9–6 THAI. Secret; Prioriy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

1 See footnote 1, Document 469.

2 Not further identified.

3 Not found.

4 Dated March 18. (Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI)

5 Dated March 8. (Ibid., REF THAI)

6 Not printed. (Ibid., POL 7 US/Mansfield)

7 Commenting on this telegram in a memorandum to U. Alexis Johnson, Koren (Masters was the drafter) accepted the Embassy’s assessment as factually correct, but, like the CIA assessment (Document 474), it failed to consider Thailand’s strengths and the U.S. and Thai programs already underway. The Embassy’s assessment was therefore in Koren’s and Masters’ view overly dramatic. Thailand would not become another Vietnam because Thailand had strengths Vietnam never had. Nevertheless, the Office of the Southeast Asian Affairs agreed that subversion had increased and more urgency was needed in accelerating progress on existing programs, but it was not as pessimistic as the Embassy (Department of State, EA/Thai Files: Lot 66 D 500, Thailand, Jan.-June)

476. Memorandum of Conversation 476. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 3, 1963, 12:03–12:10 p.m.

SUBJECT

Call of the Thai Ambassador

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H.E. Visutr Arthayukti, Ambassador of Thailand

Mr. Michael V. Forrestal

Mr. H. L. T. Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Department of State

Ambassador Visutr, in presenting to the President an autographed picture of H. M. the King of Thailand, said that the President had been very thoughtful in choosing Mr. Sayre to present the President’s picture to the King. This was appreciated by the King and his people because Mr. Sayre was considered a great friend of Thailand; he was popular there and was known by his Thai name.

The President inquired how things were getting on in Thailand. The Ambassador noted that his Government was worried about conditions in the Northeast and was grateful to the U.S. for the assistance it was giving Thailand to cope with the difficulties there. The President said he understood there was some concern in Thailand over implications that may have been drawn from the recent reports of Senator Mansfield1 and the Clay Committee.2 The President said that the message he had just sent to the Congress on foreign aid should put this matter into the proper perspective. The voice of the Government was, after all, the voice of the U.S. The Administration was determined to fight hard to maintain the support through foreign assistance outlined in his message.

The President said that we considered the survival of Thailand essential to the security of Asia and he hoped that the Government of Thailand would not become discouraged. The Ambassador said that the Thai people fully appreciated U.S. assistance, to which the President replied that the U.S. appreciated equally the help of Thailand. The security, of Thailand was important to the strength of SEATO, which was the key to the security of Southeast Asia and the latter in turn to the security of the entire Free World and therefore to the security of the U.S. We counted on the maintenance of SEATO as interpreted by the Thai Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State in their joint communiqué.

What the President had stated was the policy of the United States Government, and the President hoped the Ambassador would explain this to his Government The President added that he hoped the Thai Government’s efforts to cope with their problems along the frontier would be pushed.

In closing the President repeated that the U.S. was grateful to Thailand for the support it gave to the U.S. He also asked the Ambassador to extend his warm thanks to His Majesty for his kindness in giving him his picture and said that it would be kept in the White House.

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI-US. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and approved by the White House on April 15. The time of this meeting is taken from the President’s Appointment Book. (Kennedy Library)

1 The Mansfield report, entitled Vietnam and Southeast Asia: Report of Senator Mike Mansfield, Senator J. Caleb Boggs, Senator Claiborne Pell, and Senator Benjamin A. Smith to the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, 88th Congress, 1st Session (Washington, 1963), was mildly critical of Thailand. The authors noted that Thailand did not have institutions for political change; its governments came to power by bloodless coups.

2 The Clay Committee (officially the Committee To Strengthen the Security of the Free World) was a bipartisan, advisory group appointed by the President on December 10, 1962, to study U.S. foreign assistance. The committee was headed by retired General Lucius D. Clay. Its report, released on March 22, 1963, concluded that the U.S. aid program was “essential,” but it needed “substantial tightening up” and. “sharpened objectives.” (The Scope and Distribution of United States Military and Economic Assistance Programs: Report to the President of the United States by the Committee To Strengthen the Security of the Free World, March 20, 1963)

477. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 477. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of StateSource

Paris, April 8, 1963, 4 p.m.

Secto 5. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following summary main points Secretary’s conversation with Thanat Khoman April 7.

1) Thanat said Prime Minister instructed him express appreciation for President’s statement of US support of Thailand through SEATO.1 This “very welcome” statement had cleared atmosphere Thai-US relationships. Sarit also wanted him convey Thailand’s firm intention continue work closely with US and clarify there no change in Thai position. Secretary responded President would be pleased and heartened to know that our close relationship remains unchanged. Said US position regarding security SEA also remains solid. He cited our efforts in Vietnam where US suffering casualties every week as evidence our continued commitment to security of area.

In continuing, Thanat “speaking frankly” said Thailand had practically accepted US military base. It did so without bargaining, its cooperation is without reservation and immediate (troop movements last year), Thailand does not ask [for] money as some European countries do. Thailand, however, wants be understood by US in this way. Reports such as that of Senator Mansfield about “one-sided assistance” do not reflect Thailand’s attitude and position. Secretary replied that Mansfield report not US policy. Said that if we do not always refer publicly to cooperation of allies it is because in some cases it would be embarrassing to them. Recent difficulty with Canada, for example, really involved issue of US-Canadian military relationships. He wanted Thanat to know, however, that President understands Thailand’s cooperation. We will try to make clear in SEATO meetings and elsewhere our genuine appreciation of contribution of Thailand to our mutual defense.

In discussion counter-subversion Northeast Thanat said difficult know true extent subversive threat but Thai must act quickly. He emphatically stated Thailand determined eliminate subversive problem.

Malaysia. Thanat does not believe Indonesia will create crisis over Malaysia, said Malaya and Philippines now understand one another (Secretary referred his constructive role in this matter). Thanat doubted if Philippines would raise Malaysia in SEATO sessions. “Philippines in happy mood.”

Burma. Relations are good. Burmese inherently suspicious and therefore surprised when Thai quickly accepted proposals incorporated in agreement to be signed soon on cultural and trade matters. Thanat believes Tin Pe position waning. Burmese have not recently reflected concern about KMT troops but worried about Shans. When Secretary asked if Burma worried about Chinese attack on India through Burma, Thanat responded Burmese do not want to discuss China. Doubtful Burma interested joining ASA any time soon but Thailand doing same things bilaterally with Burma; smilingly expressed hope Burma will participate in ASA golf tournament.

Laos. Quinim2 remained “in shell” during King’s recent visit Bangkok. When Secretary said that during US visit King seemed disturbed about developments in Laos, Thanat said doubted King ever really disturbed about anything. Visit of Souvanna Phouma to [garble] very useful as “he now knows us better.” Secretary expressed hope King of Thailand could prevail upon King of Laos exercise more leadership.

USSR. In speculative discussion about Moscow-Peiping relations, Secretary wondered whether there was danger that in seeking agreement on some issue to try diminish gap, they might find common ground in more aggressive communist action in Southeast Asia. Thanat replied his personal view that USSR not willing leave ground entirely to ChiComs. Soviet Ambassador Bangkok strictly avoids discussion China. Thanat also believes North Vietnamese not willing be submissive ChiComs.

Cambodia. Not surprisingly Thanat expressed fear Cambodia may be site decisive change in communism in SEA. Secretary assured him US has no intention providing jets to match Soviet offer MIGs.

India. Thanat not sure extent to which new India outlook will be manifest, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Indians have invited him to visit, he will do so on return trip Bangkok, and will know more about their attitude after visit.

June SEATO exercise.3 Thanat said Thai people will not object foreign troops but real problem for Thailand is cost. These exercises expensive and ‘money perhaps better spent on economic development. Exercise will be more productive if, as proposed, troops help with civic action—not just distribution water tanks or school kits, but in construction simple shelters or bridges and perhaps well digging. Secretary agreed this most useful and assured Thanat US would follow up.

Other matters Secretary said Thanat had performed useful service in encouraging change in SEATO voting procedures. They agreed SEATO keeps other countries involved in defense SEA. Secretary cited France (referring recent statements MILADs meeting Paris) and Australia to which Thanat replied had more confidence Australia than France. Thanat reported Sarit’s health very good.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, P9L THAI-US. Secret. Repeated to Bangkok, Karachi, Manila, Canberra, Wellington, London, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Rusk and Thanat were attending the Eighth Ministerial Meeting of the SEATO Council April 1–10 in Paris.

1 Thanat is apparently referring to President Kennedy’s statement to Ambassador Vistur Arthayukti on April 3; see Document 476.

2 Quinim Pholsena, Lao Foreign Minister.

3 Exercise Dhanarajata in Thailand June 11–24; see Document 478.

478. Memorandum From the Director for Operations, Joint Chiefs of Staff (Unger) to the President’s Military Aide (Clifton) 478. Memorandum From the Director for Operations, Joint Chiefs of Staff (Unger) to the President’s Military Aide (Clifton)Source

Washington, June 4, 1963.

SUBJECT

SEATO Forces in Thailand During June 1963

1. During the period 11–24 June 1963, a total of some 25,000 military personnel from all SEATO nations will participate in Exercise Dharnarajata in Thailand. These include 17,000 Thais, 7,449 US (in addition to the 4,218 US military personnel now stationed there), and approximately 1,000 from the Commonwealth nations (United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand) and the Philippines, France and Pakistan.

2. US forces participating in the exercise consist of one infantry battle group from Hawaii, one airborne brigade from Okinawa, one tactical fighter squadron (18 F-400), tactical reconnaissance fighters (4 RF-101), and transport aircraft (14 C-130). In addition, 315th Air Division and MATS aircraft will be entering and leaving the country during deployment, exercise, and redeployment to provide airlift to all Services.

3. For the exercise, a Commonwealth brigade (one rifle company each from Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, each representing a battalion), with fighter, bomber and transport aircraft will participate. France, Pakistan and the Philippines are supplying headquarters staff officers. The Philippines are also sending elements of ordnance and engineer units. The Thais are using four regimental combat teams, special forces units and aircraft.

4. It is planned that the US battle group from Hawaii will remain in Thailand until some time after 5 July 1963, for further training and area indoctrination.

F. T. Unger1
Major General USA

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Thailand, Vol. V, 5/63–7/63. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Kennedy saw the original in Clifton’s JCS file.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

479. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 479. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, July 15, 1963, 7:54 p.m.

91. Ref: Embtel 79.1 You are authorized at your discretion to present the following to Sarit as unclassified Aide-Mémoire; “In his conversation with His Excellency the Prime Minister on July 15, 1963, the Deputy Chief of Mission of the American Embassy reaffirmed to the Prime Minister that the United States intends to meet its obligations in Southeast Asia. He said the United States would do whatever is necessary and appropriate in the event of a communist threat to Thailand’s borders. The Deputy Chief of Mission stated to the Prime Minister that, as publicly affirmed in the joint statement of Secretary Rusk and Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman of March 1962, the United States considers Thailand’s integrity and independence as vital to its own.”

We do not intend to publish foregoing but would have no objection if RTG wishes release it as Thai statement (not US Aide-Mémoire) with lead sentence along following lines: “In the course of a call on His Excellency Prime Minister Sarit Thanarat on July 15, 1963, the Deputy Chief of Mission of the United States Embassy reaffirmed to the Prime Minister that the United States intends, etc. (follow remainder of AideMemdire).”

You should explain to Sarit fully and frankly that in public statement of this nature we believe it not advisable single out Laos for particular mention. We fear statement might be viewed out of context and give rise to queries regarding possible new actions in or affecting Laos, thus raising more questions than it solved. As Sarit of course aware we can say nothing publicly on proposals we have outlined to him. Furthermore, we attempting insofar as possible maintain facade of Geneva Agreements. Public statement referring specifically to Laos might give impression we about to scrap those Agreements, thereby giving communists ammunition to use against us. We, therefore, trust Sarit will understand need for discretion in public statement. At same time you should assure him this in no sense represents any pull-back from what you told him July 15.

If given to press and depending on treatment it receives we think British, French and Australians may wonder whether this represents new assessment of situation in Laos and threat to Thailand or new US commitment to Thailand. Therefore in your discretion and if you feel it desirable, you may indicate to your British, French and Australian colleagues that this represents nothing more than further effort to reassure Thais and enlist their cooperation in coping with the Lao situation.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret; Emergency; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Masters; cleared by Koren and Rice and in draft by Cross, Abram E. Manell of FE/P, Czyzak, and Robert J. McCloskey of P; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Vientiane, London, Paris, and CINCPAC.

1 Telegram 79, July 15, reported that during a call on Sarit to obtain Thai cooperation in supporting the Geneva Accords on Laos, Puhan had assured Sarit that the United States would do whatever necessary to meet its obligations in Southeast Asia. Puhan also assured Sarit that the United States would “not sit idly by and allow Communists to become entrenched on Thailand’s borders.” Prime Minister Sarit was visibly gratified by this statement, (he called it “sweet news”) and asked if he could make the assurance public. Puhan promised to seek authorization from the Department for release. (Ibid.)

480. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 480. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of StateSource

Bangkok, September 19, 1963, 6 p.m.

420. Saigon for Gen Harkins. Deptel 408.1

1. DepUnder Secretary Johnson agreed use occasion his call on PM Sarit Sept 19 to explore question of redeployment US/allied ground and air units to Thailand as contingency measure in event of grave Communist military threat Laos.

2. Sec Johnson began presentation with brief review salient points of current Lao situation, noting that some political gains had been made over past year. Sarit asked whether US favored return of PL Ministers to active participation in government national union. Sec Johnson replied it always our position PL should carry out Geneva Agreements. Sarit expressed doubt PL would ever do this faithfully but instead would use positions in government merely promote Communist objectives. Sec Johnson pointed to Souvanna Phouma’s encouraging firmness in rejecting unreasonable conditions PL attempting set on their return, and noted that it better for PL return to work in govt than resume military aggression.

3. Sec Johnson stressed non-Communists now generally in more favorable political position cope with PL machinations, noted allied govts about to agree on help to Lao stabilization program to check economic deterioration and then proceeded to review military situation. He mentioned that while things quiet during rainy season attempts made raise military capabilities of FAR and neutralists. Sarit remarked that PL military capabilities suffering from termination Soviet supplies and airlift and from interruption PL supply lines. Sec Johnson noted supply line interruption not an accident. With regard USSR role, he noted Soviets very reluctant talk about Laos and appeared no longer have much influence on situation. In response to question, Sarit said he believes Lao would benefit from training they receiving in Thailand and again underlined need for careful advance screening of Lao trainees, particularly those from Kong Le forces.

4. Noting approach dry season and need be prepared for serious Communist military moves in Laos, Sec Johnson said we wished consult Thais on possible contingency actions. Stressing we not pressing for firm decision at this time, he said we again considering possible desirability deploying US troops and air units to Thailand. Sec Johnson noted this could not be done too often, but that we believed it had been of value last year and might again be called for. Sarit did not make direct reply but also did not raise any objection. FonMin Thanat, who also present as was Phya Srivisan, said he personally felt deployment to Thailand of no value unless it clear that troops prepared move into Laos if necessary. Sec Johnson said decision for such further action could be made only in light of circumstances at time, but that deployment to Thailand would put us in better position meet contingencies rapidly and Communists would know this. Thanat then agreed firm decisions on further moves could not be made in advance. Phya Srivisan asked whether troops would be sent in under SEATO. Thanat thought they should be in SEATO framework but specifically on basis bilateral US-Thai understanding. Sec Johnson agreed, adding he hoped some other SEATO partners would join us as before and that consultation with other allies would be undertaken to this end.

5. Sec Johnson remarked that Emb Bangkok had prepared paper for his use in discussion this subject and as he had mentioned only more important points, he would leave it for Thais to read at leisure. (Paper drafted with this purpose in mind. Copy by pouch.)2 He stressed paper did not represent formal communication to RTG.

6. Comment: While Sarit did not give specific endorsement of idea of troop deployment, and deliberately was not pressed to do so, he did not reject it. We believe Thais undoubtedly recognized conversation as genuine advance consultation and that it served prepare ground for further discussion and probable agreement if and when need for deployment arises.

Puhan

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Secret. Repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

1 In telegram 408 to Bangkok, September 14, the Department instructed Puhan to approach Sarit about the possibility of reintroducing U.S. and allied troops into Thailand should the situation in Laos deteriorate. (Ibid.) In telegram 412 from Bangkok, September 17, Puhan suggested that the presentation to Sarit would be more effective if done by U. Alexis Johnson during his visit to Bangkok. (Ibid.)

2 Not found.

481. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State Rusk 481. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, December 9, 1963.

SUBJECT

The Succession Problem in Thailand

Prime Minister Sarit died on December 8, 1963. Our estimate of what follows is that: 1. General Thanom Kittikachon, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, will be the immediate successor.

(He is now Acting Prime Minister, and, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] it had been agreed among key military leaders before Sarit’s death that Thanom would succeed. If for some reason Thanom does not serve, another well-known figure who, like Thanom, is respected but not personally powerful, will be chosen.)

2. Since Thanom will be a relatively weak Prime Minister, the influence of key Army officers will be great and there will be a more or less prolonged period of maneuvering for power among them.

(The most important competitors, all of whom look support, are: a. General Praphat Charusathien, Minister of Interior and Assistant Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces.

b. General Chitti Nawisathien, Deputy Commander of the Army.

c. Lt. General Krit Sriwara, Commander of the First Army Area (Bangkok).

3. The present political structure, i.e., a working relationship among the military, the civil bureaucracy, and the monarchy and its supporters, with the Army predominating, will continue.

4. Thai foreign policy, largely dictated by the threat of Communist China and the need for United States support to meet that threat, will undergo no major changes as a result of the succession. However, Thai sensitivity to indications of United States support for Cambodian demands, including the demand for a conference on Cambodian neutrality, will be heightened rather than the reverse.

* Source: Department of State, EA/Thai Files: Lot 67 D 320, POL 15 Government, 1963—Nov.-Dec. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it. Originally Pickering drafted a longer memorandum for Koren, which Koren passed on to Hilsman and Rice. (Ibid.) Hilsman instructed Koren to “Have this redone—shorter, punchier, and in much, much less detail—as a memo to S.”

482. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 482. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in ThailandSource

Washington, December 9, 1963, 6:43 p.m.

909. Accession of New Government.

You should call on PriMin Thanom at earliest appropriate moment to assure him of our continued support and friendship, recalling President Johnson’s recent messages to Field Marshal Sarit and to Thanom himself (Deptels 836 and 903).1

You should reconfirm our security guarantees to Thailand embodied in SEATO and the Rusk-Thanat communiqué of March 6, 1962 and repeat the assurances contained in Deptel 91.2

Express our willingness and desire to continue our programs of economic and military aid to Thailand uninterrupted. Note that we strongly share the late Prime Minister’s view of the importance of accelerated development in the remote rural areas, as we know Gen. Thanom does.

State again our condolences over the passing of PriMin Sarit and note our shock at the statements issued after his death by the RKG Information Dept., which we are protesting in strongest possible terms.3 If asked about US position on proposed conference, you may say that this development obviously compounds the difficulties of holding such a conference. We will continue our close consultation with RTG on this matter.

Rusk

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 THAI. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Pickering, cleared by Arzac and Koren (in draft), and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Saigon, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

1 Telegram 836, November 24, transmitted President Johnson’s assurances to Acting Prime Minister Thanom that he would continue to follow the policies of the late President Kennedy, who was assassinated on November 22. Telegram 903, December 8, conveyed Johnson’s “sincere sympathy and condolences” on the death of Sarit and his assurances to Thanom of “the continued and unfailing friendship and support of the Government and people of the United States of America.” (Ibid., POL 15–1 US/KENNEDY and POL 15–1 THAI, respectively)

2 Document 479.

3 The Cambodian Government declared a national holiday upon Sarit Thanarat’s death. See Document 132.

Index Index

Abdul Rahman, Putra Tunku, 693n [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 759–761 [Pgs. 759–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348] Indonesian-Malayan relations, 678–679 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 345], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Malaysia, 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 722–725 [Pgs. 722–725 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 344]

New Guinea dispute, 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 353–355 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Philippine-Malaysian relations, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Abdul Razak, Tun, 718–720 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331]

Abdulgani, Ruslan, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302]

Abello, Emilio, 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 799–800 [Pgs. 799–800 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

Abramov, Aleksandr N., 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 74]

Acheson, Dean: Cambodia, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 250–252 [Pgs. 250–252 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118], 282–283 [Pgs. 282–283 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 295–297 [Pgs. 295–297 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 348], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

New Guinea dispute, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 365–367 [Pgs. 365–367 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257]

Afghanistan, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40]

Africa, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 144], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285]

Agence France Presse, 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Agency for International Development (AID), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] Cambodia, 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Indonesia, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 203], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305], 678–679 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316]

Philippines, 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 801–802 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 372], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 395]

Thailand, 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 414], 886n [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 953–954 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 470], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471]

Agriculture, U.S. Department of, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358]

Aguinaldo, Emilio, 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Aidit Dipa Nusantara, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Ainsworth, Thomas W., 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Air America, 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 442]

Air Cobra, 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 441], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443]

Air Force, Department of the, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]

Alexander, Clifford L., Jr., 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 727–729 [Pgs. 727–729 include portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, and Doc. 336], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Alexandra, Princess, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105]

Algeria, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Ali, Mohammed, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 35]

Allen, Sir Richard, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52]

Alliance for Progress, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 367]

Alphand, Herve, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 37], 222–223 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Amory, Robert, 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Anand Panyarcachun, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

Anderson, Daniel V., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 90n [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89]

Anderson, George A., 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 214]

Anderson, Adm. George W., 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365]

Angola, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 170], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225]

ANZUS, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 143], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 288], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 731–737 [Pgs. 731–737 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339], 743–749 [Pgs. 743–749 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 751–752 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 344], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349] Council meeting, Wellington, June 1963, 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

ANZUS Treaty, Sept. 1951: Article IV, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 343]

Article V, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 343], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 424]

Arends, Leslie C., 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446]

Argentina, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Armstrong, Hamilton Fish, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

Arzac, Daniel M., Jr., 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89] 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 230n [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], l003n Cambodia, 211–214 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94]

Asia, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285], 771–773 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Asia Foundation, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 56]

Asian Foreign Ministers Conference, Manila, Jan. 1961, 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354]

Asian Games, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293]

Asian Productivity Organization, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28]

Askew, Laurin B., 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 848n [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402]

Association of Southeast Asia (ASA), 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 26], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Aung Gyi, Brig. Gen., 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Aung Shwe, Brig., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 49]

Australia (see also Australia and Australian subheadings under other subjects), 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480] defense of, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 396–398 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 175], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 733–734 [Pgs. 733–734 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Indonesia, relations with, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344]

political parties: Conservative Party, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344]

Labor Party, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344]

Austria, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171]

Aytona (Philippines), 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Ayub Khan, Mohammed, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31]

Azahari, A.M., 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

Azores, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Ba Swe, U., 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Babelsky, Marion, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 110]

Baghdad Pact, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27]

Bagley, Lt. Commander Worth H., 899–900 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423]

Balance of payments, U.S., 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 395]

Baldwin, Charles F., 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Ball, George W., 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 361n [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 950n [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465] Burma, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56]

Indonesia, 634–637 [Pgs. 634–637 include portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Malaysia, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342]

Netherlands-U.S. relations, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162]

New Guinea dispute, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 518–522 [Pgs. 518–522 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 527–529 [Pgs. 527–529 include portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 537–538 [Pgs. 537–538 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Southeast Asia, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12]

Thailand, 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 956–958 [Pgs. 956–958 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460]

Ballantyne, Robert J., 812n [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Bandung Conference, Apr. 1955, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Barnett, Robert W., 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311], 678n [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 332], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379]

Barrington, James, 96n [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45], 98–101 [Pgs. 98–101 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61]

Barthelemy, Marcel, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98]

Barwick, Garfield E.G., 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 738–741 [Pgs. 738–741 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 748–754 [Pgs. 748–754 include portions of Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345]

Battle, Lucius D., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 425n [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 486–489 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 770–774 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Beale, Sir Howard, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 205], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 731–734 [Pgs. 731–734 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 750–751 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

Beaudry, Robert M., 341n [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 244], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Belgium, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206]

Belgrade Conference See Conference of Non-Aligned Nations

Belk, Samuel, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 169]

Bell, David E., 286–287 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Bell, James D., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 310n [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 438n [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 521n [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 230], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 623n [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 806n [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 812n [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469] Indonesia, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Malaysia, 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345]

New Guinea dispute, 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 183], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 243], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283]

Philippines, 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 775–778 [Pgs. 775–778 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 364], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

Berlin, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 72], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 420]

Bermuda Conference, Dec. 1961, 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219]

Bernhard, Prince, 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Bhumibol Adulyadej, King, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 994–996 [Pgs. 994–996 include portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

Bingham, Jonathan B., 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Bissell, Richard M., Jr., 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Black, Eugene, 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

Blue, William L., 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 438n [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 452n [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204]

Boggs, J. Caleb, 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Boggs, Marion W., 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]

Bohlen, Charles E., 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

Boland, Frederick, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

Bolshakov, Georgi N., 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455]

Boonchoo, Air Marshal, 843n [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398]

Border Inquiry Commission, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101]

Borneo (see also Brunei; Kalimantan;

Malaysia; North Borneo; Sarawak), 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330]

Borneo, British, 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299]

Boun Oum, 146n [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 374], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424]

Bowen, Howard E., 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416]

Bowers, James E., 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Bowles, Chester B., 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 341n [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373] Burma, 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56]

Indonesia, 368–371 [Pgs. 368–371 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

New Guinea dispute, 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180]

Southeast Asia, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 59–62 [Pgs. 59–62 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 69–72 [Pgs. 69–72 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Breckon, Morgan L., 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Breitweiser, Maj. Gen. Robert A., 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Brezhnev, Leonid, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

Brookings Institution, 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Broomfield, William S., 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Brown, Edmund, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Brown, Winthrop G., 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 415], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

Brubeck, William H., 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 36], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 372], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Indonesia, 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 670–672 [Pgs. 670–672 include portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Philippines, 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 812–815 [Pgs. 812–815 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]

Bruce, David K.E., 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Brunei (see also Borneo; Malaysia), 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327] Party Rakyat of Brunei (PRB), 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

rebellion in, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342]

Budget, Bureau of the, 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 297], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 390]

Buffum, William B., 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 452n [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332]

Bulgakoff (USSR), 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 410]

Bundy, McGeorge, 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 46], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 292n [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 367n [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 425n [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 451n [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 200], 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 591n [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 619n [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304], 677n [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 750n [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344], 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 783n [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 372], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 813n [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 912n [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 946n [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Burma, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Cambodia, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 173–174 [Pgs. 173–174 include portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 244–245 [Pgs. 244–245 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123] U.S. economic and military aid to, 150–151 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69], 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 126], 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135]

Geneva Conference on Laos, 1962–1962, 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Indonesia, 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Laos, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Malaysia, 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 729–730 [Pgs. 729–730 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 344], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 348]

New Guinea dispute, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 462–463 [Pgs. 462–463 include portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 212], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283] Bunker Plan, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Indonesian military intervention in, 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 277]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 527–530 [Pgs. 527–530 include portions of Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278]

Philippines, 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 376], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379]

Southeast Asia, 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 33]

Thailand, 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 921–923 [Pgs. 921–923 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455]

Bundy, William P., 103n [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 210n [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 93], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 361n [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 212], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 939n [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Cambodia, 149–151 [Pgs. 149–151 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 87]

Indonesia, 657n [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300]

Philippines, 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Thailand, 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 953–954 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Viet Cong, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135]

Bunker, Ellsworth, 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259] New Guinea dispute, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 255], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 258], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 615–616 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285] Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 554–555 [Pgs. 554–555 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 603–605 [Pgs. 603–605 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 279], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

visit to the Netherlands, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257]

Bunker Plan, See under New Guinea dispute

Burdett, William C., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Burgess David S., 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 186]

Burke, Adm: Arleigh A., 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Burma (see also Burma and Burmese subheadings under other subjects), 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96] anti-American riots, 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 47]

army reorganization, 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 58], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 64]

communist threat to, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

coups in, 103–105 [Pgs. 103–105 include portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

ethnic groups and conflicts: China, People’s Republic of position, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Chinese, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61]

Chins, 105–106 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50]

Indians, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61]

Kachins, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 105–106 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65]

Karens, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 104–107 [Pgs. 104–107 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58]

Kayahs, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50]

Nagas, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61]

Shans, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 104–108 [Pgs. 104–108 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

India, relations with, 117–118 [Pgs. 117–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Karen National Union (KNU), 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50]

Kuomintang irregulars, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51] Burmese position, 84–85 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61]

China, People’s Republic of position, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42]

China, Republic of, support for, 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 89–95 [Pgs. 89–95 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

evacuation of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 44]

Thai position, 93–94 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

U.S. position, 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

neutrality of, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 56], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 58]

Pakistan, relations with, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61]

political parties: AFPF, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58], 127–128 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]

Burma Communist Party (BCP), 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 125–127 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64]

Communist Party (Burma) (CPB), 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61]

National United Front (NUF), 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64]

Socialist Program Party, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 64]

U Bos, 127–128 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]

UP, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]

political situation, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 123–128 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58], 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453]

regional cooperation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433]

socialism in, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 115–116 [Pgs. 115–116 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 56], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 63]

Soviet Union, relations with, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 64]

Thailand, relations with, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

U.N. Committee on West New Guinea, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Union Revolutionary Council (URC), 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 115–116 [Pgs. 115–116 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 58]

United States, relations with, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 118–122 [Pgs. 118–122 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 135–140 [Pgs. 135–140 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 143–144 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 47], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 50], 109n [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 129–130 [Pgs. 129–130 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. policy toward, 130–132 [Pgs. 130–132 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Burma Oil Company, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61]

Burris, Col. Howard L., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462]

Burrows, Bernard, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Butler, Richard A., 762–763 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Byroade, Henry A., 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59], 130–132 [Pgs. 130–132 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 135–140 [Pgs. 135–140 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 143–144 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65]

Cabal (Philippines), 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Caccia, Sir Harold, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Califoria-Texas Oil Co. (CALTEX), 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312]

Calingo, Mauro, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 364]

Cambodia, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223] Cambodian-U.S. Military Assistance Agreement of 1955, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 87]

China, People’s Republic of, economic aid to, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 83], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 293–294 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139], 297–298 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141]

China, Republic of, relations with, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86], 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

communist threat to, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 80], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 181–188 [Pgs. 181–188 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

defense of, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 93], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

economic situation, 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

ethnic groups: Chinese, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 83]

Vietnamese, 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 83], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 93]

French economic and military aid to, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94]

French-U.S. cooperation in, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 80]

India, relations with, 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432]

Indonesia, relations with, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

military situation: airplane seizure incidents, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92]

border incidents, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122]

Hoa Hao incident, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

rebellion of 1954, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 83]

neutrality of, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 108], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

neutrality proposals, 206–207 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 211–212 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94] amity agreements proposal, 227–229 [Pgs. 227–229 include portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

British position, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 100], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 236–239 [Pgs. 236–239 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 271 [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130]

Canadian position, 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 97], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125]

China, People’s Republic of, position, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94]

communists as guarantors, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 98], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 100]

French position, 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 222–223 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98], 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 236–239 [Pgs. 236–239 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 271–272 [Pgs. 271–272 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130]

Geneva Conference proposal, 198–200 [Pgs. 198–200 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 271–279 [Pgs. 271–279 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 348], 1003–1004 [Pgs. 1003–1004 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Laotian position, 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 125]

Soviet position, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Thai position, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 97], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101], 271–273 [Pgs. 271–273 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

U.S. position, 202–205 [Pgs. 202–205 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95], 219–226 [Pgs. 219–226 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 236–239 [Pgs. 236–239 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, position, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89]

Vietnam, Republic of, position, 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 97], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101], 271–273 [Pgs. 271–273 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

partition of, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96]

plots by dissidents, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 229–231 [Pgs. 229–231 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104] anti-government radio broadcasts, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 268–271 [Pgs. 268–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

political parties: Pracheachon Group, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 82], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 83]

Sangkum, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 82], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 83]

Preah Vihear Temple, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

regional cooperation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

SEATO role in, 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98]

Soviet military aid to, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Thai economic aid to, 10–11 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

Thailand, relations with, 166–170 [Pgs. 166–170 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 273–917 [Pgs. 273–917 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477] border incidents, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 121]

Khmer Serei, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

U.S. position, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 159–160 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 238–905 [Pgs. 238–905 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and Doc. 426], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

U.N. role in, 184–185 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 83], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 93]

United Kingdom, relations with, 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 138], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]

United States, relations with, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 158–159 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 215–216 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 233–236 [Pgs. 233–236 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 244–245 [Pgs. 244–245 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 289–290 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138] Cambodian termination of U.S. aid, 247–249 [Pgs. 247–249 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 252–253 [Pgs. 252–253 include portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 255–258 [Pgs. 255–258 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 126], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 138], 294–299 [Pgs. 294–299 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142]

Thai-U.S: talks on, 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

U.S. aid to rebels, charges of, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 110], 262–265 [Pgs. 262–265 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122]

U.S. economic aid to, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 187–188 [Pgs. 187–188 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 94] Khmer-American Friendship Highway, 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 286–287 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 138], 296–298 [Pgs. 296–298 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

U.S. military aid to, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 185–187 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 209–214 [Pgs. 209–214 include portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462] jet aircraft, 149–151 [Pgs. 149–151 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Thai position, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

U.S. policy toward, 217–219 [Pgs. 217–219 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, relations with, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 166–168 [Pgs. 166–168 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 77], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141] airplane seizure incidents, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92]

border incidents, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122]

breaking of, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95]

Cambodian dissidents, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115]

cattle raid, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86]

French position, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71]

Khmer Serei radio broadcasts, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 268–271 [Pgs. 268–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. position, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 159–160 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 106], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

Viet Cong infiltration, 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 152–157 [Pgs. 152–157 include portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73], 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105]

Cameron, Turner C., 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Canada, 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Carter, Lt. Gen. Marshall S., 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Castillo (Philippines), 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 372], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Castro, Fidel, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 163], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Celebes, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135], 292n [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141], 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] Cambodia, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111]

documents: No. 00615/63B, 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

No. 00618/63C, 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Indonesia, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 555n [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319], 696n [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 698–699 [Pgs. 698–699 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323]

Office of Current Intelligence, 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

Office of National Estimates (ONE), 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 355]

Thailand, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453], 987–990 [Pgs. 987–990 include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475]

Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345]

Chalermchai Charuwat, Gen., 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431]

Champaigne, Curtis, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116]

Chanco, Mario, 827–828 [Pgs. 827–828 include portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

Chapman, Christian G., 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42]

Charoenchai, Bun, 50–51 [Pgs. 50–51 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Chase, Brig. Gen. Charles H., 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]

Chau Sen Cocsal, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92]

Chayes, Abram J., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 672n [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 309], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

Chen Yi, 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

Chiang Kai-shek, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 91–94 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 44], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 46]

Chicago Convention, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

China, People’s Republic of: Borneo confrontation, 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

Burma, relations with, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 118–119 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 58], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 64]

Cambodia, relations with, 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 83], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 293–294 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139], 297–298 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141]

covert activities in, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13]

economic situation, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85]

India, relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61], 213–214 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Indonesia, relations with, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Laos, relations with, 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

military situation, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Pakistan, relations with, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 31]

Philippines, threat to, 771–772 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385]

Soviet Union, relations with, 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

U.N. membership for, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 410]

U.S. policy toward, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of relations with, 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

China, Republic of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350], 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 946 [Pg. 946 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453] agreements with the United States:

Mutual Defense Assistance

Agreement, 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 41]

Mutual Defense Treaty, Dec. 1954, 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 424]

Asian Games, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293]

Cambodia, relations with, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86], 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

communist threat to, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168]

operations against the mainland, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 44]

United States, relations with, 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

U.S. military aid to, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44]

Chinese offshore islands, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 163], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354]

Chinmen, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354]

Chit Myaing, Col, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Chitti Nawisathien, Gen., 913–915 [Pgs. 913–915 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Chou En-lai, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Church, Mrs., 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]

Churchill, Winston L.S., 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Chutavong, Col. Chalermsak, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Civil Air Transport (CAT), 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153]

Clark Field, 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 405], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437]

Clay, Gen. Lucius D., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Cleveland, Harlan, 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259] Malaysia, 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331]

New Guinea dispute, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 179], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 448–449 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 200], 452–455 [Pgs. 452–455 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 509n [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 540n [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 240]

Cleveland, Robert G., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 90n [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89], 874n [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428] Cambodia, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 77]

Southeast Asia Task Force, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 34]

Thailand, 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

Cliff, Brig. Thomas, 103n [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49]

Clifton, Gen. Chester, 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

Cline, Ray S., 292n [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Cochin China (See also Vietnam, Republic of), 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108]

Cochran, Merle, 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Colby, William, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Collins, Gen. James F., 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Colombo Plan meetings: Bangkok, 1963, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323]

Kuala Lumpur, Nov. 1961, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421]

Colonialism, 303–304 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239] British position, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332]

Indonesian position, 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 624–625 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

Netherlands position, 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

New Zealand position, 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Philippine position, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330]

Thailand, 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 417]

U.S. position, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 170]

Committee of 17, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328]

Committee To Strengthen the Security of the Free World (Clay Committee), 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Common Market See European Economic Community

Commonwealth, British, 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 346], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381]

Conference of Non-Aligned Nations Belgrade, Sept. 1961, 159–160 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191]

Congo, Republic of the, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 166], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 171], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 179], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 279] Belgian-U.S. relations, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206]

Indonesian troops in, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 144]

Netherlands-U.S. relations, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164]

U.N. role in, 338–339 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285]

Congress, U.S.: acts of: Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 2954 (P.L. 480), 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 289], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 291], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311], 679–680 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 342], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 411]

Foreign Aid appropriations, 1964, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 351], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 384]

P.L. 87–195 [Pgs. 87–195 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52]

P.L. 57–616 [Pgs. 57–616 include portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 384], 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

P.L. 88–94 (Fulbright-Hays Amendment), 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 390], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Cambodia, 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Indonesia, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337]

Laos, 859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

New Guinea dispute, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

Southeast Asia, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 420]

Thailand, 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 411], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 414], 938–939 [Pgs. 938–939 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

bilateral defense treaty, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Conway, Maj. Gen. Theodore J., 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 975–977 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469]

Cooley, Harold D., 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 352]

Cooper, Chester L., 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451]

Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171]

Cortada, James N., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27]

Cotton, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

Cottrell, Sterling J., 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 98]

Cowen, Myron M., 775–782 [Pgs. 775–782 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Crockett, William J., 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Cross, Charles T., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479]

Cruz (Philippines), 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Cuba, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 234], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 235], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403] Bay of Pigs incident, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68]

missile crisis, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 94], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

sugar, 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 795n [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 367], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

Cumming, Hugh S., Jr., 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41]

Cuthell, David C., 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318]

Czyzak, John J., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479] Cambodia, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101], 229n [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Dabney, Lt. Gen. John A., 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Dap Chhuon, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90]

Dato Ong Yoke Lim, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331]

Davies, Richard, 710n [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329]

Davis, Jeanne, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

Dawee, Air Chief Marshall Chullasapya, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 930 [Pg. 930 is part of Doc. 440], 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469]

de Gaulle, Charles, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172] Cambodia, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101], 234–235 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 106], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

European political integration, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

de Quay, Jan E., 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 241], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258] Bunker Plan, 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 583–584 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 261], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Decker, Gen. George H., 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365]

Decolonization Commission of 17, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328]

Defense, U.S. Department of, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] Thailand: U.S. military aid to, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 458], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 469]

U.S. troop deployment to, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469]

Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151]

Denmark, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181]

Desai, Manilal Jagdish, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7]

Development Assistance Committee (DAC), 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 296], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311], 678–679 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 313]

Development Loan Fund (DLF), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396]

Dexter, B.G., 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Dexter, John B., 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 118n [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 136n [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 141n [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Diehl, W.W., 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Dillon, C. Douglas, 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 372], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Dirksen, Everett M., 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Disarmament, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 169], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231]

Dizon, Col., 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Djuanda Kartawidjaja, 534–535 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 236], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 308], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314] New Guinea dispute, 523–524 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285]

U.S. economic aid to Indonesia, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 666n [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Don, Gen., 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123]

Douglas-Home, Alec. See Home, Lord.

Drumwright, Everett F., 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 87n [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42], 92–95 [Pgs. 92–95 include portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Duke, Angier Biddle, 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Dulles, Allen W., 93n [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 44], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402]

Dulles, John Foster, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219]

Dungan, Ralph A., 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 146n [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 355], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Durbrow, Elbridge, 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71]

Dutch East Indies, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191]

Dutton, Frederick, 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 818n [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

East-West conflict, 147–149 [Pgs. 147–149 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 169], 443–445 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242]

ECAFE, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Egypt, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 33], 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 840n [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396] Indonesian-U.S. relations, 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188]

Thailand, 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 397], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 399]

visits: Indonesia, proposed, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 143], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Philippines, June I960, 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354]

Ekasak, Gen., 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431]

Elizalde (Philippines), 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 361]

Elting, Howard, Jr., 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27]

Emmons, Arthur B., III, 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360]

Engen, Hans Kristian, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 76], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 77]

European Economic Community (EEC), 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216]

European Free Trade Area (EFTA), 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162]

Everton, John S., 109–113 [Pgs. 109–113 include portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 120–122 [Pgs. 120–122 include portions of Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

Ewell, Col. Julian, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Ewer, John C., 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469]

Export-Import Bank, 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 641–642 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291], 650–651 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 791n [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 801–802 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 372], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421]

Family planning, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416]

Far East, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398]

Federal Reserve Board, U.S., 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Feldman, Myer, 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366]

Felt, Adm. Harry D., 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Thailand, 50–53 [Pgs. 50–53 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 941n [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 459], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 977–979 [Pgs. 977–979 include portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]

Fensor, Andrew, 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308]

FitzGerald, Desmond, 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Follis, R.G., 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 309]

Ford Foundation, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 56]

Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 384], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Forrestal, Michael V., 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 36], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 748n [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 343], 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 931n [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441] Cambodia, 225–226 [Pgs. 225–226 include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 244–245 [Pgs. 244–245 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118], 268–271 [Pgs. 268–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 284–285 [Pgs. 284–285 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347]

Indonesia: United States, relations with, 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 672–675 [Pgs. 672–675 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 633–634 [Pgs. 633–634 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 650–654 [Pgs. 650–654 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 659n [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 313], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Laos, 935–936 [Pgs. 935–936 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Malaysia, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344], 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Philippines, 810–811 [Pgs. 810–811 include portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Southeast Asia, 59–61 [Pgs. 59–61 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29]

Thailand, 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 464], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Vietnam, Republic of, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347]

“Fortress America,” 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

France, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Frank, Isaiah, 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Frederika, Queen, 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 241]

Freeman, James B., 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

Freeman, Orville, 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Fry, Sir Leslie, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 314]

Fulbright, J. William, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 818n [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Galbraith, Frank, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 317], 696n [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Galbraith, John Kenneth, 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Garcia, Carlos P., 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 352], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 775–779 [Pgs. 775–779 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 781–782 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358], 784–787 [Pgs. 784–787 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

Gatch, John N., 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Gaud, William, 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Geneva Accords, 1954, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 172], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Geneva Accords, 1962, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 92], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471], 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480] Soviet position, 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Geneva Conference, 1954, 204–205 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91]

Geneva Conference on Cambodia, proposed, 198–200 [Pgs. 198–200 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 203 [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 271–279 [Pgs. 271–279 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 348], 1003–1004 [Pgs. 1003–1004 include portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 854–857 [Pgs. 854–857 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 424], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444] Cambodian position, 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

Thai position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 408], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462]

Germany, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 72], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 947–948 [Pgs. 947–948 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465]

Goa, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225]

Golds, Anthony A., 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345]

Gookin, Richard J., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72]

Gore, Albert, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Graham, Frank P., 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Grant, James P., 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Greenhill, Denis, 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334]

Gross, Ernest, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

Guerrilla warfare, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 746–747 [Pgs. 746–747 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Gunawan, 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226]

Gurkhas, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]

Gussing, Nils, 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471]

Gussing Mission, 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125]

Hamilton, Fowler, 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Hammarskjöld, Dag, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 346–347 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 164], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182]

Hannah, Norman B., 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59], 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 141n [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101], 230n [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140] Cambodia, 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Hansen, Kenneth R., 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Hardin, Col., 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 442]

Hare, Raymond G., 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D., 928–931 [Pgs. 928–931 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 442], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 949n [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 459], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Harriman, W. Averell, 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 473n [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 623n [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284], 650n [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 710n [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 818n [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 931n [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 950n [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455], 958n [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 460], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Burma, 112–115 [Pgs. 112–115 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65]

Cambodia, 155–156 [Pgs. 155–156 include portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73], 203–204 [Pgs. 203–204 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 227–229 [Pgs. 227–229 include portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123], 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 282–288 [Pgs. 282–288 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Indonesia, 655–659 [Pgs. 655–659 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323], 703n [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 704–705 [Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326] oil laws, 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 308]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 297], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Laos, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Malaysia, 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 732–735 [Pgs. 732–735 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 340, Doc. 341, and Doc. 342], 748–749 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345]

New Guinea dispute, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 234], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 240], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 243] Bunker Plan, 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279]

Indonesian military intervention in, 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Netherlands-U.S. talks, 495–498 [Pgs. 495–498 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Philippines, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 368], 798–800 [Pgs. 798–800 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 808–810 [Pgs. 808–810 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 813n [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Southeast Asia, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 34], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 39–44 [Pgs. 39–44 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 74–75 [Pgs. 74–75 include portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 38], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Thailand, 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 918–919 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 464], 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 468] U.S. troop deployment to, 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 935–938 [Pgs. 935–938 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, and Doc. 446], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 467], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 469]

Timor, Portuguese, 738–739 [Pgs. 738–739 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Vietnam, Republic of, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

visits: Australia, June 1963, 732–735 [Pgs. 732–735 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 738–739 [Pgs. 738–739 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Southeast Asia, Apr.-May 1961, 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Harrison, Geoffrey, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Hatta, Mohammed, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 375–376 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169]

Heavner, Theodore J.C., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Hechanova, Rufino G., 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Hecksher, Henry D., 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Heinz, Rear Adm. Luther C, 103–107 [Pgs. 103–107 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59], 149–151 [Pgs. 149–151 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 948–949 [Pgs. 948–949 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 959n [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Helms, Richard, 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 947–948 [Pgs. 947–948 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Hepworth (CIA), 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Herter, Christian A., 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

Heyl, Mary Jane, 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Hickerson, John D., 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362]

Hilliker, Grant G., 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 40], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 130n [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 62], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 295n [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 688n [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 828n [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 884n [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 417], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 974n [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469] Burma, 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64]

Cambodia, 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 250–251 [Pgs. 250–251 include portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 258–260 [Pgs. 258–260 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Indonesia, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 657n [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 694–696 [Pgs. 694–696 include portions of Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321]

Laos, 62–68 [Pgs. 62–68 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32]

Malaysia, 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 721–724 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 731–732 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 338], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Philippines, 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 824n [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Thailand, 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 1002–1003 [Pgs. 1002–1003 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482]

Vietnam, Republic of, 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Ho Chi Minh, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172], 387–388 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

Ho Chi Minh trail, 164–165 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 285n [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135]

Hoa Hao, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70]

Hodges, Luther, 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Holt, Harold, 731–735 [Pgs. 731–735 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Holyoake, Keith, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Home, Lord, 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 37], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 657n [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 723–724 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Hong Kong, 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Honolulu Conferences: July 1962, 953–956 [Pgs. 953–956 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Oct. 1962, 973–980 [Pgs. 973–980 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471]

S.S. Hope, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

House of Representatives, U.S.: Foreign Affairs Committee, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 785n [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 361]

Philippine War Damage Bill, 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366], 796–800 [Pgs. 796–800 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 807–809 [Pgs. 807–809 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Rules Committee, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 785n [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 361], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366]

Hughes, Thomas, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Humphrey, Donald D., 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205]

Huydecoper, Jan L.R., 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 243], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279]

India (see also India and Indian subheadings under other subjects), 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477] British military aid to, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 40]

Burma, relations with, 117–118 [Pgs. 117–118 include portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]

Cambodia, relations with, 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61], 213–214 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Geneva Conference on Cambodia, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96]

Goa invasion, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219]

Netherlands, relations with, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163]

SEATO role in, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 7]

Indochina (see also Cambodia; Laos; Vietnam, Democratic Republic of; Vietnam, Republic of), 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347]

Indonesia (see also Indonesia and Indonesian subheadings under other subjects, New Guinea dispute), 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33] aircraft service contracts, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321]

army-PKI conflict, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 288], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 315]

Asian Games, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293]

Australia, relations with, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344]

Australian economic and military aid to, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 288], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291]

Bank of Indonesia, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 307], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

British Embassy, burning of, 683–686 [Pgs. 683–686 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315]

Cambodia, relations with, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

communist domination of: Australian position, 464–465 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205], 468–469 [Pgs. 468–469 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215]

Indonesian position, 386–387 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172]

Philippine position, 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219]

U.S. position, 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

Communist Party (PKI) (see also political parties below), 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 315], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319] banning of, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157]

economic situation in Indonesia, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Malaysia, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 346]

New Guinea dispute, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Soviet support for, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 143], 464–465 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

strength of, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286]

Sukarno, relationship with, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 328–331 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]

Thai rebels, support of, 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

Constitution of 1945, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169]

counterinsurgency programs, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 288]

Democratic League, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169]

Development Bank, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 186]

economic situation, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 450–451 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 200], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 291], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291] development and stabilization program, 419–421 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 675–680 [Pgs. 675–680 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 332], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337]

eight-year development plan, 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 169], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Humphrey mission, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205]

Japanese war reparations, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291]

Netherlands, debt owed to, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 291], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 291], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 296]

Soviet Union, debt owed to, 633–634 [Pgs. 633–634 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 291], 641–642 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312]

education, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169]

elections, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169]

ethnic groups: Chinese, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172]

Dayaks, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172]

expansionism (see also Borneo confrontation; New Guinea dispute; Timor, Portuguese), 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 692–693 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]

French economic aid to, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

German Federal Republic economic aid to, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Guided Democracy, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155], 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 385–386 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

Malaysia, relations with, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Nasakom, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144]

National Front for the Liberation of West Irian, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169]

nationalism, 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 387–389 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

Netherlands, relations with: representation in Djakarta, lack of, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162]

Karel Doorman cruise, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143]

nationalization of Netherlands property, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162]

restoration of, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 196], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285], 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

New Zealand economic and military aid to, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 288]

oil, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 667–675 [Pgs. 667–675 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337]

outer-island revolts, 323–324 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 153], 376–377 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 399n [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Pantjasila, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 317], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Philippines, relations with, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

philosophy, political, 385–386 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

political parties (see also Communist Party above), 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 172] Masjumi, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 144], 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169]

Muslim Scholar Party (NU), 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169]

National Front, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 172]

National Party (PNI), 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169]

Socialist Party (PSI), 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 144], 376–377 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169]

rubber, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 186]

Soviet economic and military aid to, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143], 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 465–464 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 205], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 288], 638–639 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 291], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337]

Soviet policy toward, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 155], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 269]

Soviet Union, relations with, 361n [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 235], 591n [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

United Kingdom, relations with, 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 349]

United States, relations with, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 143], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 235], 595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 689–690 [Pgs. 689–690 include portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 692–694 [Pgs. 692–694 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326] Malaysia, establishment of, 715–716 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330], 723n [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332]

U.S. economic aid to, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 198], 626–629 [Pgs. 626–629 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 349] Development Grant Program, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291]

economic stabilization and reform, 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 169], 378–379 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 419–421 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 633–636 [Pgs. 633–636 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 675–680 [Pgs. 675–680 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326]

educational programs, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 143], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 289], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 291]

Humphrey economic mission, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205]

Ibu Sukarno Hospital, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

spare parts and raw materials, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 291], 641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 652–654 [Pgs. 652–654 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 312]

technical assistance, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 143], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 291], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

U.S. military aid to, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 143], 319–322 [Pgs. 319–322 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 155], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 198], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316], 762–763 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349] Civic Action Survey Team, 629–630 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 288], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291]

civil action program, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 291], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

helicopter gift to Sukarno, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 171], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Netherlands position, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

New Guinea dispute, effect on, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 626–628 [Pgs. 626–628 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302]

U.S. policy toward, 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169], 443–445 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 639–640 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 656–657 [Pgs. 656–657 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and Doc. 303] seven-point program, 302–307 [Pgs. 302–307 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Usdek, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169]

West Irian, transfer to Indonesia, 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Ingersoll, James H., 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386]

Ingraham, Edward C., 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 688n [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316], 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332]

Inter-American Economic and Social

Council, 141n [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 64]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 291], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 364], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 414], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416]

International Control Commission (ICC), 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 106], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444] Cambodian position, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 288n [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

China, People’s Republic of, position, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74]

Soviet position, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74]

Thai position, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125]

U.S. position, 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 202–203 [Pgs. 202–203 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101]

International Cooperation Administration (ICA), 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53] Indonesia,

Thailand, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 411], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 412] Study Group report on, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416], 886n [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418]

International Court of Justice (ICJ), 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 468] New Guinea dispute, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 345–346 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 172]

Preah Vihear Temple dispute, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

International Monetary Fund (IMF): Indonesia, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 634–636 [Pgs. 634–636 include portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 638–639 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 291], 641–644 [Pgs. 641–644 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 307], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 316] granting of loans, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 313]

IMF team visit, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 296], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311]

Philippines, 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 372]

Iran, 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 201], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408]

Ireland, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

Irian, West. See New Guinea dispute; West New Guinea

Israel, 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293]

Iwin, Bo, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 53]

Jani, Gen., 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Janow, Seymour J., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 650n [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 675n [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 311], 678n [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 681–683 [Pgs. 681–683 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Japan, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 384], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387] sugar purchases, 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

United States, relations with, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Jarvis, Francis G., 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Java, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 106], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198]

Jenkins, Alfred leS., 341n [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182]

Jessup, Philip, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Johnson, Maj. Gen. Briard P., 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 928 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 458], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463]

Johnson, Lady Bird, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] Cambodia, 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 266–267 [Pgs. 266–267 include portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

Indonesia, 698–701 [Pgs. 698–701 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 703–706 [Pgs. 703–706 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Laos, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350], 856–858 [Pgs. 856–858 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Philippines, 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 368], 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4]

Thailand, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 853–854 [Pgs. 853–854 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 408], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462], 1003n [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

U.S. military aid to, 860–862 [Pgs. 860–862 include portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 412], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 458], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 469], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 470]

visit to South and Southeast Asia, May 1961, 7–9 [Pgs. 7–9 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 853–862 [Pgs. 853–862 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 411], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 420]

Johnson, Pat, 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Johnson, Robert H., 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287] Cambodia, 167–175 [Pgs. 167–175 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Indonesia, 325–327 [Pgs. 325–327 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 371–375 [Pgs. 371–375 include portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 419–421 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196]

New Guinea dispute, 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 471–472 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207] Netherlands-U.S. relations, 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 405–406 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180], 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.N. trusteeship proposal, 364–367 [Pgs. 364–367 include portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 393–394 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175]

U.S. position, 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 447–451 [Pgs. 447–451 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 455–460 [Pgs. 455–460 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 483–484 [Pgs. 483–484 include portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 502–504 [Pgs. 502–504 include portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Philippines, 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 775–777 [Pgs. 775–777 include portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 17–21 [Pgs. 17–21 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 37–39 [Pgs. 37–39 include portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30]

Thailand, 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 59n [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 407n [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 240], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 678n [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 778n [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 827n [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 388], 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395], 874n [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 912n [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 953n [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 990n [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 475], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479] Burma-Thai relations, 108n [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Cambodia, 172–175 [Pgs. 172–175 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]

Kuomintang irregulars in Burma, 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

New Guinea dispute, 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 200], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 202]

Philippines, 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 828–829 [Pgs. 828–829 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]

Southeast Asia, 9–12 [Pgs. 9–12 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, and Doc. 6]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 420]

Thailand, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 407], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412], 886n [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 970–972 [Pgs. 970–972 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468] defense of, 843n [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 904–906 [Pgs. 904–906 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427]

U.S. troop deployment to, 853–854 [Pgs. 853–854 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 958–959 [Pgs. 958–959 include portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 1000–1001 [Pgs. 1000–1001 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] Cambodia, 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105]

documents: JCSM 311–61, 851–853 [Pgs. 851–853 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406]

JCSM 725–61, 443–445 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 288]

JCSM 33–62, 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

JCSM 415–63, 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

JCSM 692–63, 628–631 [Pgs. 628–631 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

JCSM 971–63, 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Indonesia, 443–445 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 628–631 [Pgs. 628–631 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Philippines, 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Southeast Asia, 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Thailand, 851–853 [Pgs. 851–853 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, and Doc. 406], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 941n [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 459], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461]

Jones, Howard D. 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17]

Jones, Howard P., 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 619n [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295] Indonesia, 302–307 [Pgs. 302–307 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 683–685 [Pgs. 683–685 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314] oil laws, 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 307], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 308]

Pope case, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

United States, relations with, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 507n [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 689–690 [Pgs. 689–690 include portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 692–696 [Pgs. 692–696 include portions of Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 319–322 [Pgs. 319–322 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 645–646 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293], 659–662 [Pgs. 659–662 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and Doc. 303], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

Malaysia, 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 659n [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 705–706 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 326], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 744–745 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

New Guinea dispute, 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 194], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 517–519 [Pgs. 517–519 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 622–625 [Pgs. 622–625 include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285] Bunker Plan, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 599–603 [Pgs. 599–603 include portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274]

Indonesian military intervention in, 473–474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 479–481 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275]

Indonesian position, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 216]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 477–478 [Pgs. 477–478 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 211], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 224], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 234], 533–535 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236], 564n [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267] bilateral talks with third-party representation, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 216], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 555n [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

pro-Indonesia policy shift, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 207]

U.N. negotiations over, 446–447 [Pgs. 446–447 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 449n [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

U.S. role in negotiations, 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204]

Sukarno visit to the United States, 1961, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 314–317 [Pgs. 314–317 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Jones, Mary Lou, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 317]

Judd, Thomas M., 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339]

Judd, Walter, 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Kachin Independence Army (KIA), 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 50]

Kahin, George, 334–335 [Pgs. 334–335 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157]

Kalimantan (see also Borneo), 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347]

Kantol, Prince Norodom, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 94], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 266–267 [Pgs. 266–267 include portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Kaplan, Jacob, 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 411]

Karel Doorman cruise, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244]

Karen National Defense Organization (KNDO), 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 47], 105–106 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50]

Katanga, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211]

Katay Don Sasorith, 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Kaysen, Carl, 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 212], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 498n [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 650n [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296] New Guinea dispute, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 504–505 [Pgs. 504–505 include portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268]

Thailand, 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

Keita, Modibo, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188]

Kennedy, Ethel, 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428]

Kennedy, Jacqueline, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400], 925–926 [Pgs. 925–926 include portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Kennedy, John F., 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 108], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258], 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 960n [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 998n [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478] assassination of, 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 761n [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 348], 833n [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392], 1003n [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482] Cambodian glee at, 280–283 [Pgs. 280–283 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

Burma, 116–118 [Pgs. 116–118 include portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, and Doc. 56], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 136–138 [Pgs. 136–138 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Cambodia, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89], 224–225 [Pgs. 224–225 include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 233–236 [Pgs. 233–236 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447] United States, relations with, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 161–166 [Pgs. 161–166 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 79], 206n [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

U.S. military aid to, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69]

East-West conflict, 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 169]

Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962, 854–857 [Pgs. 854–857 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408]

Indonesia, 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] Pope case, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 153], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 401–403 [Pgs. 401–403 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188]

United States, relations with, 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 423–425 [Pgs. 423–425 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 626–627 [Pgs. 626–627 include portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 652–654 [Pgs. 652–654 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305], 675–677 [Pgs. 675–677 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 313], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

International Control Commission (ICC), 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74]

Kuomintang irregulars in Burma, 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 46], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 47]

Laos, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 145–146 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432]

Malaysia, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 343] formation of, 684–685 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 718–719 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 331], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 731–736 [Pgs. 731–736 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 740–741 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340], 750–753 [Pgs. 750–753 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 816–817 [Pgs. 816–817 include portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Netherlands-U.S. relations, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 200], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

neutralism, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 53], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74]

New Guinea dispute, 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175], 472–474 [Pgs. 472–474 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 483–484 [Pgs. 483–484 include portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 279], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293] Bunker Plan, 582–585 [Pgs. 582–585 include portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Indonesian military intervention in, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 477–482 [Pgs. 477–482 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 503–506 [Pgs. 503–506 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 234], 623–624 [Pgs. 623–624 include portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 518–520 [Pgs. 518–520 include portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 538 [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 276], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Netherlands-U.S. talks, 345–352 [Pgs. 345–352 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 548–551 [Pgs. 548–551 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

U.N. resolutions, 451–452 [Pgs. 451–452 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 202], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 203], 462–463 [Pgs. 462–463 include portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

U.S. policy toward, 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 227]

peace summit proposal, 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Philippines, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 822n [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385] United States, relations with, 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

War Damage Bill, 796–800 [Pgs. 796–800 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 374], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 826n [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Southeast Asia, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 39–40 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 75–76 [Pgs. 75–76 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 885–886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 907n [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432]

Sukarno, personal relationship with, 304–307 [Pgs. 304–307 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 314–316 [Pgs. 314–316 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 232], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323] Borneo confrontation, 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

correspondence with, 471–472 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 479–482 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 218], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 232], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 565–566 [Pgs. 565–566 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293], 648–649 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 729–730 [Pgs. 729–730 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378]

invitation for Kennedy visit, 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Washington talks, Apr. 1961, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 399n [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186]

Thailand, 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 414], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457] defense of, 889–893 [Pgs. 889–893 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420] U.S. commitment, reaffirmation of, 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 399], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433]

United States, relations with, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 921–926 [Pgs. 921–926 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

U.S. troop deployment to, 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437]

U.S. withdrawal of forces, 942n [Pg. 942 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 957 [Pg. 957 is part of Doc. 459], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 968–970 [Pgs. 968–970 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Vienna talks, July 1961, 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415]

Vietnam, Republic of, 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

visits: Indonesia, invitation to, 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Paris, May-June 1961, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 174]

Philippines, invitation to, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387]

Kennedy, Robert F., 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 251], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 622n [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429] New Guinea dispute, 606–609 [Pgs. 606–609 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

quarrel with Sukarno, 533–534 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236]

Thailand, 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 912–915 [Pgs. 912–915 include portions of Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455]

visits: Indonesia, Feb. 1962, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 507n [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 517–527 [Pgs. 517–527 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 235], 535–536 [Pgs. 535–536 include portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Netherlands, Feb. 1962, 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 538–542 [Pgs. 538–542 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Thailand, Feb. 1962, 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 46–49 [Pgs. 46–49 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 912n [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 913–915 [Pgs. 913–915 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Kenworthy, Ned, 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 229]

Khin Nyo, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Khmer-American Friendship Highway, 283–284 [Pgs. 283–284 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 286–287 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 138], 296–298 [Pgs. 296–298 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Khmer Kampuchea Krom (KKK), 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120]

Khmer Serei, 190n [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 84], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125] British view of, 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Cambodian charges of U.S. support for, 240–243 [Pgs. 240–243 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 245–249 [Pgs. 245–249 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 257–259 [Pgs. 257–259 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 263–265 [Pgs. 263–265 include portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

radio broadcasts from South Vietnam, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 268–271 [Pgs. 268–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

Thai-Cambodian relations, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Khouw Bien Tie, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 94], 234–235 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455] peace summit proposal, 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Vienna talks, June 1961, 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415]

visit to Indonesia, Feb. I960, 302–303 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 143], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 154]

Kim, Gen., 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123]

King, Samuel L., 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369]

Kinney, Robert L., 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

KLM Airlines, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 162], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 545–546 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242]

Knoche, E.H., 108n [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Knox, M. Gordon, 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Kohler, Foy D., 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 310n [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 341–343 [Pgs. 341–343 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and Doc. 161], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164]

Komer, Robert W., 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 275–277 [Pgs. 275–277 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 194], 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224] 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 619n [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] China, People’s Republic of, 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 169]

Indonesia, 320n [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 656–657 [Pgs. 656–657 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 303], 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Malaysia, 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

New Guinea dispute, 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 148], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 545–547 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 552–553 [Pgs. 552–553 include portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571–573 [Pgs. 571–573 include portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 608n [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 277], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Bunker Plan, 583–585 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 590–592 [Pgs. 590–592 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Indonesian military intervention in, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 503–506 [Pgs. 503–506 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 512–513 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

settlement of, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

UN. trusteeship, 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168]

Kong Le, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 480]

Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

Korea, Republic of, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451]

Mutual Defense Treaty with the

United States, Oct 1953, 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 424]

Korean war, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 408]

Koren, Henry L.T, 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 34], 118n [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101], 230n [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 252n [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 271n [Pg. 271 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 912n [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 923n [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479], 1002n [Pg. 1002 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 1003n [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482] Cambodia, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101], 229n [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Thailand, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 990n [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 993n [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 475], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Kossamak, Queen, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 139]

Krause, Henry G., Jr., 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 35], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Krit Sriwara, Lt. Gen., 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Kuchel, Thomas H., 938–939 [Pgs. 938–939 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Kuomintang (KMT) irregulars (see also under Burma), 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469]

KyawNyeiri, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Kyi Maung, Col., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 58]

Labor unions, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61]

Laking, George R., 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Lampson, E.T., 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Landon, Kenneth P., 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 148], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396]

Lansdale, Maj. Gen. Edward G., 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 827–829 [Pgs. 827–829 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Laos (see also Laos and Laotian subheadings under other subjects), 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465] battles: Nam Tha, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 930 [Pg. 930 is part of Doc. 440], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466]

Plaine des Jarres, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40]

Thakhek, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448]

British cease-fire proposal, 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

British military intervention in, 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

China, People’s Republic of, military intervention in, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

communist threat to, 2–4 [Pgs. 2–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475] Cambodian position, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 106]

Malayan position, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

Thai-U.S. cooperation in countering, 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Vietnam, Republic of, effect on, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]

defense of, 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471] Philippine position, 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 804–805 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Thai position, 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 408], 881–882 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 420], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 468]

U.S. position, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 881–882 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 468]

Fourteen-Power conference (see also Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962), 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 350]

French military intervention in, 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Geneva Agreements, see Geneva Accords, 1954, and 1962.

Indonesian-U.S. talks, 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 169], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

King’s Council proposal, 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435]

Kong Le coup, 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469]

Kuomintang irregulars in, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 92–94 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 44], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

neutrality of, 162–163 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467] Soviet role in, 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 422], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423]

Thai position, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474]

Vietnam, Republic of position, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]

oligarchy in, 387–388 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

partition of, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 848n [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

regional cooperation, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

SEATO resolution on, 4–7 [Pgs. 4–7 include portions of Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4]

SEATO role in, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 783n [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359] Australian position, V, 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31]

British position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 64–68 [Pgs. 64–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Cambodian position, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 74]

French position, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 64–68 [Pgs. 64–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Laotian request for intervention, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 31], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 31]

New Zealand position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 64–67 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31]

Pakistani position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31]

Philippine position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 773–774 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354]

Plan 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 405], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

Thai position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 420], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428]

U.S. position, 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 420], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 480]

Souvanna government, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 109–110 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 897–898 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 424], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 913n [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 924–925 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457], 981–982 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

Soviet airlift, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 480]

Soviet policy toward, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 170]

Thai economic and military aid to, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

Thai Exiles Association, 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

Thai military intervention in, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 66–68 [Pgs. 66–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Three Princes meetings, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72]

United States, relations with, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162]

U.S. economic aid to, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

U.S. military aid to, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432]

U.S. military intervention in, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 66–68 [Pgs. 66–68 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448] China, People’s Republic of military response to, 858–859 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408]

Soviet position, 858–859 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408]

U.S. policy toward, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 47], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Viet Minh withdrawal from, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 468], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of military intervention in, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461]

Vietnam, Republic of, military intervention in, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Latin America, 675 [Pg. 675 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Lebanon, 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443]

Lee Kuan Yew, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330]

Leimena, Johannes, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172], 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 443–445 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 926–927 [Pgs. 926–927 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451]

Levy, Walter, 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 672–673 [Pgs. 672–673 include portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Lewis, Verne B., 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Lincoln, Evelyn, 473n [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Lindquist, Robert S., 310n [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 521n [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 230], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275] Indonesia, 405–406 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180]

New Guinea dispute, 427–428 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194]

Linehan, John A., Jr., 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Lippmann, Walter, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85]

Liu Shao-chi, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

Lockhart, Frank P., 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Lockheed, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123], 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129]

Lon Nol, Gen., 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 80], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 92], 209–210 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 93], 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Long, Gus, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 309]

Lopez, Salvador P., 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

Lubkeman, Walter, 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

Lumumba, Patrice, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 47]

Luns, Joseph, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258] Indonesian view of, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 196], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267]

New Guinea dispute, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 467–468 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 205], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 211], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266] Bunker Plan, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 261], 587–589 [Pgs. 587–589 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 596–598 [Pgs. 596–598 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271]

Indonesian military intervention in, 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 241], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 274], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275]

Papuan self-determination, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 215], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 224], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.N. trusteeship, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 179], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S. proposals, 342–343 [Pgs. 342–343 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 202], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 570–571 [Pgs. 570–571 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257]

visits: New York, Sept. 1961, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191]

Washington, Apr. 1961, 344–364 [Pgs. 344–364 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Washington, Mar. 1962, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 545–553 [Pgs. 545–553 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Lutkins, LaRue R., 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 90n [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44]

Macapagal, Diosado, 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348] economic situation in the Philippines, 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 793–794 [Pgs. 793–794 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 800–803 [Pgs. 800–803 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

Indonesia, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Malaysia, 693n [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 727–728 [Pgs. 727–728 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

political situation in the Philippines, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358], 786–789 [Pgs. 786–789 include portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 826–827 [Pgs. 826–827 include portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

U.S.-Philippine relations, 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 796n [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 368], 797–800 [Pgs. 797–800 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 806–813 [Pgs. 806–813 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 826n [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas, 770n [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354]

Macmillan, Harold, 234–235 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 106], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 261], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Magsaysay, Ramon, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]

Malaya (see also Malaya and Malayan subheadings under other subjects, Malaysia), 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330] communist revolt in, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

oligarchy in, 387–388 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

regional cooperation, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

Singapore, relations with, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328]

Thailand, relations with, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

U.N. Committee on West New Guinea, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Malaysia (see also Malaya; Malaysia and Malaysian subheadings under other subjects), 712–717 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330] Australia, relations with, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

Borneo confrontation: Australian position, 731–733 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344]

Australian troops in, 731–732 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 734–736 [Pgs. 734–736 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 739–741 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 343]

British position, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344], 757–758 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 762–763 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Indonesian military intervention, 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 338], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340]

Indonesian support for Borneo rebels, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

Malaysian position, 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 346]

New Zealand position, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339]

Philippine position, 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 346]

Soviet position, 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 346]

U.S. position, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 757–759 [Pgs. 757–759 include portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 762–763 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

British economic and military aid to, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 329], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330]

British-Indonesia-Malaya conflict, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

British-Malaysian defense agreement, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 329], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332]

China, People’s Republic of, threat to, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

communist influence in, 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

conferences: Bangkok, proposed, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 345]

Manila Summit, July-Aug. 1963, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 315], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 721–725 [Pgs. 721–725 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

establishment of: Australian position, 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 731–734 [Pgs. 731–734 include portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

British position, 710–712 [Pgs. 710–712 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 722–724 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332]

China, People’s Republic of position, 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Indonesian position, 678–679 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 718–719 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387]

Indonesian-U.S. talks, 656–659 [Pgs. 656–659 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 684–685 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314]

Malayan position, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332]

New Zealand position, 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329]

Philippine position, 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

postponement of, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 722–724 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Singaporean position, 712–713 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330]

Soviet position, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Thai position, 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

U.S. position, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 684–685 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 705–708 [Pgs. 705–708 include portions of Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328], 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 331], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, position, 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

ethnic groups, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327] Borneo Chinese, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

Borneo tribals, 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 715–716 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

Chinese, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 344]

Dayaks, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Indonesian migrants, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330]

Malays, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Singapore Chinese, 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381]

Indonesia, relations with, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

military situation in, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 344]

New Zealand, relations with, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

Philippines, relations with, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331]

political parties: Barisan Sosialis (BSP), 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330]

Clandestine Communist Organization, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

Sarawak United People’s Party (SUPP), 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

quadripartite meeting on, 753–756 [Pgs. 753–756 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

U.N. role in, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 329], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 338], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 349], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381]

U.N. survey of attitudes toward federation, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 723–724 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

United Kingdom, relations with, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

United States, relations with, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 329], 716–717 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 345]

Malik, Adam, 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 559–564 [Pgs. 559–564 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 258], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 279], 618–619 [Pgs. 618–619 include portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Malinovsky, Marshall, 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Manell, Abram E., 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479]

Manfull, MX., 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354]

Manglapus, 824–285 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386]

Manhart, Maj. Gen. A.H., 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 394]

Manila Evening News, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358]

Manila Pact, Sept, 1954, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 26], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 845n [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 399], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 935–936 [Pgs. 935–936 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444] Article 4(1), 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 31], 901–903 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 910–911 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 429], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Article 4(2), 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 31], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Article 4(3), 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3]

defense of Thailand, 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

Manila Summit, July-Aug.1963, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 315], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 721–725 [Pgs. 721–725 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Mansfield, Mike, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 33], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Mao Tse-tung, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 388]

Maphilindo, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 317], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 721–722 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 345]

Marcy, Carl, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 38]

Marshall, Gen, George C., 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33]

Martadinata, Rear Adm. E., 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

Martin, Edward M., 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 351]

Martin, Edward W., 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 90n [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44]

Martin, Graham, 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123]

Masters, Edward E., 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 36], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 953n [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458]

Matsu, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354]

Maung Maung, Brig., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 49], 125–126 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 62]

McBride, Robert H., 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163]

McCloskey, Robert J., 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479]

McCloy, John J., 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

McConaughy, Walter P., 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 778n [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357] Cambodia, 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 171–172 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 77], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 79]

New Guinea dispute, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 200]

Philippines, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 351], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Thailand, 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

McCone, John A., 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465] Indonesia, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 696n [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

New Guinea dispute, 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 148], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 269]

Thailand, 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 935–936 [Pgs. 935–936 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 946–948 [Pgs. 946–948 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454]

MacDonald, Malcolm, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

McEwen, John, 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 338], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340]

McFarland, James H., 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 351], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 355], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 366], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

McGhee, George C., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 341n [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424] New Guinea dispute, 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 148], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268]

Southeast Asia, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

McHugh, Col., 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 171]

McIntosh, Alistair, 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345]

McKisson, John, 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

McNamara, Robert S., 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 115n [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373], 827n [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 388], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Cambodia, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92], 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Indonesia, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 445n [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 198], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Malaysia, 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331]

New Guinea dispute, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244]

Philippines, 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 835 [Pg. 835 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Southeast Asia, 36–37 [Pgs. 36–37 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17]

Thailand, 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 458] U.S. military aid to, 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 975–977 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469]

U.S. troop deployment to, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 935–937 [Pgs. 935–937 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453]

U.S. withdrawal of forces, 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 955–957 [Pgs. 955–957 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 959n [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 469]

Vietnam, Republic of, 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Meade, Frazier, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130]

Meijer (Netherlands), 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Mein, John Gordon, 785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 361], 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Mekong River Project, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28]

Melanesian Federation, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 163], 395–396 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175]

Meloy, Francis E., 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Mendenhall, Joseph A., 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115]

Menzies, Robert G., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 183] Malaysia, 731–732 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 735–736 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 338], 740–741 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340], 747–749 [Pgs. 747–749 include portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

New Guinea dispute, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172], 503n [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219]

Messmer, Pierre A., 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Mexico, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Meyner, Robert B., 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Military Assistance Program (MAP). See U.S. military aid to under specific countries.

Milne, Matilda L., 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Mixed Boundary Commission, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 101]

Mongolia, U.N. membership for, 772–773 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Monireth, Prince, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111]

Montano (Philippines), 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Moore, Dan, 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Morgenthau, Henry, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Morse, Wayne, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Munro, D.J., 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Murphy, Robert, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Murray, Peter, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 106], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]

Murrow, Edward R., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 631–633 [Pgs. 631–633 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423]

Mutuc, Amelito, 788–789 [Pgs. 788–789 include portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 811–812 [Pgs. 811–812 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

Myat Tun, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53]

Myint Thein, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58]

Na Kham, Prince, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Nasser, Gamal Abdul, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300]

Nasutiori, Gen. Abdul Haris, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 155], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 639–640 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 349] army-PKI conflict, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 169], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291]

New Guinea dispute, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 182], 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285]

Sukarno relationship with, 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

visits: Moscow, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 154], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Washington, Nov. 1963, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 698–702 [Pgs. 698–702 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345]

National Advisory Council on

International Monetary and

Financial Affairs (NAC), 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 372]

National Broadcasting Company (NBC), 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 374]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 50–61, 2–4 [Pgs. 2–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]

NIE 52–62, 115–116 [Pgs. 115–116 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

NIE 54–59–62, 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

NIE 55–62, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

NIE 54–55–63, 757–758 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

NIE 55–63, 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

National Liberation Front (FLN), 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108]

National Security Council (NSC), 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198]

Action Memoranda: No. 124, 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423]

No. 179, 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 634–637 [Pgs. 634–637 include portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

No. 195, 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294]

Actions, 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220] No. 2267, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]

No. 2425, 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

meetings: 483d, 849–850 [Pgs. 849–850 include portions of Doc. 402, Doc. 403, and Doc. 404]

484th, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

498th, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Nationalism, 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 387–389 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

Naudts, Col., 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Navez, Andre, 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Ne Win, Gen., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43] U.S.-Burmese relations, 109–111 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 118–121 [Pgs. 118–121 include portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 130–132 [Pgs. 130–132 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 135–140 [Pgs. 135–140 include portions of Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 143–144 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 65]

Ne Win, Mrs., 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 53], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 136n [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 192], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Neilson, Paul, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 289]

Netherlands (see also Netherlands subheadings under other subjects): India, relations with, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163]

Indonesia, relations with: Karel Doorman cruise, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143]

nationalization of Netherlands property, 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162]

Netherlands representation in Djakarta, lack of, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162]

restoration of, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 196], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285], 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

political parties: Catholic Party, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 191]

Labor Party, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 191]

United States, relations with: air landing rights and overflights, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 545–547 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

New Guinea dispute, 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 197], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 491–492 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 570–573 [Pgs. 570–573 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

Panama Canal, use by Netherlands Navy, 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 558–559 [Pgs. 558–559 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

Neustadt, Richard, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Neutral Nations commission (Sihanouk commission), 145–146 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66]

Neutralism, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453]

New Guinea, Australian, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 657n [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344]

New Guinea Council. See under West New Guinea

New Guinea dispute: agreement of Aug. 1962, 622n [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295]

Australian position, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143], 345n [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 163], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 214], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

Australian-Netherlands talks, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 183]

Australian-U.S. talks, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181]

British role in, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 163], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 207], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Bunker Plan, 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 255] Australian position, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

British position, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Indonesian position, 580n [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 267], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Netherlands position, 570–571 [Pgs. 570–571 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 573–580 [Pgs. 573–580 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 269], 596–600 [Pgs. 596–600 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 276]

Papuan self-determination, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 258], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 580–581 [Pgs. 580–581 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

transition period, length of, 604–607 [Pgs. 604–607 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 611–616 [Pgs. 611–616 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

U.S. position, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 254], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260], 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 590–592 [Pgs. 590–592 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 272]

Canadian position, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238]

history of, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 158], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205]

Indian position, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 192], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281] Australian position, 470–473 [Pgs. 470–473 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 209]

British position, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260]

Netherlands position, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. position, 330–331 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 372–373 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 169], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 172], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 205], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 546–547 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 242], 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Indonesian military intervention in, 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281] Australian position, 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281]

British position, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Cambodian position, 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

China, People’s Republic of position, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

diplomacy as alternative to, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Indonesian position, 479–481 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285]

naval engagements, 506–508 [Pgs. 506–508 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Netherlands reinforcements, 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 244], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 558–559 [Pgs. 558–559 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 565–566 [Pgs. 565–566 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254]

paratrooper landings, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 277], 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283]

Philippine position, 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Soviet position, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 261], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 277], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

U.N. discussion, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281]

U.S. military response to, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 502–504 [Pgs. 502–504 include portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

U.S. position, 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 450–451 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 200], 473–475 [Pgs. 473–475 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 479–481 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 269], 608–609 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 277], 614–618 [Pgs. 614–618 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281]

Indonesian-U.S. talks on, 383–384 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 411–412 [Pgs. 411–412 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 429–432 [Pgs. 429–432 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

interim authority (see also Bunker Plan above; U.N. trusteeship and U.N. Temporary Executive Authority below): Indonesian position, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 216]

Malayan role in, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Netherlands position, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214]

Netherlands-Indonesian condominium, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Philippine role in, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

Japanese position, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 192]

Malayan position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 192]

Melanesiari Federation, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 163], 395–396 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175]

Netherlands-Indonesian agreement, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 215], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks (see also Bunker Plan above): 1950–1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 456], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 145], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205]

1955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 145], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205]

bilateral with third-party representation, 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 215]—499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 217], 514–516 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 538–540 [Pgs. 538–540 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 241], 554–555 [Pgs. 554–555 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 603–605 [Pgs. 603–605 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 279], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Indonesian position, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 533–535 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 243], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Netherlands position, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

preconditions to, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 510–511 [Pgs. 510–511 include portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 514–515 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 517–522 [Pgs. 517–522 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 530–532 [Pgs. 530–532 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

secret, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 500–501 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 228], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 539–540 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 557–564 [Pgs. 557–564 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252]

U.N. resolutions calling for, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 200], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 202], 466–467 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. position, 471–472 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 510–511 [Pgs. 510–511 include portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 527–530 [Pgs. 527–530 include portions of Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and Doc. 235], 614–618 [Pgs. 614–618 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281]

Netherlands-Indonesian war possible, 347–348 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344]

Netherlands-U.S. relations, 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 197], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 491–492 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 570–573 [Pgs. 570–573 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

Netherlands-U.S. talks, 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 410–411 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 428–429 [Pgs. 428–429 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 213], 538–542 [Pgs. 538–542 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 573–579 [Pgs. 573–579 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Papuan position, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 145], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 250], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 258], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Papuan self-determination: agreement on, 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Australian position, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214]

Bunker Plan, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 258], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 580–581 [Pgs. 580–581 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

French African position, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Indonesian position, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

Netherlands position, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 348–349 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 162], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 182], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 224], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 244], 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.N. role in, 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 615–616 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S. position, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 163], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175], 433–434 [Pgs. 433–434 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 197], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 205], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 215]

representative government inauguration of, 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 214]

settlement of, 616–617 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 622–628 [Pgs. 622–628 include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]

Soviet position, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 198], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 213], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215]

three-power trusteeship, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 245]

U.N. Commission, U.S. proposal for, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 197]

U.N. discussion: Brazzaville resolution, 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 205], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 209], 486–487 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 215]

Indian resolutions, 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 205], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 209], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 215]

Indonesian position, 446–447 [Pgs. 446–447 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 449–453 [Pgs. 449–453 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 201], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 202]

Netherlands draft resolution, 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 197], 453–457 [Pgs. 453–457 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 209]

Netherlands position, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 145]

U.S. draft resolution, 449–453 [Pgs. 449–453 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 455–458 [Pgs. 455–458 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 203]

U.S. position, 450–457 [Pgs. 450–457 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 475–476 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 209]

U.N. Temporary Executive Authority, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295]

U.N. trusteeship: Australian role in, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163]

Burmese role in, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163]

Ceylonese role in, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163]

costs of, 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Indonesian position, 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 166], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 172]

Malayan administration, 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 158], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 166], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 169], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 171], 393–395 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 397–398 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 205]

Netherlands position, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 163], 391 [Pg. 391 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 432–434 [Pgs. 432–434 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 209]

Netherlands role in, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 164], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

New Zealand role in, 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163]

Thai role in, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163]

U.N. administration, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 174], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175]

U.S. position, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 155], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 364–367 [Pgs. 364–367 include portions of Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170]

U.S. diplomatic initiatives, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 340–343 [Pgs. 340–343 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and Doc. 161] Australian position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150]

British position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150]

Malayan position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150]

Netherlands position, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 150]

U.S. position, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 447–452 [Pgs. 447–452 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291] cold war, effect on, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162]

tilt toward Indonesia, 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 166], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 440–442 [Pgs. 440–442 include portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

New Zealand (see also New Zealand subheadings under other subjects), 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198] Malaysia, relations with, 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 330]

U.N. committee on West New Guinea, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Ngo Dinh Diem, 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 74], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 110], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404] Cambodian-Vietnamese relations, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70], 156–157 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 77], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 190n [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 84], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 241–242 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124]

death of, 247–248 [Pgs. 247–248 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 280–283 [Pgs. 280–283 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

U.S. support for, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 168n [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 76], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

Ngo Dinh Nhu, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 71], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 280–283 [Pgs. 280–283 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Nguyen Ngoc Tho, 154–155 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73]

Nhiek Tioulong, 154–155 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 161–162 [Pgs. 161–162 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 248–249 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111], 256–257 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 270–271 [Pgs. 270–271 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Nicolayev (USSR), 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

Nigeria, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181]

Nitze, Paul H., 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 50], 115n [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 361n [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 164], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 451], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 966n [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 234–235 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

Nolting, Frederick E., Jr., 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13], 156–157 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 71], 190n [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 84], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463]

Nong Kimny, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 168–169 [Pgs. 168–169 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 171–173 [Pgs. 171–173 include portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 98], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 108], 243n [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 109], 257–259 [Pgs. 257–259 include portions of Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118] 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Norstad, Gen. Lauris, 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

North Atlantic Council Ministerial Sessions: Athens, May 1962, 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

London, Dec. 1963, 762n [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Paris, Dec. 2961, 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 162], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443] New Guinea dispute, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 158], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 172], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 240], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 376]

North Borneo (see also Malaysia), 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 325], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 343] participation in Malaysian Federation, 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 709–710 [Pgs. 709–710 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Philippine claim to, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 330], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Novotny, Anton, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

Nu, U., 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 49], 109n [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 55], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]

Nuclear free zones, 750–751 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 344]

Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, Aug. 1963, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332]

Nuclear testing, 125–126 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 72], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Nuclear weapons, 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431]

Nugroho, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 251]

O’Donnell, Gen. Emmett, Jr., 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 36], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463]

Office of Current Intelligence documents: OCI No. 3519/63, 292–294 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 139]

OCI No. 3520/63, 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

offshore procurement, 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 294], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Oganesoff, Igor, 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432]

Ohn, U., 84–85 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41]

Oil, vegetable, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291]

Okinawa, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

O’Neal Emmet, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

On Seirt, U., 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 45], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 53]

Operations Coordinating Board (OCB), 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 69]

Opium, 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120]

Organization of American States (OAS), 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 419]

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312]

Ormsby Gore, David, 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 657n [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Osmena, Sergio, 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Ouan Rathikoun, Gen., 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Pakistan, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 7], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 783n [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478] agreements with the United States: Agreement of Cooperation, Mar. 1959, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19]

Defense Support Assistance

Agreement, Jan. 1955, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19]

Mutual Defense Assistance

Agreement, May 1954, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19]

Burma, relations with, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 31]

Palar (Philippines), 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340]

Palmer, Stephen, 452n [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214]

Pan American Airways, 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Parades (Philippines), 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Paris Accords of 1954, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 82]

Paris Foreign Ministers meeting, Aug. 1961, 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422]

Parker, Maj. Gen., 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Parrott, Thomas A., 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Parsons, Chick, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358]

Parsons, J. Graham, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 145n [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66], 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 313n [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 148], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Passman, Otto, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Pathet Lao, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 405], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 415], 884n [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 417], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475] Cambodia, threat to, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92]

government role for, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 74], 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422], 1000–1001 [Pgs. 1000–1001 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Indonesian view of, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

military offensive by, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 468]

Viet Minh forces with, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

Pauker, Guy, 325–327 [Pgs. 325–327 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 334–336 [Pgs. 334–336 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300]

Pe, U., 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Peace Corps, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 289], 635–636 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 291], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 295], 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 357], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 395]

Pelaez, Emmanuel, 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 37], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 362], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 796n [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 368], 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 803–810 [Pgs. 803–810 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 815–818 [Pgs. 815–818 include portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 824–825 [Pgs. 824–825 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Pell, Claiborne, 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Penn Nouth, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 270–271 [Pgs. 270–271 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

People-to-People Health Foundation, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Peralta, Macario, 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 822n [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385], 827–829 [Pgs. 827–829 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390], 831–832 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 391]

Perez, Rod, 824–825 [Pgs. 824–825 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Peters, Richard B., 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 55n [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 61n [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 40], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 908n [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433]

Peterson, Avery F., 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 791n [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

Pheng Phongsavan, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 74]

Philippine-American Chamber of Commerce, 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 374]

Philippines (see also Philippines and Philippine subheadings under other subjects): agreements with the United States: Mutual Defense Treaty, Aug.1951, 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 424], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 433]

Philippine Education Program bilateral agreement, 838–839 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 395]

Status of Forces Agreement, 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Barrio Act, 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 357]

China, People’s Republic of, threat to, 771–772 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385]

combat troop availability, 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

communist threat to, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 810n [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 376], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 388]

Corrigedor-Bataan memorial, 794n [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

economic situation, 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 800–803 [Pgs. 800–803 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

elections, 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 775–777 [Pgs. 775–777 include portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 387], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

ethnic Chinese in, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 388]

Huks, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

Iglesia Ni Kristo, 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Indonesia, relations with, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 381], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 385], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 392]

land reform, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358]

Malaysia, relations with, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331]

political corruption, 776–782 [Pgs. 776–782 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

political parties: Liberal, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358], 785–787 [Pgs. 785–787 include portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Nacionalista, 772–773 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

regional cooperation, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

Thailand, relations with, 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

United States, relations with, 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 773–774 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 376], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 820–821 [Pgs. 820–821 include portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406] imports of U.S. tobacco, 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 352], 794n [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

U.S. sugar quota, 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373]

war damage compensation, 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 793–794 [Pgs. 793–794 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 796–800 [Pgs. 796–800 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 806–809 [Pgs. 806–809 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 817–821 [Pgs. 817–821 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 824–826 [Pgs. 824–826 include portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 837–839 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 288], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 364], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 820–823 [Pgs. 820–823 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 831–832 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 391], 835–839 [Pgs. 835–839 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409]

Phoumi Nosavan, Gen., 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373], 808–809 [Pgs. 808–809 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375] Cambodian view of, 192–193 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]

defense of Laos, 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 408], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 408], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 931–933 [Pgs. 931–933 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442]

KMT irregulars, use of, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42]

Souvanna government, 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Thai view of, 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435]

Phurissara, Norodom, 242–243 [Pgs. 242–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 256–257 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119]

Phya Srivisan, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 480]

Pickering, Laurence G., 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110]

Poage, W.R., 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 352]

Poole, Walker S., 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Pope, Allen L., 323–325 [Pgs. 323–325 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 170], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 401–403 [Pgs. 401–403 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 203], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 532–534 [Pgs. 532–534 include portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 277]

Portugal, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 163], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Portuguese Timor. See Timor, Portuguese

Posponegoro, Sudjono, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 272]

Praphat Charusathien, Gen., 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Preah Vihear Temple, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

Preap Inn, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124]

Primicias (Philippines), 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Puhan, Alfred, 999–1002 [Pgs. 999–1002 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

Puyat (Philippines), 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]

Pye, Lucian S., 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Qadir, Manzur, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Quemoy, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354]

Quinim Pholsena, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 74], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Racism, 674–675 [Pgs. 674–675 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Ranad, Donald L., 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Rand Corporation, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300]

Read, Benjamin H., 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 245–246 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Recto, Claro M., 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]

Reilly, Patrick, 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Rhee, Syngman, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68]

Rice, Edward E., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 60], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 89], 224n [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 99], 230n [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 245n [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 110], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 678n [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 312], 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 710n [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 797n [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 369], 812n [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 821n [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 896n [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 999n [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479], 1002n [Pg. 1002 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481] Cambodia, 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105], 250–252 [Pgs. 250–252 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]

Indonesia, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Philippines, 793–794 [Pgs. 793–794 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 17–21 [Pgs. 17–21 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Rice, John S., 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 215], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 219], 511n [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 224], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 244], 568n [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 570–572 [Pgs. 570–572 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 265], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Rice (grain), 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296], 695–697 [Pgs. 695–697 include portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 358]

Richardson, Maj. Gen., 928 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438]

Riggins, Howard, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 118]

Riley, Vice Adm. Herbert D., 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373], 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Rio Pact, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17]

Robinson, Col. William B., 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379]

Rolz-Bennett, Jose, 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340]

Rome Treaty, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162]

Romualdez (Philippines), 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Romulo, Carlos P., 767–769 [Pgs. 767–769 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

Roosevelt, Eleanor, 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Rostow, Walter W., 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 173n [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 78], 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 79], 328n [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 473n [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 212], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220] Cambodia, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73]

Indonesia, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 334–335 [Pgs. 334–335 include portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 380–382 [Pgs. 380–382 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 296]

Netherlands-U.S. relations, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

New Guinea dispute, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 391–393 [Pgs. 391–393 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 423–425 [Pgs. 423–425 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 194], 440–442 [Pgs. 440–442 include portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 203], 463–465 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 205], 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246]

Philippines, 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 355], 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Southeast Asia, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 879–880 [Pgs. 879–880 include portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Thailand, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 884–886 [Pgs. 884–886 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Round Table Conference, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 163], 465–466 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 205]

Roux, Jacques, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 98]

Rowland, J.R., 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Roxas, Ting, 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386]

Rubber, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 186], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 291], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 296]

Rusk, Dean, 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 42], 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 229n [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 108], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 394n [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 623n [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284], 677n [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 928n [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 438], 950n [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455] Association of Southeast Asia, 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Burma, 116–117 [Pgs. 116–117 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 57], 133–136 [Pgs. 133–136 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Cambodia, 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 76], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 79], 222–223 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 101], 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962, 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 408], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 456], 958n [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 460]

Indonesia, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 143], 696n [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] Pope case, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 153], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188]

Sukarno visit to U.S., 311–312 [Pgs. 311–312 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 378–379 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

U.S. economic and military aid, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 647–648 [Pgs. 647–648 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 681 [Pg. 681 is part of Doc. 313]

KMT irregulars in Burma, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 46], 98–101 [Pgs. 98–101 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61]

Laos, 4–7 [Pgs. 4–7 include portions of Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435]

Malaysia, 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 329], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 332], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 337], 738–742 [Pgs. 738–742 include portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345], 762–763 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349] New Guinea dispute, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 438–440 [Pgs. 438–440 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 473n [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 225], 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 240]

Australian position, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 468–470 [Pgs. 468–470 include portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Bunker Plan, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 585n [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 261], 587–589 [Pgs. 587–589 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 276], 611–614 [Pgs. 611–614 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Indonesian military intervention in, 502–503 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244]

Netherlands position, 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 537–538 [Pgs. 537–538 include portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 554–555 [Pgs. 554–555 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 603–605 [Pgs. 603–605 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 618–621 [Pgs. 618–621 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282]

Netherlands-U.S. talks, 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 435–436 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 194], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

U.N. resolutions, 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 458–459 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 203], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 205]

U.N. trusteeship, 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 395–398 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175]

U.S. policy toward, 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 227], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Philippines, 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 795n [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 367], 800–803 [Pgs. 800–803 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373], 828–829 [Pgs. 828–829 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

Southeast Asia, 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 919–920 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 433]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 76–78 [Pgs. 76–78 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 80–82 [Pgs. 80–82 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 909–911 [Pgs. 909–911 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429] Thai position, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 886–888 [Pgs. 886–888 include portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 918–919 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 970n [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Thailand, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 433], 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 1002 [Pg. 1002 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481] defense of, 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 844–846 [Pgs. 844–846 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 908–909 [Pgs. 908–909 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

United States, relations with, 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

U.S. troop deployment to, 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 927 [Pg. 927 is part of Doc. 437], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 931–933 [Pgs. 931–933 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442]„935–939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 959n [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461]

Vietnam, Republic of, 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Russell, Richard B., 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446]

Sabah. See North Borneo.

Salans, Carl F., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 58n [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 38], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59]

Salant, Walter S., 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Salazar, Antonio, 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Saleh, Chaerul, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 171], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 180], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 186], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 464–465 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314]

Salinger, Pierre, 950n [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 455]

Saltonstall, Leverett, 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Sam Sary, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 113], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 132]

Sambath, Huot, 229–230 [Pgs. 229–230 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]

Sandys, Duncan E., 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

Santos (Philippines), 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Sarasin, Pote, 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 7], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 74–77 [Pgs. 74–77 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 914n [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431], 967–970 [Pgs. 967–970 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

Sarawak (see also Malaysia), 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 343] Indonesian claims to, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191]

participation in Malaysian Federation, 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 709–710 [Pgs. 709–710 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

U.N. report on, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Sarit Thanarat, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 244–245 [Pgs. 244–245 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434] Burma, 108n [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53]

Cambodia, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 76], 170–172 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 77], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 108], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462]

communism, 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

death of, 280–283 [Pgs. 280–283 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134], 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 1002–1003 [Pgs. 1002–1003 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 482]

Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962, 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 855–857 [Pgs. 855–857 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 951n [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 456]

health of, 894–895 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 421], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Laos: defense of, 848n [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 898n [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 422], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 469]

Souvanna government, 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 424], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 430], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 420], 907n [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 951n [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 456]

Thailand: defense of, 841–843 [Pgs. 841–843 include portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 411], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 913–914 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471], 987n [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 473 and Doc. 474], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 474], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

political situation, 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 410], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

Soviet economic and military aid to, 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

United States, relations with, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 429], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

U.S. military aid to, 860–862 [Pgs. 860–862 include portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 470]

U.S. troop deployment to, 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 928–935 [Pgs. 928–935 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 982–983 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471], 1000–1002 [Pgs. 1000–1002 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481]

U.S. withdrawal of forces, 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 956–957 [Pgs. 956–957 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 461], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 966–968 [Pgs. 966–968 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 971–972 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 468], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

U.S. view of, 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 463], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

Vietnam, Republic of, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Sastroamidjojo, Ali, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302]

Savang Vatthana, King, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Saw Myint, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Sawang Trachu, 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

Scherrer, Brig. Gen. E.C.D., 175–178 [Pgs. 175–178 include portions of Doc. 79, Doc. 80, and Doc. 81], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90]

Schiff, Emil L.C., 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 243], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 258], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 455n [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 498n [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 217]

Schnee, Alexander, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 61]

Schneider, David T., 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Schroeder, Gerhard, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Scott, Denny F., 90n [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44]

Scott, Joseph W., 778n [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

SEATO. See Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.

Senate, U.S.: Cambodia, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 98]

Foreign Relations Committee, 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 384]

Philippine War Damage Bill, 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 818–820 [Pgs. 818–820 include portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 433], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 441], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443]

Serrano, Felixberto M., 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350], 770–773 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 362]

Seta, Gen., 152–153 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 70]

Shan States Independence Army, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 50]

Shann (Australia), 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340]

Shell Oil Co., 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 314]

Shen (Burma), 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42]

Shepard, Capt. Tazewell, 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

Shriver, Sargent, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 291], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 295]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 145–147 [Pgs. 145–147 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 152–153 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 70], 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 229–231 [Pgs. 229–231 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 105], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142] communism, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 182–185 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 83], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 83], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

deaths of foreign leaders, 281–282 [Pgs. 281–282 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

health of, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 111], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141]

neutralism, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

neutrality proposals, 201–203 [Pgs. 201–203 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 206–210 [Pgs. 206–210 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 220–228 [Pgs. 220–228 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 233n [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 237–240 [Pgs. 237–240 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108] Geneva Conference, 198–200 [Pgs. 198–200 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 96], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 130]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 74], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 77]

Thai-Cambodian relations, 166–169 [Pgs. 166–169 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 463]

U.S.-Cambodian relations, 168–174 [Pgs. 168–174 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 233–236 [Pgs. 233–236 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106] Cambodian termination of U.S. aid, 247–249 [Pgs. 247–249 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 251–253 [Pgs. 251–253 include portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 255–259 [Pgs. 255–259 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123], 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124], 275 [Pg. 275 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 138], 300–301 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 142]

guarantee of territorial integrity, 198–203 [Pgs. 198–203 include portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 206–210 [Pgs. 206–210 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95]

U.S. aid to rebels, charges of, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 110], 262–265 [Pgs. 262–265 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

U.S. view of, 169–171 [Pgs. 169–171 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

Vietnamese-Cambodian relations, 155–157 [Pgs. 155–157 include portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 164–165 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105] Khmer Serei, 191–192 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 240–243 [Pgs. 240–243 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

visits: Indonesia, Singapore, Nov-Dec. 1962, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 97], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105]

United States, Sept. 1961, 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 162–166 [Pgs. 162–166 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 92]

Sihanouk Commission (Neutral Nations Commission), 145–146 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 66]

Singapore, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 327], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345] British naval base in, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330]

communists in, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 330], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 331]

Malaya, relations with, 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 328]

Sinha, R.R., 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Sirikit, Queen, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 435]

Sisavang Vong, King, 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Sisco, Joseph J., 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 438n [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 488n [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Sison, Ferdinando E.V., 790–791 [Pgs. 790–791 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 801–802 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 372]

Slim, Mongi, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 164], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Sloan, Frank K., 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

Smith, Benjamin A., 994n [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 476]

Smith, Bromley, 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 46], 169n [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 119], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Smith, Gen. Frederick, 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 365]

Smith, Stephen, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 350]

Smith, William Y., 276n [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Snow, William P., 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 41], 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Socony Mobil, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308]

Solomon Islands, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172]

Somalia, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 179], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 192]

Son Ngoc Thanh, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128] Cambodian view of, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 85], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 113], 270–271 [Pgs. 270–271 include portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. view of, 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 250–252 [Pgs. 250–252 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 123]

Son Sann, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 124]

Son Thai Nguyen, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120]

Souphanovong, Prince, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85]

South Pacific Commission, 353–354 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163]

South Pacific islands, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198]

Southard, Frank A., Jr., 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 372], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Southeast Asia: Australian role in, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39]

China People’s Republic of, threat to, 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326]

communist threat to, 7–9 [Pgs. 7–9 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 198], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400]

countersubversion programs, 18–20 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 61n [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

defense of, 28–31 [Pgs. 28–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 215], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 242], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 300], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 405], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 420], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

“domino theory”, 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 33]

Indian role in, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

Indonesian-U.S. talks, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 295]

Japanese role in, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

nationalism, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

Philippine role in, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 373], 829 [Pg. 829 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

regional cooperation, 10–11 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433]

Soviet role in, 27–28 [Pgs. 27–28 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 33]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 8–9 [Pgs. 8–9 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

U.S. military intervention in, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 28–31 [Pgs. 28–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

U.S. policy toward, 12–13 [Pgs. 12–13 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 31–33 [Pgs. 31–33 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 69–72 [Pgs. 69–72 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 397]

U.S. task force for, 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359]

Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, Manila, Sept. 1954. See Manila Pact.

Southeast Asia Independent Nations

Group, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO): Air Cobra exercise, 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Australian position, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 40–44 [Pgs. 40–44 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

British/French-Asian disagreement in, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 14–15 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 22–24 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453]

British position, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 22–25 [Pgs. 22–25 include portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 40–41 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434]

British withdrawal from, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428]

Council meetings, 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443] Bangkok, Mar. 1961, 4–6 [Pgs. 4–6 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400]

Apr. 1962 (cancelled), 43–44 [Pgs. 43–44 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 420], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 420], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 429]

Paris, Apr. 1963, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 35], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 81–83 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 40], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

countersubversion planning, 54–57 [Pgs. 54–57 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Exercise Dhanarajata, 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

French position, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 40–41 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40], 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 419], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

French withdrawal from, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 428]

Graduate School of Engineering Bangkok, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5]

Laos, council resolution on, 4–7 [Pgs. 4–7 include portions of Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4]

New Zealand position, 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 40–41 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Pakistani position, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 40]

Philippine position, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 27], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 773–774 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 354]

Plan 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 3], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 353], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 405], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 408], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

regional cooperation, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7]

Thai position, 13–16 [Pgs. 13–16 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 9], 34–36 [Pgs. 34–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 38–41 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 885–890 [Pgs. 885–890 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, and Doc. 420], 970n [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Thai-U.S. talks, 887–888 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419]

Thai withdrawal from, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 26–27 [Pgs. 26–27 include portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 14], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19], 915–916 [Pgs. 915–916 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

U.S. position, 48–49 [Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 55–57 [Pgs. 55–57 include portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 75–76 [Pgs. 75–76 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 467]

voting procedures, 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 34–44 [Pgs. 34–44 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc. 18], 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 31], 74–80 [Pgs. 74–80 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 888 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc. 419], 891–893 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 420], 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Souvanna Phouma, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 56], 146n [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 164–165 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480] British support for, 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

Cambodia, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 74], 200n [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

French support for, 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

leadership role for, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 52], 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 422]

Thai view, of, 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 422], 913n [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432], 921 [Pg. 921 includes portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434]

visits: Bangkok, 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Washington, July 1962, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457]

Soviet Union, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89] Burma, relations with, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 64]

China, People’s Republic, relations with, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

Geneva Accords on Laos, 1962, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466]

Laos crisis, British proposal, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

peace summit proposal, neutralist, 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 439–440 [Pgs. 439–440 include portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Sparkman, John, 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Special Group (Counter-Insurgency), 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 904–906 [Pgs. 904–906 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 55–41, 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169]

SNIE 10–62, 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

SNIE 58–4-62, 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

SNIE 54/59–63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 712–717 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330], 757n [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346]

Spender, Percy, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206]

Spinks, Charles N., 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41], 310n [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 884n [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 417]

Spivack, Herbert D., 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Sprouse, Philip D., 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 217–221 [Pgs. 217–221 include portions of Doc. 95, Doc. 96, and Doc. 97], 237–240 [Pgs. 237–240 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 136], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463] plots by Cambodian dissidents, 229–230 [Pgs. 229–230 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 269–271 [Pgs. 269–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132]

U.S.-Cambodian relations, 233–236 [Pgs. 233–236 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 117], 259–262 [Pgs. 259–262 include portions of Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 288–291 [Pgs. 288–291 include portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 297–301 [Pgs. 297–301 include portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Stahl, Capt. Paul L., 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 115n [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Stalin, Joseph, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Standard Oil Co. of California, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308]

Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308]

Standard Oil Co. of Texas, 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308]

Standard Vacuum Oil Co. (STANVAC), 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312]

Stavropoulos, Constantine A., 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279]

Steeves, John M., 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 43], 310n [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 146], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 368n [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 390n [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 438n [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 488n [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360] Burma, 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Cambodia, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 77]

Indonesia, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

New Guinea dispute, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Southeast Asia, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 21–22 [Pgs. 21–22 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 74], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 429–434 [Pgs. 429–434 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 209], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 217], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Stevenson, William E., 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 368], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 806–812 [Pgs. 806–812 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 813n [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 378], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 818–821 [Pgs. 818–821 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 823–825 [Pgs. 823–825 include portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 831–832 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 391]

Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 66]

Stone, Galen L., 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 514n [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 226], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 623n [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284]

Stonehill, Harry, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 358]

Subandrio, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 302], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 308], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340] Indonesia: economic situation, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 200], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 666n [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 305]

Netherlands, relations with, 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 251]

Pope case, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 277]

U.S. economic and military aid to, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 297], 702n [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

Malaysia, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

nationalism, 385–386 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172], 388–389 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 172]

New Guinea dispute, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 194], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 216], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257] Bunker Plan, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 276]

Indonesian military intervention in, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258], 608–609 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 277], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 211], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 218], 510–511 [Pgs. 510–511 include portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 230], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 609–616 [Pgs. 609–616 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 618–619 [Pgs. 618–619 include portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281] bilateral talks with third-party representation, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Papuan self-determination, 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

settlement of, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 624–625 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 285]

troop reinforcement, 558–559 [Pgs. 558–559 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250]

U.N. negotiations over, 446–447 [Pgs. 446–447 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

U.S.–Indonesian talks, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 182], 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 430–432 [Pgs. 430–432 include portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 438–441 [Pgs. 438–441 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197]

U.S. view of, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168]

visits: Moscow, May 1962, 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Vienna, Oct. 1961, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Washington, Apr. 1961, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177]

Subardjo, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226]

Subic Bay Naval Base, 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 386]

Subibjo, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 314]

Sudjarwo, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Suez crisis, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

Sugar, 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 794–795 [Pgs. 794–795 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Sukarno, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247] Afro-Asian bloc leadership role, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 326–327 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 330–331 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155]

CIA attempts to overthrow, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319], 696n [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

communism, 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 151], 328–331 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 155], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 169], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]

health of, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 265]

helicopter, U.S. gift of, 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 171], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Indonesia: economic situation, 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 639–640 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 291], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 302], 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]

Netherlands, relations with, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211]

oil laws, 667n [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 307], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337]

Pope case, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 153], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 226], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

United Kingdom, relations with, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 315], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 332]

United States, relations with, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 143], 689n [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 317], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 703–706 [Pgs. 703–706 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Kennedy, personal relationship with, 304–307 [Pgs. 304–307 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 314–316 [Pgs. 314–316 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 170], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 231], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 232], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 293], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323] Borneo confrontation, 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302]

correspondence with, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207]—472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 207], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 479–482 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 218], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 232], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 238], 565–56 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252]

invitation for Kennedy visit, 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Washington talks, Apr. 1961, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 399n [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 176], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 419n [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 186]

Malaysia: confrontation in, 657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 716–717 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 330], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 337], 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 337], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 337], 736–737 [Pgs. 736–737 include portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 344], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 757–758 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 346], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

establishment of, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 726n [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 335], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Nasution, relationship with, 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

nationalism, 382–383 [Pgs. 382–383 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

New Guinea dispute, 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 159], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 194], 446–447 [Pgs. 446–447 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 274], 616–617 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283] Bunker Plan, 568n [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 259], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 597–602 [Pgs. 597–602 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 276]

diplomacy vs. military action, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 205], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 205], 479–483 [Pgs. 479–483 include portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 213], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 277]

Indonesian military intervention in, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 189], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477–478 [Pgs. 477–478 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 574n [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 258], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 284]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 207], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 234], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267] bilateral talks with third-party

participation, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 539–540 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 239], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278]

preconditions for, 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 230], 523–526 [Pgs. 523–526 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 531–532 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 235], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 237], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Papuan self-determination, 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 215], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 258]

speeches: U.N. General Assembly, 1960, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144]

West New Guinea mass rally, Dec. 1961, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 211], 482n [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 211], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 487–488 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 218]

U.N. trusteeship, 432–434 [Pgs. 432–434 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193]

U.S.-Indonesian talks, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 182], 412n [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 429–432 [Pgs. 429–432 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 207]

Soviet view of, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 144], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 147]

Timor, Portuguese, 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

U.S. view of, 369–370 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 168], 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 169], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198]

visits: Manila, Nov. 1963, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Soviet Union, 1961, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 174], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177]

United Kingdom, proposed, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

Vienna, Oct. 1961, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Washington, 1956, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

Washington, 1964, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 326]

Washington, Apr. 1961, 306–307 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144], 311–312 [Pgs. 311–312 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 314–316 [Pgs. 314–316 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, and Doc. 150], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 155], 332–336 [Pgs. 332–336 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 163], 363–366 [Pgs. 363–366 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 368–375 [Pgs. 368–375 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 378–391 [Pgs. 378–391 include portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174]

Washington, Sept. 1961, 422–427 [Pgs. 422–427 include portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, and Doc. 190]

West New Guinea, Apr. 1963, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 304]

Sukarno, Madame, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 149]

Sullivan, William H., 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 204], 670n [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 308], 691n [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 334], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

Sultan of Brunei, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 330]

Sultan of Jogjakarta, 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 272]

Sumarno, Gen., 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 272], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 314]

Sumatra, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 198], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 392]

Sumulong (Philippines), 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 354]

Sunthorn (Thailand), 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431]

Suryadarma, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153]

Suthi Suthisarn Ronakary, Gen., 915 [Pg. 915 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Sweden, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Swezey, Anthony C., 874n [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Symington, Stuart, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 363]

Taber, Gen., 262n [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138]

Tacon, Maj. Gen. Avetin P., 831–832 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 391]

Taft, Robert H., 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Taiwan (see also China, Republic of), 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Taiwan Straits crisis, 1958, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41]

Talbot, Phillips, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 7], 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354]

Tank, Martin M., 814n [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 379]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 206–210 [Pgs. 206–210 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 94], 627n [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 359], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415], 980n [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471] Indonesia, 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 291], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 293], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 34–36 [Pgs. 34–36 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421]

Thailand, 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 935–936 [Pgs. 935–936 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446], 960–964 [Pgs. 960–964 include portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 469]

Taylor Mission, 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Thailand (see also Thailand and Thai subheadings under other subjects): agreements with the United States:

bilateral defense pact, proposal, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 22–23 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 45–46 [Pgs. 45–46 include portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 420], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Friendship, Commerce and Navigation Treaty, Nov. 1937, 970–971 [Pgs. 970–971 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

Agrimetro plans, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 412], 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431]

Australia, relations with, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17]

Australian troop deployment to, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 460], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

Bowen mission report, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416], 886n [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426]

British troop deployment to, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 460], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 970n [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

Buddhism, 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 410], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469]

Burma, relations with, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 52], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Cambodia, relations with, 166–170 [Pgs. 166–170 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 179n [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 960 [Pg. 960 is part of Doc. 462], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477] border incidents, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 121]

Khmer Serei, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

U.N. role in, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471]

U.S. position, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 159–160 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 106], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

China, People’s Republic of, threat to, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 962–963 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Communist Party, 973–974 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469]

communist threat to, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 85], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 863–866 [Pgs. 863–866 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 453], 986–991 [Pgs. 986–991 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475]

defense of, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 269], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349] counterinsurgency programs, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 875–876 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 414], 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 423], 904–906 [Pgs. 904–906 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 923 [Pg. 923 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 946–947 [Pgs. 946–947 include portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 953–954 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 463], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Mekong River, role of, 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

Northeast, strengthening of, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 4]

planning for, 973–977 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469], 984–986 [Pgs. 984–986 include portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

U.S. commitment to, 841–846 [Pgs. 841–846 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 885–886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 909–911 [Pgs. 909–911 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Young Report, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 867n [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 411], 868–873 [Pgs. 868–873 include portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426]

defense of (see also U.S. troop deployment to below)

ethnic groups, 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 417], 984–985 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 472] Akha, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474]

Chinese, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 410], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469]

hill tribes, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 410]

Lahu, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474]

Malay Muslims, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 410], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474]

Meo, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

Vietnamese refugees, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 410], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 475]

family planning in, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 416]

Geneva Conference on Cambodia, 199–200 [Pgs. 199–200 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Khmer Serei activities, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 113], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

KMT irregulars in, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 47]

Malaya, relations with, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

military value of, 28–29 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

neutralism, 947–948 [Pgs. 947–948 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

New Zealand troop deployment to, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 460], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471], 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

Pathet Lao forces in, 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474]

Philippines, relations with, 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

political situation, 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 410], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 474]

Pork Federation scandal, 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

Preah Vihear Temple, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

psychological warfare, 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431]

regional cooperation, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

SEATO role in, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 397], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 885–886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 443], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Soviet economic and military aid to, 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415]

Soviet Union, relations with, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 9], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

U.N. role in, 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 472]

United States, relations with, 17–18 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 94], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

U.S. economic aid to, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 288], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 412], 894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 421], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 472], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 482] communications, 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 458], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463]

economic development, 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 411], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 412], 876–878 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 414], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 475]

five-year planning, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 400]

irrigation projects, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434]

road construction, 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 414], 886 [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 475]

U.S. military aid to, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 83], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 288], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 463], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 463], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 472], 992–993 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 475], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 482] aircraft, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432]

Border Police, 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 412], 886 [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 418], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431], 946–948 [Pgs. 946–948 include portions of Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 469], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 470], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471]

logistic support, 945–946 [Pgs. 945–946 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457]

military bases, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 978 [Pg. 978 is part of Doc. 469], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

naval vessels, 861–862 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 409], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 412]

Thai military buildup, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 396], 860–862 [Pgs. 860–862 include portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 875–876 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 414], 894–896 [Pgs. 894–896 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 976–977 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 469]

U.S. policy toward, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

U.S. troop deployment to (see also defense of above), 30–31 [Pgs. 30–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 75–76 [Pgs. 75–76 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471], 1000–1002 [Pgs. 1000–1002 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481] B-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 11]s, 842–844 [Pgs. 842–844 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

force strength, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

living conditions, 942–944 [Pgs. 942–944 include portions of Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450]

maintenance and base support

personnel, 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

movement toward Laos, 927–936 [Pgs. 927–936 include portions of Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 446]

planning for, 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Thai position, 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 982 [Pg. 982 is part of Doc. 471]

withdrawal of forces, 941–942 [Pgs. 941–942 include portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 948–950 [Pgs. 948–950 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457], 956–959 [Pgs. 956–959 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461], 964 [Pg. 964 is part of Doc. 463], 966–972 [Pgs. 966–972 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 469], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

Vietnam Democratic Republic of, subversion in, 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Vietnam, Republic of, relations with, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

Than Pe, Commodore, 103n [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49]

Thanat Khoman, 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 53], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 61], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 463] Geneva Conference on Laos, 1961–1962, 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 456]

health of, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421]

Laos, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 843n [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 398], 881–882 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415], 896–898 [Pgs. 896–898 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 921–925 [Pgs. 921–925 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 480]

Malaysia, 741 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 340], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 755–756 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 345], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 347]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 8], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 26], 76–78 [Pgs. 76–78 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 39], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 918–920 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433] voting procedures, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 22–25 [Pgs. 22–25 include portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 885–886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 888–893 [Pgs. 888–893 include portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

Thailand, 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 415], 906–907 [Pgs. 906–907 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427] defense of, 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424], 909–911 [Pgs. 909–911 include portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 465], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 479], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

United States, relations with, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 431], 921–923 [Pgs. 921–923 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

U.S. troop deployment to, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 8], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 930–932 [Pgs. 930–932 include portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 442], 939n [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

U.S. view of, 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 434], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 466]

visit to the United States, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25], 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 918–921 [Pgs. 918–921 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 924–925 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

Thanom Kittikachorn, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 469], 1002–1004 [Pgs. 1002–1004 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482]

Thant, U., 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 89], 203n [Pg. 203 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444] Malaysia, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313], 693n [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 319], 721n [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 332], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 332], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–727 include portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342]

New Guinea dispute, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 258], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 285] Bunker Plan, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 258], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 272], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 279]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 217], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248]

Indonesian position, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 218], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 236], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280]

Netherlands position, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 228], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 244], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 274], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281]

U.S. position, 506n [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 221], 512–516 [Pgs. 512–516 include portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 230], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 239]

Thawi Chulasap, Air Chief Marshal, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51]

Thi Han, U., 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 49], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 133–136 [Pgs. 133–136 include portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Thompson, John S., 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 59], 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Tibet, 84n [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 41]

Timor, Portuguese, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 162], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 247], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 299], 657–658 [Pgs. 657–658 include portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 738–739 [Pgs. 738–739 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Tin, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 291], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Tin Pe, Brig., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 52], 996 [Pg. 996 is part of Doc. 477]

Tioulong. See Nhiek Tioulong.

Tito, Josep Broz, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 105], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144]

Tobacco, 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 352]

Tonesk, William J., 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 331]

Touart, Lt. Col. Anthony J., Jr., 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Touch Kim, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 116]

Trimble, William G., 147–149 [Pgs. 147–149 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 152–156 [Pgs. 152–156 include portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 74], 169 [Pg. 169 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 77], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 78], 178–188 [Pgs. 178–188 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, and Doc. 84], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Truman, Harry S., 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Trumbull, Robert, 232n [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 104]

Tubby, Roger W., 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Tucker, Gen. Reuben H., 941n [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 448]

Tunisia, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 200]

Tunku. See Abdul Rahman, Putra Tunku.

Turkey, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 68]

Tyler, William R., 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 182], 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 427n [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 190], 452n [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 488n [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 216], 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 222], 521n [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 230], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 538n [Pg. 538 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 545n [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 242], 554n [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 248], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 579n [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 586n [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 262], 592n [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282] Indonesia, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349]

New Guinea dispute, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 496–497 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 216], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 548–549 [Pgs. 548–549 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 258], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Umar, Gen., 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 314]

Unger, Maj. Gen. F.T., 998 [Pg. 998 is part of Doc. 478]

Unger, Leonard, 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 50–53 [Pgs. 50–53 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

United Kingdom (see also British and United Kingdom subheadings under other subjects), 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 162], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

United Nations Charter, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 91], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 182], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 342], 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444] Article 12, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 175], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 175]

Article 14, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181]

Article 99, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

Chapter XI, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181]

United Nations (see also United Nations and U.N: subheadings under other subjects), 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75] Afro-Asian group, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

China membership issue, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 9], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42]

Commission on Indonesia, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162]

General Assembly, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 61], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 72], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 332] 15th Session, 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

16th Session, 393–394 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 181], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 183], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 191], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 201]

17th Session, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 175], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 175], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 181], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 201], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 203]

18th Session, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

KMT irregulars in Burma, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 44]

New Guinea dispute, 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 258], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281]

Sukarno address, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 144]

neutralism, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12]

Papuan visit to, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260]

Resolution 1514 (XV), 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Security Council, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 274], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 281]

Soviet attacks on, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168]

Temporary Executive Authority (UNTEA), 576–577 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 258], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 261], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 283], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 295]

Timor, Portuguese, 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Uniting for Peace procedure, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

Unna, Warren, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 34], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 412], 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 426]

U.S. Information Service (USIS), 631–632 [Pgs. 631–632 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 414]

U.S. Intelligence Board, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Us Say, Lt. Col., 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 138]

Usher, Richard E., 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

van Roijen, Jan H., 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224] Netherlands-U.S. relations, 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 252], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

New Guinea dispute, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 205], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 214], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 220], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 548–551 [Pgs. 548–551 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Bunker Plan, 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 261], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 263], 611–616 [Pgs. 611–616 include portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Netherlands U.N. initiative, 448–449 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 200]

Indonesian military intervention in, 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 145], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 219], 520–521 [Pgs. 520–521 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Netherlands-Indonesian talks, 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 495–498 [Pgs. 495–498 include portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 226], 529–531 [Pgs. 529–531 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 246], 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 562–563 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 251], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 268], 618–621 [Pgs. 618–621 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 274], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 275], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 278]

Netherlands-U.S. talks, 345–350 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 162], 352–353 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 163], 355–357 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 163], 359–363 [Pgs. 359–363 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 573–579 [Pgs. 573–579 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

U.N. trusteeship, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175]

West New Guinea, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160]

Vichit, Luang, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 421]

Viet Cong, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 135], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141] Cambodia, sanctuary in:

Cambodian position, 152–153 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 70], 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 80], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115]

U.S. position, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 114], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 125], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Vietnam, Republic of position, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 70], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115]

Viet Minh, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 70], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 162], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172], 932 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 441], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 468], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (see also Vietnam, Democratic Republic of, subheadings under other subjects), 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 7], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469] air strikes against Thailand, possible, 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

Cambodia, relations with, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141]

China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 477]

covert activities in, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 13]

Thai rebels, training of, 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 474]

Vietnam, Republic of (see also Vietnam, Republic of subheadings under other subjects), 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 904 [Pg. 904 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 946–947 [Pgs. 946–947 include portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 475] Australian economic and military aid to, 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

Buddhists in, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 106]

Cambodia, relations with, 166–168 [Pgs. 166–168 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 77], 179–181 [Pgs. 179–181 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 83], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 141] airplane seizure incident, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 90], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 92]

border incidents, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 95], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96], 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 122]

breaking of, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 94], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 95]

Cambodian dissidents, 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 196–197 [Pgs. 196–197 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 90], 230–231 [Pgs. 230–231 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 241–243 [Pgs. 241–243 include portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115]

cattle raid, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 86]

French position, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71]

U.S. position, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 159–160 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 72], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 106]

Viet Cong infiltration of Cambodia, 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 69], 152–157 [Pgs. 152–157 include portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 73], 231–233 [Pgs. 231–233 include portions of Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105]

Cambodian minority (Khmer Krom), 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 70], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 74], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 96], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 110], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120]

China, People’s Republic of, policy toward, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

communist access through Laos, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 23]

communist threat to, 2–4 [Pgs. 2–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 157], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

coup against Diem government, 247–248 [Pgs. 247–248 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

defense of, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 206], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 239], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 244], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 349], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 354], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 432], 902–903 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 424], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 429], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 431], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 471]

defoliation operations, 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Indonesian policy toward, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 172]

intelligence gathering in, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23]

Khmer Serai activities, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 113], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Khmer Serei radio broadcasts, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 108], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 111], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 116], 263n [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 120], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 268–271 [Pgs. 268–271 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274–276 [Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, and Doc. 128], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

military situation, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 28]

neutralism, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 141]

New Zealand economic and military aid to, 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

oligarchy in, 387–388 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 172]

political situation, 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12]

regional cooperation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 14]

SEATO role in, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 77], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 420]

Soviet-U.S. talks on, 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Taylor Mission, 440n [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Thai economic aid to, 10–11 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5]

Thailand, relations with, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]

U.N. membership for, 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 354]

United States, relations with, 72–73 [Pgs. 72–73 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 94], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 162], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 467]

U.S. military aid to, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 83], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 850 [Pg. 850 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 422], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

U.S. military intervention in, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 75–76 [Pgs. 75–76 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Vietnam, unification of, 183–184 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 83], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Vietnam Task Force, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 34], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 70], 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Visutr Arthayukti, 841n [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 397], 846–849 [Pgs. 846–849 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 419], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 457], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

Voice of America, 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

Volta River Project, 462n [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

Vu Van Mau, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 70], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 71], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 84]

Wallace, Henry, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 33]

Waller, J.K., 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

Wallner, Woodruff, 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 341n [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 400n [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 177], 438n [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 508–509 [Pgs. 508–509 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 614n [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 281]

Wallop, Lt. Gen. Rochanawisut, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 23], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 51], 913–916 [Pgs. 913–916 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 433 and Doc. 434], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435]

Wan Waithayakun, Prince, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 85]

Warner, Frederick A., 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 345]

Weiss, Leonard, 800n [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

West New Guinea (see also New Guinea dispute), 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365] ethnicity of, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163]

flag-raising ceremony, 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 214], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 214]

International Development Authority, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 180]

Netherlands military strength in, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 162], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 163], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 164], 473n [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

New Guinea Council, 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 160], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 161], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 162], 353–354 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 163], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 216]

Papuan independence movement, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 260]

plebiscite, 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 172], 433–434 [Pgs. 433–434 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 211], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 225], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 257], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 274], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 279], 615–616 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]

sovereignty, Netherlands willingness to relinquish, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 199], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 200], 479–481 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 211]

transfer to Indonesia, 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

U.N. visiting Commission, 404–407 [Pgs. 404–407 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 409–411 [Pgs. 409–411 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 183], 422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 187], 424–425 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188], 427–429 [Pgs. 427–429 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 191], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 200], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 203], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 214], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 209]

West Papua. See West New Guinea.

Wheat, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 291]

White, John P., 39n [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 837n [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 395]

White, Gen. Thomas D., 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 153]

Whiting, Allen S., 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Wilson, Donald M., 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Win, U., 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 58]

Wongsanith, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140]

Wood, Chalmers B., 230n [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Woolf, Donald L., 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

World Court. See International Court of Justice.

Wright, Oliver, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 339]

Wright, William M., 188n [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84]

Wyatt, Wilson W., 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 672–673 [Pgs. 672–673 include portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 312], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Yani, Gen. See Jani, Gen.

Ye Htut, Bo, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 58], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]

Yeh, George, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 42], 92–93 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 44]

Yost, Charles W., 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 140], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315]

Young, Kenneth T., 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 40], 874n [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 432] Cambodian-Thai relations, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 77], 189n [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84]

Laos, 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 415], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 422], 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 423], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 424]

Southeast Asia, defense of, 28–31 [Pgs. 28–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 13–19 [Pgs. 13–19 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, and Doc. 19], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 56–58 [Pgs. 56–58 include portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 62 [Pg. 62 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 907n [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 427], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

Soviet-Thai relations, 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 415]

Thailand: communist threat to, 863–866 [Pgs. 863–866 include portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 986–987 [Pgs. 986–987 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474]

counterinsurgency, 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

defense of, 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 940–941 [Pgs. 940–941 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 953–954 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 458], 973–974 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 469]

United States, relations with, 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 420], 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 435], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc. 464]

U.S. economic aid to, 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 894–896 [Pgs. 894–896 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 433], 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 433], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 463], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471]

U.S. military aid to, 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 409], 867n [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 411], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 411], 870–873 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 412], 894–896 [Pgs. 894–896 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 926 [Pg. 926 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 458], 962–963 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 463], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 470], 983 [Pg. 983 is part of Doc. 471]

U.S. troop deployment to, 928–931 [Pgs. 928–931 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 933–934 [Pgs. 933–934 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 939–944 [Pgs. 939–944 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, and Doc. 450], 949n [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 454], 956–957 [Pgs. 956–957 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

Yulo, Jose, 777–782 [Pgs. 777–782 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Zablocki, Clement J., 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 360], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 373]

Zain, Zairin, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 168], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 175], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 215], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 251], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 289], 674 [Pg. 674 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 315], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Zeya, Bo, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 58], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 58]
