Foreign Relations of the United States, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy, World War I (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2014)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1917-72PubDip).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

FOREIGN
 RELATIONS
 OF THE

 UNITED
 STATES

 1917–1972

PUBLIC DIPLOMACY,
 WORLD WAR I

 DEPARTMENT
 OF
 STATE

 Washington
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 2 – blank – no folio
 Foreign Relations of the United
 States, 1917–1972

 Public Diplomacy,
 World War I

 United States Government Printing Office
 Washington
 2014

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 3 – blank – no folio
 DEPARTMENT OF STATE

 Office of the Historian

 Bureau of Public Affairs

 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
 Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
 Fax: (202) 512-2250 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 4
 About the Series
 The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official
documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and
significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The
Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility
for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office
of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the
General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, com-
piles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B.
Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific stand-
ards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March
26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series
through 1991.
 Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act,
established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series,
which was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991.
Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department
of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).
 The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough,
accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy
decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The vol-
umes of the series should include all records needed to provide compre-
hensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions
of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing
principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series
is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records
should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the
published text that a deletion has been made; the published record
should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a
decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing
a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations
series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.
The editors are convinced that this volume meets all regulatory, statu-
tory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.
Sources for the Foreign Relations Series
 The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record
in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide
comprehensive documentation of major U.S. foreign policy decisions
and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that govern-

 III

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 5
 IV About the Series

ment agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government
engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate
with the Department of State historians by providing full and complete
access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and
by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted
in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are avail-
able for review at the National Archives and Records Administration
(Archives II), in College Park, Maryland.
 The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all
the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central
files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the
Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the
Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of inter-
national conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with
foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memo-
randa of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State
and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of the
Department’s central files are available in electronic or microfilm
formats at Archives II, and may be accessed using the Access to Archival
Databases (AAD) tool. Almost all of the Department’s decentralized
office files covering this period, which the National Archives deems
worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred to or are in the
process of being transferred from the Department’s custody to
Archives II.
 Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through spe-
cial access to restricted documents at the presidential libraries and
other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been
declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified documents. The
staff of each presidential library is processing and declassifying many
of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available
in their entirety at the time of publication. Presidential papers main-
tained and preserved at the presidential libraries include some of the
most significant foreign-affairs related documentation from White
House offices, the Department of State, and other federal agencies
including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence
Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Editorial Methodology
 The documents in this volume are presented chronologically
according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed
according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the
date the memorandum was drafted.
 Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign
Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guid-

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 6
 About the Series V

ance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publish-
ing Division. The documents are reproduced as exactly as possible,
including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the
footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted con-
ventions for the publication of historical documents within the limita-
tions of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the
editors for each document included in this volume. Spelling, capitaliza-
tion, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except
that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes
and omissions in documents are corrected by bracketed insertions: a
correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words and
phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbrevia-
tions and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and
a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.
 Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals
with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after
declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where possible,
the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by indicating
the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire documents
withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and
are listed with headings, source notes, and number of pages not declas-
sified in their chronological place. All brackets that appear in the origi-
nal text are so identified in footnotes. All ellipses are in the original
documents.
 The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the
document, original classification, distribution, and drafting informa-
tion. This note also provides the background of important documents
and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy
advisers read the document.
 Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional
documentary sources, provide references to important related docu-
ments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide
summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and
elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs
and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to sup-
plement or explicate the official record.
 The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than
to page numbers.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
 The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documenta-
tion, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records,

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 7
 VI About the Series

advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations
series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation
and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the
preparation and declassification of the series. The Advisory Commit-
tee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes
in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to
its attention and reviews volumes as it deems necessary to fulfill
its advisory and statutory obligations.
Declassification Review
 The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of
Administration, conducted the declassification review for the Depart-
ment of State of the documents published in this volume. The review
was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive
Order 13526 on Classified National Security Information and applica-
ble laws.
 The principle guiding declassification review is to release all infor-
mation, subject only to the current requirements of national security
as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed
concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in
the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Govern-
ment, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific doc-
uments of those governments. The declassification review of this com-
pilation, which began in December 2013 and was completed in March
2014, resulted in the decision to withhold 0 documents in full, excise
a paragraph or more in 0 documents, and make minor excisions of less
than a paragraph in 0 documents.
 The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research
conducted in preparing this compilation and as a result of the declassifi-
cation review process described above, that the documentation and
editorial notes presented here provide a thorough, accurate, and relia-
ble record of public diplomacy initiatives during World War I.

Adam M. Howard, Ph.D. Stephen P. Randolph, Ph.D.
General Editor The Historian

 Bureau of Public Affairs
 November 2014

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 8
 Preface
Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations,
 Public Diplomacy, 1917–1972
 In 2007, historians at the Office of the Historian proposed a retro-
spective Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) volume designed
to augment the series’ coverage of U.S. public diplomacy. While the
series began to document the subject in a sustained and concerted way
starting with the second administration of President Richard M. Nixon,
previous FRUS coverage of U.S. public diplomacy efforts have been
far less consistent. This retrospective volume will fill that gap, which
stretches from the First World War to the early 1970s. Resource con-
straints and the statutory requirement to publish Foreign Relations vol-
umes 30 years after the events that they cover mean that compilations
in this volume have been researched and compiled piecemeal over a
longer period of time than the typical FRUS volume. Fortunately,
progress is being made, as evidenced by this compilation, which covers
the U.S. Government’s public diplomacy efforts from 1917 to 1919.
Subsequent compilations, which will document up to the end of the
first Nixon administration, will be published as they are completed.
 This compilation focuses on the creation and overseas work of the
Committee on Public Information (CPI). While the U.S. Government
had engaged in public diplomacy before (such as with the publication
of diplomatic correspondence during the Civil War), the CPI’s overseas
work constituted a sustained effort to educate a foreign public about
the United States, and, in particular, its role in the war effort. Represent-
atives of the CPI were sent around the globe to establish reading rooms,
distribute translated copies of President Woodrow Wilson’s speeches,
work with local journalists to publish news stories, and show films
demonstrating the United States’ readiness to fight. This compilation
documents all of these activities. While few planning documents from
the time exist, this compilation includes numerous examples of how
the CPI executed its work in the field, particularly in Europe, Asia,
and Latin America. The chapter also includes examples of the types
of information distributed by the CPI. The inclusion of these multime-
dia items is a new milestone in the publication history of the Foreign
Relations series. Despite the CPI’s extensive activity, the war’s conclu-
sion led the U.S. Government to shut down the Committee. However,
future U.S. public diplomacy efforts could call upon the CPI as an
example, even though it left no sustained bureaucratic legacy.
 Adam M. Howard, Ph.D.
 General Editor

 VII

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 9
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 10 – blank – no folio
 Acknowledgements
 The editor wishes to thank the staff at the Library of Congress and
the National Archives and Records Administration facility in College
Park, Maryland, for their valuable assistance.
 Aaron W. Marrs collected, selected, and edited the documentation
for this compilation under the supervision of Adam Howard, General
Editor of the Foreign Relations series. The compilation was reviewed
by Kathleen B. Rasmussen, Chief of the Global Issues and General
Division. Stephanie Eckroth, Rita Baker, and Thomas Faith performed
the copy and technical editing, and Kerry Hite coordinated the final
declassification review under Carl Ashley, Chief of the Declassification
Division. Joe Wicentowski provided technical assistance in creating the
multimedia portion of this volume.

 Aaron W. Marrs, Ph.D.
 Historian

 IX

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 11
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 12 – blank – no folio
 Contents
About the Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . III
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . VII
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . IX
Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XIII
Abbreviations and Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XV
Persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVII
World War I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94

 XI

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 13
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 14 – blank – no folio
 Sources
 The Committee on Public Information (CPI) had both a foreign
and domestic function. Records on the foreign function of the CPI are
not extensive, but the National Archives and Records Administration
has two record groups of primary interest. Record Group 63 contains
the records of the CPI, which include director George Creel’s corre-
spondence. The 1910–1929 Central Decimal File in Record Group 59,
the General Records of the Department of State, also includes CPI
information in decimal files 103.93 and 103.9302.
 At the Library of Congress, the private papers of George Creel do
not offer extensive discussion of the foreign work of the CPI, although
there is some material on the CPI’s founding. The Papers of Woodrow
Wilson offer key insights into the founding of the CPI and Wilson’s
stance on its work. Many of these documents have been reprinted in
the comprehensive Papers of Woodrow Wilson published by Princeton
University Press. Another key printed work is the Complete Report of the
Chairman of the Committee on Public Information, which gives a thorough
summation of the CPI’s work.

 Unpublished Sources
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.

 Papers of George Creel
 Papers of Woodrow Wilson

National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.

 RG 59 (General Records of the Department of State)
 Central Decimal File 1910–1929
 RG 63 (Records of the Committee on Public Information)
 Correspondence of Arthur Wood
 Correspondence, Cables, Reports, and Newspapers Received from Employees
 of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr. 1919
 Director’s Office of the Foreign Section
 General Correspondence of George Creel
 Manuals Giving Psychological Estimates of Foreign Countries, Prepared by the
 Military Intelligence Branch of the General Staff

 XIII

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 15
 XIV Sources

 Published Sources
Creel, George. Complete Report of the Chairman of the Committee on Public Information,
 1917, 1918, 1919. 1920. Reprint, New York: Da Capo, 1972.

Culbert, David Holbrook, and Richard E. Wood, eds. Film and Propaganda in America:
 A Documentary History, volume 1, World War I. New York: Greenwood Press,
 1990.

Link, Arthur, ed. The Papers of Woodrow Wilson. 69 vols. Princeton: Princeton
 University Press, 1966–1994.

Whitehouse, Vira Boarman. A Year as a Government Agent. New York: Harper, 1920.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 16
 Abbreviations and Terms
AEF, American Expeditionary Forces

Col., Colonel
Compub, Committee on Public Information
CPI, Committee on Public Information

GHQ, general headquarters

MIB, Military Intelligence Branch, Department of War General Staff
MID, Military Intelligence Division, Department of War General Staff

P.H.P., Philip H. Patchin

Rc’d, rec’ved, received
RG, record group

U.S., United States

Y.M.C.A., Young Men’s Christian Association

 XV

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 17
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 18 – blank – no folio
 Persons
Baker, Newton Diehl, Secretary of War from 1916 until 1921
Blankenhorn, Heber, Captain, USA; Military Intelligence Division, Department of War
 General Staff
Bullard, Arthur, unofficial representative of the Committee on Public Information in
 Russia from 1917

Churchill, Marlborough, Brigadier General, USA; Head of the Military Intelligence
 Branch, Department of War General Staff, from June 1918 (Military Intelligence
 Division after August 1918)
Clemenceau, Georges, Prime Minister of France from 1917 until 1920
Creel, George, Chairman of the Committee on Public Information from April 1917

Daniels, Josephus, Secretary of the Navy from 1913 until 1921

Francis, David Rowland, U.S. Ambassador to Russia from 1916 until 1917

Gibson, Hugh, Secretary at the Embassy in Paris from February 13, 1918

House, Edward “Colonel,” adviser to President Wilson

Irwin, Will, Director of the Foreign Section, Committee on Public Information, from
 January 1918 until July 1918

Keeley, James, U.S. representative to the Inter-Allied Conference on Propaganda in
 Enemy Countries
Kerney, James, Committee on Public Information Commissioner in France from Febru-
 ary 1918

Lansing, Robert, Secretary of State from 1915 until 1920
Lenin, Vladimir, President of the Soviet of People’s Commisars from November 8, 1917
Lippman, Walter, journalist and adviser to President Wilson

Marion, Frank J., Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Spain from Novem-
 ber 17, 1917
Mott, John R., International Secretary of the International Committee of the Young Men’s
 Christian Association
Murray, Robert H., Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Mexico

Page, Thomas Nelson, U.S. Ambassador to Italy from 1913 until 1919
Page, Walter Hines, U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom until November 1918
Patchin, Philip H., staff member, Bureau of Foreign Intelligence, Department of State
Perry, Paul, V., staff member, Foreign Press-Cable Service, Committee on Public Infor-
 mation, in 1918; Committee on Public Information Commissioner in the United
 Kingdom from July 1918
Pershing, John J., General, USA; leader of the American Expeditionary Forces
Polk, Frank Lyon, Counselor of the Department of State

Rickey, Harry N., Committee on Public Information Commissioner in the United King-
 dom until May 1918

 XVII

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 19
 XVIII Persons

Rogers, Walter S., Director of the Division of Wireless and Cable Service, Committee
 on Public Information
Root, Elihu, U.S. Ambassador on a Special Mission to Russia from June 1917 until
 July 1917
Russell, Charles Edward, delegate on the Special Mission to Russia from June 1917 until
 July 1917; speaker for the Committee on Public Information from October 1917
 until February 1918; Committee on Public Information Commissioner in the United
 Kingdom from May 1918 until July 1918

Sharp, William Graves, U.S. Ambassador to France until April 1919
Sisson, Edgar, Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Russia from October
 1917; Director of the Foreign Section, Committee on Public Information, from
 July 1918
Smith, Guy Croswell, Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Russia until
 March 1918, then Committee on Public Information representative for films in Scan-
 dinavia; Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Switzerland from
 December 25, 1918
Suydam, Henry, Committee on Public Information Commissioner in the Netherlands

Van Deman, Ralph H., Colonel, USA; head of Military Intelligence Section, Department
 of War General Staff from May 1917 (Military Intelligence Branch after February
 1918) until June 1918

Whitehouse, Vira B., Committee on Public Information Commissioner in Switzerland
 from January 26 until April 12 and July 1 until December 25, 1918
Wilson, Woodrow, President of the United States from 1913 until 1921
Woods, Arthur, staff member, Foreign Section, Committee on Public Information

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 20
 World War I
1. Editorial Note

 Shortly after Congress’s declaration of war on April 6, 1917, Presi-
dent Woodrow Wilson and his advisers discussed the need for what
would become the Committee on Public Information (CPI). Secretary
of the Navy Josephus Daniels recorded in his diary on April 9 that he
and Wilson “talked about censorship. He will appoint George Creel
as head.” (Papers of Woodrow Wilson, volume 42, page 23) In an undated
memorandum, Creel outlined his thoughts on a “Department of Public-
ity,” which Daniels forwarded to the President under cover of an April
11 letter. The memorandum made no mention of foreign work, focusing
instead on the need for a domestic publicity service that would include
a censorship function. (Ibid., pages 39–41) On April 12, Wilson
responded to Daniels: “Do I understand that I now have the authority
to designate Creel? If so, I shall be glad to do so. I like his memorandum
very much.” (Ibid., page 43)
 The formal request for the creation of the CPI came in a letter to
Wilson dated April 13 from Secretary of State Robert Lansing, Secretary
of War Newton Baker, and Daniels. According to White House staff
member Thomas Brahany, the letter was “drafted by Creel after consul-
tation with the President.” Brahany also noted some disagreement
between Creel and Lansing:
 “When he [Creel] took it to Lansing for approval following its
approval by Baker and Daniels, with whom he had talked fully, Creel
was very coolly received. Lansing insisted that the letter be written on
a State Department letterhead, and that his signature appear above the
signatures of Baker and Daniels. Creel didn’t want Lansing on the
Board. It was the President’s suggestion that Lansing be added. Creel
was disgusted with what he termed Lansing’s ‘petty sensitiveness.’
Baker and Daniels laughed heartily, Creel said, when he told them
they would have to sign a second letter because Lansing wanted his
name to appear first.” (Diary entry of April 15; ibid., page 71) Daniels
also commented on the incident: “Creel went to L to sign letter where-
upon L wanted it written on State Dept. paper & he sign first. Prece-
dence!” (Diary entry of April 13; ibid., page 59)
 As with Creel’s memorandum, the focus of the letter was on the
domestic work of the organization. The three men argued:
 “It is our opinion that the two functions—censorship and public-
ity—can be joined in honesty and with profit, and we recommend the

 1

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 21
 2 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

creation of a Committee on Public Information. The Chairman should
be a civilian, preferably some writer of proved courage, ability and
vision, able to gain the understanding cooperation of the press and at
the same time rally the authors of the country to a work of service.
Other members should be the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War,
and the Secretary of the Navy, or an officer or officers detailed to the
work by them.” (Ibid., page 55)
 Wilson authorized the creation of the CPI that same day in Execu-
tive Order 2594, appointing the Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy
as members of the CPI and Creel as the head. (Ibid., page 59) The
Committee apparently met only once. In an undated note, Creel wrote:
 “Mr. Lansing, a dull, small man, bitterly resented my chairmanship
of the Committee, and made himself so unpleasant at the first meeting
that I never called another. As a consequence, he refused to work with
the Committee, and did everything that he could, in his mean, cheap
way, to hinder and embarrass.” The undated note is a typed addition
to an excerpt of a letter from Wilson to Lansing dated June 29; the note
is bound in a volume of collected letters with an introductory note
dated March 21, 1931. (Library of Congress, Papers of George Creel,
Woodrow Wilson and the Committee on Public Information, 1917–
1931, Box 3, Vol. III, 1917–1918, 1931)
 Although foreign work was apparently not part of the original
conception of the CPI, in time the Committee would assume responsi-
bility for distributing material in allied, enemy, and neutral territories
abroad, as Wilson and his administration were soon urged to consider
publicity work in foreign countries. Ambassador on Special Mission
to Russia Elihu Root wrote to Lansing from St. Petersburg on June 17
that conditions in Russia were “critical.” He elaborated: “The soldiers
do not understand at all the importance to their country of maintaining
the war and all along the line have simply been unwilling to fight.
[Demoralization] has been aided by a tremendous German propaganda
through fraternization of troops at the front and thousands of German
agents throughout the country who swarmed across the border imme-
diately after the revolution.” Root notified Lansing that he was already
beginning to distribute “information” and had spent $100,000 for that
purpose. He urged the expenditure of “at least $5,000,000” and gave
the following justification:
 “That would be less than the cost of maintaining five American
regiments and the chance of keeping 5,000,000 Russians in the field
against Germany is worth many times five regiments. It will mean a
supply of newspapers, printing and distribution of posters, leaflets and
pamphlets, employment of numerous lecturers and moving pictures
to go about the front. This work to be done with the approval of Russian
Government and not to be conducted in the name of the United States.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 22
 World War I 3

We particularly recommend the establishment upon the Russian front
of Y.M.C.A. stations similar to those on the French and English fronts,
until recently on the Austrian front, just beginning on the Italian front,
and in Mesopotamia, and along the lines planned for the American
Army as authorized in Executive order signed by the President on
April 27, 1917. These establishments have reading rooms, provisions
for reading aloud to illiterate soldiers, lecture rooms, and temporary
arrangements for moving pictures. There are two thousand of these
establishments with the British Army all thronged by soldiers. They
afford opportunities for access to the minds of the soldiers. These
should be financed by the United States but that fact probably not
made public until after they are established and understood. Mott
thinks he can obtain twenty Americans now in Europe to inaugurate
plan promptly pending the securing and training adequate number.
Same sort of work is now being done on considerable scale in prison
camps with great success. Very desirable indeed to send here immedi-
ately as many moving pictures as possible showing American prepara-
tion for war, battleships, troops marching, factories making munitions,
and other things to carry to the mind the idea that America is doing
something. These poor fellows have been told that no one is really
fighting except Russian soldiers and they believe it. The British have
recently been sending out similar moving pictures with very good
effect, but everything has been done on too small a scale to deal with
the great masses of people who must be assimilated.” (Telegram 8;
Foreign Relations, 1918, Russia, volume I, pages 121–122)
 On June 27, Lansing responded to Root: “The matter of establishing
an efficient agency for publicity is receiving careful consideration in
view of your recommendations as to its desirability.” (Telegram 1;
ibid., page 127)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 23
 4 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

2. Letter From Walter S. Rogers to the Chairman of the
 Committee on Public Information (Creel)1

 Woods Hole, Massachusetts, August 13, 1917

Dear Mr. Creel:
 I have just reread the interview with Charles Edward Russell in
the New York Times of last Sunday.2 One paragraph especially appeals
to me:
 “Observe, now, the really critical point today is the security of the
Russian line on the eastern front; take note next of the great fact almost
universally overlooked in this country that the security of that Russian
line depends solely upon the state of mind of the masses of the Russian
people. Then, if you convince the masses of the people that the United
States is not really in this war, that it will not prosecute it with vigor
and resolution, that it is divided in its councils, that it is really seeking
peace, you have done more to make that Russian line melt away than
the Kaiser could do with ten million men and ten times as much artillery
as he has now.”
 Just the other day I talked with an experienced observer recently
returned from Russia. He said he had talked with a great many Russians
and that their expressed opinion was that the United States had made
fabulous sums out of the war and now had entered into it to be in
position to share the spoils. Not a single Russian that he had spoken
with was familiar with the events and the line of thought that had led
to our participation in the war. This tragic situation is only partly due
to German propaganda; it is still more due to our own blindness and
to our inability or unwillingness to realize that we have no case unless
our case reaches the attention of the masses of the world. The Russians
are not to blame. We state our case in Washington; then innocently
expect the Moscow papers to have the story the next day! “Papers
everywhere, please copy,” seems to be our motto.
 It can not be said too often or too loudly that this war is being
fought out in the minds of great masses of people as truly as it is being
fought out on the battle fields of Europe. Stating our case, convincing
the world that we mean business and that we stand for the common
rights of men, is just as important a piece of work as that being done

 1
 Source: Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Series 2: Family and
General Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 90, 1917 July 31–Aug. 29. No classification
marking. Also published in Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 43, pp. 456–459.
 2
 “Russia Today,” New York Times, August 12, 1917, p. X1.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 24
 World War I 5

by our war and navy departments or by Hoover.3 We may lose the
war or only partially achieve what we are struggling for, if we do not
get our grievances and our ideas to the world.
 Presenting our case to the world is no small job, it requires the
same high degree of brains, technical skill and energy as goes into the
actual prosecution of the war in its military aspects.
 I am aghast at the situation. Take my own case. I went to China
and Japan to learn what people there thought of us and to acquaint
myself with Oriental newspaper and press association methods. I found
that something drastic ought to be done at once to checkmate unfriendly
propaganda and to get the American case presented. China was drifting
into chaos. China needed news and truth from America. None was
forthcoming—only German, Japanese and British selfishly directed
propaganda. The American Minister4 clearly saw the situation and
desired me to impress on Washington the urgency.
 I reported to Col. House. He sent me to the State Department. Now
I have been about the world and have had considerable journalistic,
political and commercial experience. I think I qualify as a trained inves-
tigator. Mr. Lansing was too busy to see me. I have been home three
months, have been in and out of the Department any number of times,
but have not talked with the Secretary yet. I went to the Bureau of Far
Eastern Affairs. The Chief of the Bureau5 inquired about the weather,
hotels and railroads, but asked me not a single question regarding
conditions. I then turned to Mr. Polk, who gave me ten minutes and
agreed to give consideration to certain suggestions. I then turned to
Mr. Patchin, head of the Bureau of Information. We had several short
talks. Mr. Patchin thought that possibly I wanted a job under him!
Patchin partially has the idea, but is not a great person and has no
independent authority.
 Consider just two questions: What would be the situation now
had the President’s communications to the belligerents been actually
printed textually throughout the world? We are making an appeal to
the good sense and honor of the world, but most of the world has
never had a chance to read our state papers!
 One of these days a peace conference will be held. Will America
be looked upon by South America, the Orient and Russia (not to men-
tion the rest) as standing unselfishly for human rights? Or will America
be considered merely as a butt-in-sky with a greedy appetite? Our

 3
 Herbert Hoover, head of the U.S. Food Administration.
 4
 Paul S. Reinsch.
 5
 Edward T. Williams.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 25
 6 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

standing at the peace conference, the measure of our influence, will
depend largely upon what the world believes of us.
 Of course, German propaganda will try to muss everything up,
scatter dust about and blind the eyes. Of course, Japanese propaganda
will not forget Nipponese aspirations. As to British propaganda—the
late cock-of-the-walk is out to regain its lost prestige; for seventy-five
years the British dominated the Orient because of the belief that they
could lick the world any afternoon; now the British are not going to
let the world believe that we are playing a decisive role and that we
are the upholders of liberty. We preach our own message—democracy’s
story—or it isn’t told.
 I believe the President perceives this situation. I believe we have
no greater problem or obligation. Personally I do not believe this
task can be handled by the State Department; the Department is
not suitably manned or organized. A year ago last June I went to
Mr. Lansing and told him of the South American service inaugurated
by the United Press—I knew all about it as, in a sense, it was my
scheme—and suggested that the Department take advantage of this
new service to explain systematically our attitude and actions. The
Secretary told me in so many words that it was not one of the
functions of the Department to see that the American case was
presented to the peoples of other countries.
 The President or the Department carefully prepares a statement
intended to clarify a situation or to make us friends—the dissemination
of that statement is not a matter of official concern! The dissemination
is as important as the document. I thought we wrote documents and
prepared statements with a view to getting results and not merely for
filing purposes in official archives! I have never been a diplomat.
 I see no signs of the Department getting the big idea. Certain
things are being done grudgingly and parsimoniously. It is laugh-
stuff to find the Department felicitating itself upon the idea of
sending a million post cards to Russia—and a moving picture film
too for good measure. From any big view of the task, such things
are merely incidental details.
 We have got to organize to spread the teachings and the purposes
of our democracy and to show that democracy is a real thing that can
have character and direction.
 The undertaking is huge. One can not map out a policy, submit
blue-prints or accurate estimates of cost. It is a new job which must
be done under war-time conditions.
 Would that the President might give this opportunity to some
experienced man, make him virtually independent of the State Depart-
ment and turn him loose to do his best?

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 26
 World War I 7

 To me our conversation with the President was not entirely satisfac-
tory.6 The conversation went off into details. The President was tired.
The problem of world wide publicity requires a broad consideration
and then the leaving of details to experts.
 In conclusion let me emphasize the vital necessity for our democ-
racy to become articulate throughout the world.
 Sincerely,
 Walter S. Rogers

 6
 According to the editors of the Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Wilson met Creel on
August 2, “and it seems likely that Rogers was also present at this meeting.” (Papers of
Woodrow Wilson, vol. 43, p. 459, n. 2)

3. Editorial Note

 Ambassador on Special Mission to Russia Elihu Root and other
members of the Mission continued to urge the Department of State to
conduct propaganda in Russia. On July 2, 1917, Mission member Sam-
uel Bertron wrote from St. Petersburg to Secretary of the Treasury
William Gibbs McAdoo at noon: “It is the unanimous opinion of com-
mission that an extensive educational publicity campaign be under-
taken in Russia with the approval of Russian Government and to be
supervised by Ambassador Francis in order to offset extensive and
very dangerous German propaganda. This is absolutely essential in
our judgment and even though costly is the best possible contribution
that America can make.” (Telegram 12; Foreign Relations, 1918, Russia,
volume I, page 128) Three hours later, Root wrote from St. Petersburg:
“I beg you to realize that Germany is now attacking Russia by propa-
ganda and is spending millions, at least a million dollars monthly, to
capture the minds of the Russian people. Germany expects to succeed;
can be prevented only by active and immediate counter attacks by the
same weapons.” (Telegram 13; ibid., pages 128–129)
 The August 1917 report of the Mission included a supplement
entitled “Plans for American Cooperation To Preserve and Strengthen
the Morale of the Civil Population and the Army of Russia.” Portions
of the report and supplement are ibid., pages 147–153. Chairman of
the Committee on Public Information George Creel responded to the
proposals in the report in a letter to President Woodrow Wilson on

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 27
 8 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

August 20. Creel summed up his recommendations for Russia at the
conclusion of his letter:
 “With regard to administration, I do not think that the State Depart-
ment should have anything to do with it at all. The work lies entirely
within the province of the Committee on Public Information, and would
be merely an extension of activities already under way. I have not
included Russia in my foreign campaign out of a desire to learn the
findings of the Root Commission, but with its work concluded, I see
no reason for further delay.
 “While not yet ready to present a detailed plan, it is my thought
to ask Charles Edward Russell to act for the Committee in Russia. He
knows more about the Russian situation than any other, and in addition
to his sympathy and understanding, he is one of the best newspaper-
men in the country and a writer of rare ability.” (Papers of Woodrow
Wilson, volume 43, pages 529–530)
 On October 29, Secretary of State Robert Lansing informed Ambas-
sador to Russia David Rowland Francis that President Wilson, pursuant
to the report of the Root Mission, had authorized the establishment of
“(1) a war cable service from New York to Vestnik Agency, Petrograd,
approximately 1,000 words daily, service already begun; (2) moving-
picture service on large scale, 75,000 feet of films already prepared will
be shipped shortly with machines and operators; (3) possible encour-
agement of lecture bureau and pamphlet lecture program on large
scale; (4) extensive Y.M.C.A. program, 200 secretaries in all, of whom
70 already in Russia or en route.” He continued: “Sisson, representing
Bureau of Public Information, now sailing for Petrograd to study condi-
tions and report regarding immediate realization of three features as
enumerated. He represents Creel, who has been personally charged
by President with direction of this undertaking. Y.M.C.A. program
under exclusive control of Mott at New York. Sisson should be assisted
in every way to make his work effective and insure sound understand-
ing on his part of existing conditions.” (Telegram 1808; Foreign Relations,
1918, Russia, volume I, pages 214–215)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 28
 World War I 9

4. Editorial Note

 On August 24, 1917, Frances H.C. Burnett sent a night lettergram
from San Francisco to Third Assistant Secretary of State Breckinridge
Long. She reported: “Good effect imperial Japanese missions visit here
is being undone and anti-Japanese feeling seriously aggravated by film
play called Curse of Iku. Influential Japanese feel they cannot protest
personally in view of recent hospitality shown commission. Please
use every effort to prevent further exposition of film in California.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 7527,
811.4061/215)
 On August 25, Secretary of State Robert Lansing sent a telegram
to William Stephens, Governor of California. He informed Stephens:
“The Department is reliably informed that anti-Japanese feeling at San
Francisco is being seriously aggravated by the showing of a film play
entitled ‘Curse of Iku.’ The Department is informed also that a Bill,
Senate 509 Section 10A, was passed in April, 1917, by the California
Legislature prohibiting the display of films calculated to create race
hatred or international misunderstanding. The Department is not
informed as to the exact nature of the ‘Curse of Iku’ but the showing
of any film which creates race prejudice is distinctly objectionable at
this time in our international relations. I shall be greatly obliged if you
will take such steps as you may deem expedient and advisable to
suppress the ‘Curse of Iku’ or any other film which you may have
reason to believe is prejudicial to the foreign relations of this coun-
try.” (Ibid.)
 On August 30, Lansing sent another telegram to Stephens: “[F]ur-
ther investigation develops that the film ‘Curse of Iku’ is ‘Her White
God’, for which picture the censor at Chicago denied an exhibition
permit. Vigorous protest was made against the picture by the Japanese
Consulate at Chicago. Subsequently the producers exhibited the film
to representatives of the Japanese Embassy here and the Department
of State. The film was found to be distinctly objectionable and the
producers agreed to eliminate certain scenes before showing the pic-
ture. It appears that these modifications have not been made or if
they have been made they have not been sufficient to remove the
objectionable features from the picture. The change of name of the
picture to the ‘Curse of Iku’ does not in any way modify the attitude
of the Japanese Embassy or of the Department. The action of the produc-
ers in showing this film in San Francisco at this or any other time
deserves the severest condemnation and it is earnestly hoped that you
may find means to suppress the picture.” (Ibid.)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 29
 10 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

5. Report From the Embassy in Spain1

 Madrid, December 22, 1917

 1. Three methods of propaganda are being employed in this country
at the present time: publications, cinema and personal advocacy.
 2. Propaganda by publication takes two forms—periodicals and
pamphlets.
 The periodicals are divisible into secular and Catholic press.
 These papers are published in all the large cities, and even in towns
which less thorough campaigners than the Germans might unwisely
consider small enough to be overlooked.
 Despite the high percentage of illiteracy, these papers have a very
great influence in moulding the opinion of the people of Spain; what
is written is read by those who can read, and recounted to those who
cannot, and the printed word is given a credence in this country which
it does not enjoy among better educated, and therefore more critical,
peoples.
 By those periodicals which are enlisted on the German side,—and
unhappily this means, by most of the newspapers of Spain, both secular
and Catholic,—the opinion of the people of Spain is being shaped up,
without regard to domestic politics or religion, to oppose the Allies.
To cultivate this opposition no appeal is left unmade; readers in south-
ern Spain are eternally reminded that the English took and kept Gibral-
tar; readers in northern Spain are eternally reminded of what was
suffered during the Napoleonic invasion; readers in all Spain are not
permitted to forget that it was the Americans who bereft Spain of the
last of her colonial glory. Catholics are incited against the heretic
English, against the godless French, and the gross materialistic Yankee,
without any regard whatsoever for truth, or even the common decen-
cies of language.
 On the other hand, Spaniards who know no better are permitted
to believe that the Kaiser and most of Germany anyhow, are Catholic;
or at least, even though Lutheran, they are deeply religious—and now
defending the sacred fires of spirituality against a sordid horde of the
heathen. Incredible as it may seem, these views are actually taught!
 3. Against all this the Allies have offered little or no defense by
counter-propaganda in publication. The idea seems to have been that

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 111, Correspondence of Arthur Wood,
Box 1, Commission in Spain and Italy Frank J. Marion. No classification marking. “Naval
Attaché” is typed at the top of the first page. The report was presumably written by the
Naval Attaché, Captain Benton C. Decker. The Ambassador to Spain was Joseph Willard.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 30
 World War I 11

the German campaign was too crude, and too wholly based on falsity,
to succeed. A somewhat similar campaign of deception and vicious
untruth did fail, for instance, in the United States, but the standard of
education and information there is far higher than in Spain. In Spain,
it has succeeded.
 4. Which is not to say that there are not excellent periodicals in
Spain which champion the Allies’ cause,—such papers as La Corre-
spondencia de Espana, and El Liberal—which represent the best jour-
nalistic thought of Spain, and have taken their stand because of that
fact. Similarly, in the free forum of the Ateneo of Madrid, only the
other night, a member of parliament was not afraid to inform his
hearers that the Allies are fighting for the rights of humanity, not afraid
to attack Germany by name, nor to denounce militarism there, and in
Spain, not to urge this country to enter the war on the Allies’ side for
her honor and for her future’s sake. Such papers and such speakers,
nevertheless, are the minority.
 5. The majority in Spain are pro-German—the aristocracy out of
respect to their own interests, and the rest, out of ignorance and miscon-
ception fostered very largely by the pro-German press, secular and
especially Catholic.
 6. It has been said that the Allies should not attempt to remedy
this situation because the enemy has been working a long time and
has succeeded in fixing the views of the people permanently against
us, so that to combat their propaganda now would be a waste of effort.
 Whether or not such an effort would, or could possibly bring in
adequate returns is a question which rests upon two premises; one,
whether Spain could be induced or seduced into entering this war
against the Allies, and, the other, whether if Spain did go in against
us, she could injure the Allies seriously.
 7. Those who seriously declare that there is no use in our making
an effort to combat the enemy’s propaganda, also assert that it is
impossible for Spain to enter the war against the Allies, and that even
if she did, she could not put up more than a feeble fight.
 As for myself, I am of a contrary opinion, viz., of the opinion that
Spain can enter the war against us, and that, if she does, it will be a
serious matter for the Allies.
 8. Therefore, it is my opinion that we should make an effort to
combat the propaganda being carried on by the enemy in the newspa-
pers of Spain.
 9. I believe that we should by all means do so, because if Spain
enters the war on the side of the enemy, it will be that Spain is convinced
that the enemy is winning, and to bring this conviction home to Spain,
and to obtain the consequent result, is the very object of much of the
enemy’s printed propaganda.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 31
 12 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 It is the object of all the articles setting forth the prowess of the
invincible German army, the economic and industrial strength of that
inexhaustible country, lauding the morale of the people, and the unbro-
ken Christian spirit of its leaders. It is the object of all those other
articles picturing England as starved and frightened by U-boats, France
as prostrate, Russia in anarchy, Italy defeated and the United States
too far away and too careful of her own interests to become of any
account whatsoever in this war. These preachments are laid before the
Spaniard every day, or twice a day, in his daily paper, for which he
has a very great respect; so that it is no marvel that most Spaniards
have come to believe these things to be true. If they are true, he argues,
then the Allies are defeated, Germany wins; further—following what
is the best of the Spanish mind,—it would therefore be very advisable
for him to ally himself quickly with the winner that he may at least
avoid the victor’s wrath that he has not done so sooner. (One hears
this line of argument set forth daily by Spaniards—and sometimes one
hears it denounced by other Spaniards who understand, and lament,
but never deny, their race’s modes of reasoning!)
 10. I have not mentioned the importance of propaganda from the
commercial point of view. I have heard everywhere, from Spaniards
and from English themselves, that “the Spanish hate the English”.
They are being trained to hate the French as heartily. The Spaniard
“remembers the Maine,”2 and yet, having a nearer object in Gibraltar
to remember against the English, and a larger number of points of
irritation between him and the French, he would presently forget the
Spanish-American war, if he were permitted to, and continue in increas-
ingly friendly relation with the United States,—if for no other reason
than because he hates the others worse! But the Germans do not propose
to permit the Spaniard to forget the Maine. The incident is dug up and
aired in the pro-German press at every opportunity; Spain is continually
reminded that the Yankees sought to “besmirch her honor with that
base and baseless charge.” And the second string to the enemy bow,
as played against us, is that we refused the mediation in this war of
His Holiness.3
 11. I do certainly believe that we should endeavor to prevent the
enemy from embittering the Spanish people against us, by a constant

 2
 Reference is to the battleship USS Maine, which exploded while at harbor in
Havana on February 15, 1898, killing 266. Although Spain played no role in the explosion,
at the time the event helped solidify U.S. public opinion against Spain prior to the
Spanish-American War.
 3
 For Pope Benedict XV’s August 1 peace proposals and the U.S. response, see
Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 43, pp. 482–485, 488–489, and ibid., vol. 44, pp. 57–59. For
additional documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1917, Supplement 2, The World War,
vol. I, pp. 161–222.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 32
 World War I 13

and determined harping upon these two points, and upon our material-
ism, and our “picturesque” peculiarities.
 It will pay us, strategically and commercially, not to permit our-
selves to be undone in this country by German lies and ridicule.
 12. The Catholic press of Spain is a formidable influence. Newspa-
pers published with the approval of the church are preferred by the
strictest Catholics, and have easiest access to their homes. Although
the church holds itself responsible merely for the morals of such papers,
it is quite certain that these papers do not present military or political
matters in a manner offensive to the church authorities; and, in view
of the distortions of fact and the language employed by some such
papers, it is amazing of what the church in Spain can bring itself
to approve.
 13. I believe that we should bring to our side what Catholic papers
we can. Some of them would not cost much.4
 14. Propaganda by pamphlets, books, circulars, etc. exerts an influ-
ence when conducted with intelligent consideration of the need of
the occasion.
 This office has been considering the possibility of reaching the
Catholics along these lines. The French have done something. I do not
know what the English are doing, except that I have heard they were
sending out publications that are not considered suitable for the masses
of the people here.
 15. The French, the English and the Italian have engaged in propa-
ganda work by cinematograph. The films shown are not always war
pictures.
 16. I believe that it is possible for Mr. Marion to do exceedingly
good work here for us.
 17. He has with him some excellent films, which, if shown through-
out Spain, and well advertised as American, could not fail to influence
the opinion of this country in our favor,—for, after all, Spain is ignorant
because she has poor facilities for information not because she is herself
inert and unthinking.
 Take, for instance, one film Mr. Marion has brought called “The
Story of a Grain of Wheat”. That film, which shows American agricul-
ture, industry and commerce at its best, would create nothing less than
a sensation in the wheat-growing regions of Castile, and I venture to
assert that the Spaniard who saw it would go from the show with
some respect and admiration for a people who cultivate his own crop
on such a scale, by such means, with such success. And in the back of

 4
 This sentence was struck out by an unknown hand.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 33
 14 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

his head there would begin to germinate a notion that he would better
not engage in conflict with such a people.
 18. Propaganda by personal advocacy. This is difficult for us
because there are few Americans in this country and those few not
always of a desirable type. Propaganda by personal relations has been
most carefully developed by the enemy; Germans mix with all classes
of Spaniards and have got on intimate terms with the people,—a thing
which is difficult for a foreigner as a rule.
 I have thought that we might do a little along this line if we had
here some good American priests, patient and tactful, speaking Spanish
well,—if possible, even related to Spanish people in this country.
 Some influence might be exerted among the intellectuals by profes-
sors of our universities, if they were sent to visit Spain; but such visitors
would need to be of our finest,—educated, urbane, masters of Spanish
language and customs, and able to address critical audiences upon
congenial topics. We possess some such; there is here an opportunity
for them to serve their country.

6. Letter From the Chairman of the Committee on Public
 Information (Creel) to President Wilson1

 Washington, December 27, 1917

My dear Mr. President:
 Sisson cables that your message has been printed and widely circu-
lated, and that a very sound service has been formed for the handling
of our wireless and cable news.2
 I gathered a half million feet of film for the Y.M.C.A. for exhibition
in the soldiers’ houses on the firing line. These pictures show our social,
industrial, and war progress. They should be in Russia now, and I

 1
 Source: Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Series 2: Family and
General Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 93, 1917 Nov. 27–1918 Jan. 7. No classifica-
tion marking.
 2
 Reference is presumably to Wilson’s annual address to Congress of December 4.
In telegram 2129 from St. Petersburg, December 22, Sisson reported: “Cabled you detailed
report operations December seventeenth. Million copies the President’s message
printed.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/
8) For the text of Wilson’s speech, see Foreign Relations, [1917], With the Address of the
President to Congress, December 4, 1917, pp. ix–xvi.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 34
 World War I 15

have cabled Sisson3 to take as much of the film as he wishes, using it
in cities for our publicity purposes. This will obviate the necessity of
a separate expedition.
 Sisson understands he is not to touch the political situation, to
avoid all personal entanglements, and that while he is not to consider
himself an attaché to the Embassy, he must maintain the most friendly
relations with the Ambassador.4
 The Secretary of State, any number of Senators, and practically
every other citizen interested in international affairs, deluge me from
day to day with the suggestion that we send to Russia men of Russian
birth for the purpose of explaining America’s meaning and purposes.
I have not thought this wise because the Russian situation changed so
from day to day, and demanded such extreme caution in every
approach. I have now, however, a list of very remarkable people that
it might be well to send; men born in Russia, successful Americans in
every way, and able to write and speak authoritatively. What do you
think of sending them over?
 Propaganda, of course, goes hand in hand with policy. It is
impossible for me to do very much in Russia or with Russians until
certain decisions are made.5 Even were it proper for me to advise,
I do not feel that I am sufficiently in possession of facts to give
intelligent advice. The people that come to see me, and to whom
I attach most importance, however, feel strongly that some definite
statement should be made that we stand ready, as in the past, to
give whole-heartedly of all that we possess, to relieve distress, to
aid in restoration, and to build foundations under military strength,
but that this spirit of generous helpfulness can only be given effect
in cooperation with a Russian movement that is expressive of the
whole people, that has its source in democratic procedure, and its
authority from a free electorate.
 These portions of Russia where the German prisoners are, where
the coal fields are, where the grain belt is—all are in possession of anti-

 3
 Not found.
 4
 In telegram 1901 to St. Petersburg, December 14, Creel informed Sisson about the
“half million feet of motion picture film,” and also that “President insists that you
avoid political entanglements and personal matters.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/6a)
 5
 The Bolshevik Revolution of October 1917 (November by the Gregorian calendar)
led to difficulty in the U.S.-Russia relationship, although diplomatic relations were never
formally severed. On December 6, Lansing conveyed to Francis Wilson's instruction that
all U.S. representatives in Russia refrain from any direct communication with representa-
tives of the Bolshevik government. (Telegram 1883 to St. Petersburg, December 6; Foreign
Relations, 1918, Russia, vol. 1, p. 289) The revolution was followed by a civil war between
Communists and anti-Communists which continued throughout World War I.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 35
 16 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

German, anti-Lenine forces. Such a statement would strengthen these
forces even while cutting away Bolsheviki supports.
 I am not trying to be “ambassadorial,” but simply searching for
some light that will enable me to see my own way clearer.6
 Respectfully,
 George Creel
 Chairman

 6
 A stamped notation on the first page indicates the letter was acknowledged on
December 28. Wilson’s response, however, is dated December 29: “Thank you for your
letter of the twenty-seventh about the Russian propaganda. You are taking just the right
position. It must be our position for the time being, at any rate, and we must wait to
see our way before pushing forward any faster than we are now doing or in any different
way.” (Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Series 2: Family and General
Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 93, 1917 Nov. 27–1918 Jan. 7) Both letters are also
printed in Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 45, pp. 367–368, 387.

7. Cablegram From the Committee on Public Information
 Commissioner in St. Petersburg (Sisson) to the Chairman of
 the Committee on Public Information (Creel)1

 St. Petersburg, January 3, 1918

 If President will restate anti imperialistic war aims and democratic
peace requisites of America thousand words or less comma short almost
placard paragraphs comma short sentences comma I can get it fed into
Germany in great quantities in German translation and can utilize
Russian version potently in army and everywhere stop excerpts from
previous statement2 will not serve stop need is for internal evidence
that President is thinking of the Russian and German common folk in
their situation of this moment and that he is talking to them stop can
handle German translation and printing here paragraph obvious of

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables, Reports,
and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr.
1919, Box 2, Bullard—Sisson—Russia—Cables. No classification marking. Sent via West-
ern Union. A stamp on the back of the last page reads: “1918 Jan 4 AM 8 31.”
 2
 Reference is presumably to Wilson’s speech of December 4. See footnote 2, Docu-
ment 6.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 36
 World War I 17

course to you that disclosure German trickery against Russia in peace
negotiations3 promises to immensely open up our opportunities for
publicity and helpfulness stop4 with film expedition send supplies of
transformers rheostats carbons cement rewinders number four cable
stop Gaumont or Pathe machines preferable account convenience local
repairs stop intersperce thousand foot comedies with educational reels
stop soon as possible themes of some educational firms should be built
into emotional dramas five to eight thousand feet stop choose film
leader carefully stop no American not kindly and democratic must
come in to Russia stop Smith5 is competent can handle advertising if
necessary and attached him to my staff December first stop first film
has gone admirably paragraph presently may be desirable to start our
own newspaper stop it is mechanically feasible stop what is your view
question would need desk man as capable as Rochester6 to get out
paper stop would Sam Adams7 come to swing writing end devoting
himself solely to this work question mark put some general news in
cable stop several short items better than one long one stop could you
utilize few paragraphs return service stop cable tolls low outgoing stop
have you seen Thompson8
 Sisson

 3
 Reference is to the peace negotiations between the Central Powers and Russia
leading to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, signed on March 3, 1918.
 4
 In an undated note, Creel wrote that after receiving this cable he “went at once
to the President, and after some urging, he made his great speech of January 8, 1918,
in which he laid down the Fourteen Points.” (The note is bound in a volume of collected
letters with an introductory note dated March 21, 1931; Library of Congress, Papers of
George Creel, Woodrow Wilson and the Committee on Public Information, 1917–1931,
Box 1, Vol. I, 1917–1918, 1931) House, however, makes no mention of Creel in his diary
entry of January 9 describing the drafting of the speech. (Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol.
45, pp. 550–559) Wilson’s speech before a joint session of Congress is printed in Foreign
Relations, 1918, Supplement 1, The World War, vol. I, pp. 12–17.
 5
 Guy Croswell Smith.
 6
 Reference is presumably to Edward S. Rochester, a journalist who was editor of
the CPI’s publication Official Bulletin.
 7
 Reference is presumably to Samuel Hopkins Adams, a journalist who wrote for
the CPI.
 8
 William Boyce Thompson. For Thompson’s January 3 report on propaganda in
Russia, see Foreign Relations, 1918, Supplement 1, The World War, vol. I, pp. 12–17.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 37
 18 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

8. Letter From the Chairman of the Committee on Public
 Information (Creel) to Paul Fuller of the War Trade Board1

 Washington, January 4, 1918

My dear Mr. Fuller:
 I have just heard of an order issued by the Treasury Department at
the request of Mr. Oliphant, to the effect that all motion pictures going
out of the country should be censored by the Customs House Officers.
As a result, the shipments of American propaganda film to Scandinavia
and Russia were held up yesterday on the very eve of departure, and it
has taken several hours of my time to straighten out this infernal tangle.
 Practically every foot of film made in the United States is censored by
this Department. Also, before leaving the United States, the consignees
must receive a license from the War Trade Board. By our arrangement,
these men have been referred to me, and with each of them I am making
an arrangement that permits me to pass upon the matter they are taking,
but which also gives me the right to make them take a certain amount of
our propaganda film with them for incorporation in every program.
 For the Customs Officers to try to censor film is as impossible as it
is needless. Some of my shipments run from half a million feet to a million
and a half. Not only would projection rooms have to be provided, but it
would take a force of five men working day and night for a month to
censor the material. When one considers that it has already been cen-
sored, it will be seen that the only result is confusion, expense and delay.
Will you please be kind enough to take this matter up at once, and have
the order withdrawn as far as New York is concerned at the present time.
 Will you also give explicit orders that no motion picture license is
to be issued until the man has been referred to this Committee. This
will prevent the exportation of any film but that which has already
been approved, and will enable us to force our educational matter
upon every exporter.2
 Sincerely,
 Chairman3

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Correspondence of George
Creel, Box 10, Hart, Charles. No classification marking.
 2
 For the changing regulations and requirements of film exportation, see Film and
Propaganda in America: A Documentary History, vol. 1, World War I, Documents 119–138.
 3
 Creel did not sign this copy of the letter.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 38
 World War I 19

9. Cablegram From the Committee on Public Information
 Commissioner in St. Petersburg (Sisson) to the Chairman of
 the Committee on Public Information (Creel)1

 St. Petersburg, January 13, 1918

 Presidents speech placarded on walls Petrograd this morning2 stop
one hundred thousand copies will have this display within three days
stop three hundred thousand handbills will be distributed here within
five days stop proportionate display Moscow by end of week stop
YMCA agreed distribute million Russian and million German copies
along line stop other channels into Germany being opened stop Isvestia
official government newspaper nearly million circulation through Rus-
sia printed speech in full Saturday3 morning with comment welcoming
it as sincere and hopeful stop much of other newspaper comment still
cynical but shifting rapidly as speech makes its own mighty appeal
stop German version in hands printer now stop calls editorial4 useful
also Thompsons interview5 stop what was comment Nova Mir comma
New York Bolshevick paper stop place third allotment my credit New
York stop will hold balance second allotment in New York as moving
picture reserve stop will have to transfer third to Russia stop before I
send bank instructions as to method cable rate of rouble exchange stop
first transfer was unfavorable as purchasing value of rouble is only
ten cents stop in this case all right to deposit with National Bank
Commerce
 Sisson6

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables, Reports,
and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr.
1919, Box 2, Bullard—Sisson—Russia—Cables. No classification marking. Sent via the
Postal Telegraph-Commercial Cables Company. The time “1:27 a.m.” is printed on the
last page of the cablegram. Creel forwarded the cablegram to Wilson on January 15.
(Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 45, p. 596)
 2
 See footnote 4, Document 7. Telegrams from several Embassies reporting on the
reception of the President's speech are printed in Foreign Relations, 1918, Supplement 1,
The World War, vol. I, pp. 17–28 and 32–36.
 3
 January 12.
 4
 Reference is presumably to War for Peace (1918), a publication in the CPI’s War
Information Series edited by Arthur D. Call.
 5
 Not further identified.
 6
 In telegram 2363 from St. Petersburg, February 13, Sisson further reported: “Circu-
lation of the President’s message January eighth practically completed. Totals three
million two hundred and fifty thousand copies without account of results of separate
printing and distribution at Odessa, Tiflis, Rostoff, Vladivostok, Chita and Omsk.”
According to a handwritten notation on the first page of the telegram, Creel was sent
a “paraphrase” of the February 13 telegram on February 18. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 731, 103.93/45)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 39
 20 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
 Russia1

 Washington, January 23, 1918

 21112. For Sisson from Creel: Emphasize following points in all
publicity work. Stop. Give them to your writers and speakers and drive
them home in every possible manner:
 I. That the United States has no other motive in waging war against
the German Government than to overthrow autocracy and to protect
democracy from the intrigue and physical might which threatens it.
 II. That it is folly to believe that the United States would give
thousands of lives and expend billions of dollars in prosecution of a
war for commercial advantages, which, even without considering the
loss of life and the consequent weakening of the industrial power of
the republic, could not for decades compensate the nation for the sums
expended in carrying on the war.
 III. That the United States, if a German victory would not be a
deadly menace to its own independence and free institutions and to
those of other democratic nations, could have remained neutral in the
war and through commerce and industry accumulated vast wealth and
become the great financial power in the world.
 IV. That the capitalists of the United States would have acted
without reason and contrary to their interests to have favored a war
for the sake of insuring a few hundred millions of debts due them by
the Entente Governments when the war would impose billions upon
the United States, which would have to be paid by taxes of which
the great bulk would be collected from these same capitalists, whose
business enterprises would be disorganized and jeopardized by war.
 V. That the entry of the United States into the war against its
financial and industrial interests is certain evidence that it considered
its own and the world’s democracy in grave peril from Prussian aggres-
sion, particularly the newly arisen democracy of Russia.
 VI. That every class of the population in the United States and
every political party are solidly behind the Government in pressing
the war through to a victorious conclusion regardless of cost in life or
treasure. COMPUB.
 Polk

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736,
103.9302/12a. No classification marking. Marked “Seen” by Alvey Adee on January 23.
Patchin initialed the telegram.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 40
 World War I 21

11. Memorandum by the Chairman of the Committee on Public
 Information (Creel)1

 Washington, undated

 Memorandum for an American Bureau of Public
 Information in Europe
 Pressure from various quarters has been brought to bear on the
Army Authorities to undertake Propaganda along the lines of the differ-
ent European organizations. Both the British and French maintain
bureaus in the allied and neutral countries each one considering its
own national interest as well as that of the allied cause.
 Thus far, our only “Propaganda” has been through the Press Divi-
sion of the Intelligence Section of the American Expeditionary Forces
which has charge of public relations and of censorship. It has supplied
information freely to all who wished it, distributed photographs in
allied countries and extended unusual facilities to influential civilians
and writers and correspondents for seeing our Army.
 Any organization that we may develop in the future should be
under Government direction. Volunteer organizations will not only
overlap but will assume a semi-official capacity if they receive official
assistance necessary for efficiency, and, unless they carry out the spirit
of Government’s intentions, may produce mischievous results in a
work which requires the most delicate possible handling. Dismissing
the Volunteer System as impracticable, we may follow one of two
courses.
 I. The Press Division may extend its work along present lines by
an increase of personnel and a small appropriation which might come
from the War Department.
 II. We might establish a central bureau in Paris where the Press
Division already has an office and branch bureaus in London, Rome
and Madrid, the Central Bureau being in liaison with the Committee
of Public Information in Washington and the Intelligence Section of the
Army. Our policy should be to stiffen the moral[e] and determination of
the allied countries by the presentation of the immense power which
America could exert against the Germans when our preparations are
complete. It would counteract German propaganda and other propa-
ganda which has had such serious results in Italy for example, and by

 1
 Source: Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 46, pp. 200–203. The original notes that the
memorandum is dated “c. Jan. 31, 1918.” All brackets are in the original. © 1984 by
Princeton University Press.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 41
 22 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

the exposition of American thoughts and ideals, remedy the too com-
mon scepticism of our motives among the masses in the allied countries
who can not conceive that we are not in the war for territorial or
commercial gains. After peace negotiations had begun, the organization
would still be serviceable in its influence as a means of reflecting our
national aims.
 The chairman of the central bureau in Paris should be a man of
broad European experience, and the branch bureaus in London, Madrid
and Rome and the Scandinavian countries should be directed by men
who knew the country to which they were assigned sympathetically
and spoke the language fluently, including an eminent scholar, a practi-
cal man of affairs, an economist, a journalist and others who would
reach different institutions and classes of Society. Upon the choice of
these men and the character of the chairman would depend the results
of the work which would be carried on in a dignified, modest and
thorough manner in keeping with the character of the New America
as opposed to the America with which Europeans associate boasting,
flamboyancy and commercialism.

 FIXED CHARGES FOR AN EUROPEAN
 BUREAU OF AMERICAN INFORMATION
 Annually

Rent of offices in Paris, London, Rome, Madrid, $24,000.
 Rotterdam, Berne, Christian[i]a, Stockholm,
 Copenhagen and Petrograd
Stenographers, clerks and offices expenses $50,000.
Salaries of five assistants in each branch at the rate $240,000.
 of $250. to $500. monthly
Total of Fixed Charges $314,000.

 The principal assistants would be expected, as a matter of
patriotiam [patriotism] as well as of wisdom in the policy of such work,
to give their services for small remuneration. Out of an appropriation
of $500,000. say $176,000 would be left for printing, travel and emergen-
cies of the organization. One assistant at the Central Bureau should be
am [an] accountant who would act as auditor. All employees would
be subject to a month’s notice. No moneys should be spent in such
a manner that the record of the expenditure would not bear public
investigation.
 1. Sound ethics as well as sound policy apparently require that our
people should be told the truth in some detail of the present situation
of the Allies. The facts had better come from the government now than
later from other sources which may play into the hands of critics.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 42
 World War I 23

 2. Allied representations of the danger of the Germans winning a
military decision on the Western Front should be considered in relation
to the Allies’ desire to have us committed to the war with our last
drop of blood and last dollar to gain ends, which, in some instances,
are not in keeping with our declared purpose in the war.
 3. In any event a campaign of education as to the actualities of the
present situation should be inaugurated at home. The only force which
will be convincing to the German General Staff in its survey of the
situation is military force and the building of the bridge across the
Atlantic which will bring military force to bear upon the German Army.
Any preparations, even any public emotion, which is a diversion from
this purpose will only play into the hands of the German military party
which judges our effectiveness only by its measure of the power of
our blows and our potential blows. The response of our people to the
truth should be so determined and concrete in its warlike intensity
that the German Staff will not mistake our meaning; for this is the best
weapon to place in the President’s hands for the earliest possible ending
of the war.
 4. The French government should be informed of our purpose in
telling our people the facts in order that the French government may,
if it chooses, use its censorship in suppressing what may be harmful
to French morale while strengthening to our own.
 5. It is common talk among the French, and in a lesser degree among
the English, masses that we are willing to loan the Allies money[,] to
subscribe to Red Cross funds and provide ambulanciers but we are
not willing to shed our blood. As the most convincing proof of our
determination our trained troops, no matter how small their numbers,
should, even at the expense of heavy casulaties [casualties], play a part
against any great German offensive on the Western Front which will
be well heralded in Europe.
 6. In the event of a disaster to the French Army prevision requires
that we safeguard our army, and, in the extreme event, join the British
Army using British bases for future operations.
 7. Such is the character of the French people and such the effect
of the strain that they have borne for more than three years that every
possible infleunce [influence] should be exerted to stiffen their morale
with convicition [conviction] of our strength in order that they may
withstand the shock of another great offensive which will undoubtedly
be directed against their sector if the German[s] decide to make a
supreme effort for a decision on the Western Front.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 43
 24 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

12. Report Prepared in the Division of Foreign Press, Committee
 on Public Information1

 Washington, February 1, 1918

 Report of the Division of Foreign Press (cable) up to
 February 1, 1918
 The underlying purpose of this Division is to help in the dissemina-
tion of news regarding America with special reference to making clear
the reasons why this country entered the war, its purposes, military
preparations and efforts. America is appealing to the good sense and
democratic instincts of the world. Such an appeal lacks reality unless
it reaches the newspaper readers of the world. This particular Division
deals with “spot” news i.e., material requiring dissemination by tele-
gram, cable or radio.
 Speaking generally, it is fair to say that America has largely been
misunderstood throughout the world and developments in this country
have been badly or inadequately presented in the foreign press. This is
no new condition. America for years has been unfortunately advertised.
With some notable exceptions, it can be stated that brief items, often
sensational in character and never with background or proportion,
have constituted the news sent from this country. Many important
news distributing centers have received no direct news from here.
 1: This Division is expected to be familiar with news channels
throughout the world and particularly with the channels through which
news regarding America is carried.
 2: It seeks, in every way, to encourage press agencies and corre-
spondents to increase the amount of American news sent abroad and,
wherever possible, assists in obtaining access to news and aids in
securing improved transmission facilities. It establishes cooperative
relations with correspondents of foreign papers and with the press
agencies.
 3: The Division sends, to wherever it seems necessary, a supplemen-
tary news service. As a matter of policy, such service is not of a character
to compete with news handled by established news agencies or that sent
out by special correspondents. Such service is, in truth, a supplementary
service designed to meet the requirements of the present time for a
just presentation of the American point of view.
 4: The Division stands ready to distribute abroad textually, import
communications, such as presidential addresses. The general policy in
handling such communications is to transmit them to the news centers

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 16, Poole, Ernest Feb–June 1918. No classifica-
tion marking.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 44
 World War I 25

of the world and there to turn them over to the established press
agencies for further distribution. At places where such arrangements
cannot be made, because of the absence of press agencies or for other
reasons, the messages are sent to the American official representative
to be given out by him to the local press.
 5: The Division keeps in direct contact with the State Department
and exercises the greatest care in no way to misinterpret American
policy. Arrangements are in the making for close cooperation with the
War Trade Board.
 On January 31st the following services were being sent out:

 1: A cable service of approximately two hundred-fifty words a day
to the Committee’s representative in Petrograd. The Root Mission and
others familiar with the situation in Russia urged that an American
news service be sent there.2 At that time a service of about one hundred
words a day was being sent from New York to Petrograd by the Viestnik
Agency, then an official Russian news agency. Understanding was
reached with this agency for extension of its service to four or five
hundreds words a day. This arrangement was terminated after having
been tried for a few weeks and later the present service was instituted.
The service usually consists of several short items, which over a period
of time, are intended to give a picture of developments in America. It
is the only direct news service from this country to Russia.
 2: On November 29th a service of approximately twelve hundred
words a day was started to France. This service is sent by Navy Radio
and intercepted by a French radio station. The original intention was
that this service should go into Russia and arrangements were made
to have the messages retransmitted and intercepted by the Russian
station at Moscow but owing to the chaotic situation in Russia the
messages for some time have not been received in that country. The
service to France goes to the Maison de la Presse for distribution in
France, and is telegraphed to the American Legation at Berne where
it is also given out for publication. Recently the service has been sent
from Berne to Rome.
 3: This radio service for a while was intercepted by the station at
Darien on the Isthmus of Panama where copies were given out to the
local papers and the messages rebroadcasted for the benefit of a number
of radio stations in the Caribbean Basin. Later this service was replaced
by a service telegraphed to San Diego. There the service is translated
into Spanish and radioed from San Diego to Darien for reradioing.
The present plan permits the sending of items of especial interest to
South America.
 4: Arrangements are pending for extending the news service into
Stockholm, Venezuela and to various points in Asia.
 5: Numerous conversations have been had with representatives of
the news agencies with the idea of encouraging them to extend and
improve their news services.

 2
 See Documents 2 and 3.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 45
 26 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 This Division handled the world wide distribution of the presiden-
tial addresses of December 4th and January 8th3 and sent to South
America and Asia a summary of Secretary Lansing’s review of Colonel
House’s report on the special Mission to Europe.4
 The presidential messages were quite generally printed in full in
the leading newspapers of the world. Such publication has gone a
long way towards making clear to the world the American attitude
and purposes.
 As illustrative of the way in which presidential addresses are han-
dled by the press associations, the following statement by the Kokusai
Agency of Japan is interesting. After describing how the message was
handled in the United States to San Francisco the statement goes on
to say:—
 “It had traveled overland for nearly four thousand miles and then
commenced its long under the sea trip from San Francisco to the Island
of Guam. Here again the long message was taken down and ‘relayed’
once more for China and Japan where the Reuter agent in Shanghai
and the general manager of Kokusai had been notified to accept it.
This notification was received late on Tuesday night the 4th, and again
on Wednesday the 5th.5 During the afternoon of the fifth the first section
of about one hundred words came in on the wire to the headquarters of
the Kokusai Agency at Sojuro-cho. Here all preparation had been made
to give this great message a fitting reception and treatment; the editors,
translators, manifolders and messengers had all been organized for the
work. Experienced editors taking turns, received the telegrams as they
came. These were immediately rewritten on the typewriter to dictation
of the editor. Short “takes” were passed to translators and then to the
chief translator in Japanese and English for reediting. The retouched
and compared sheets were then rewritten and passed to the manifolder
for the machine work of the reproduction of the copies necessary.
 “It was a busy and interesting night for, owing to the extreme
pressure on the local wires the matter came slowly. Fifty-two messages
of between seventy and one hundred words were received and each
one passed through the same machine.
 “The utmost care was taken to prevent premature publication of
any part of the message before the whole was ready for simultaneous
distribution.
 “The first completed copies were put upon the outgoing trains for
the far out-of-town newspapers. The first of the copies of the message
in full English and translation was delivered at the general manager’s
office early in the morning—and immediately this was approved, a
full copy was sent to the American Ambassador. After the copy was

 3
 See footnote 2, Document 6, and footnote 4, Document 7.
 4
 Lansing forwarded his summary of House’s report on the American Mission to
Europe and the Inter Allied Conference to Wilson on December 27, 1917. See Papers of
Woodrow Wilson, vol. 45, pp. 368–369.
 5
 December 4 and 5, 1917.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 46
 World War I 27

delivered the ‘release’ was given and the bicycle messengers rushed
out so that every newspaper would receive it promptly and without
discrimination.
 “The news agencies which, cooperating with the Kokusai, distrib-
ute the Kokusai News Agency service to the provincial newspapers
were supplied at the same moment and then came the wider and wilder
scenes in the offices of the news agencies and newspapers in Tokyo,
Osaka and Yokohoma and Kobe and throughout the provinces. Liter-
ally hundreds of telephones were commandeered and from one end
of Japan to the other the contents of the message were distributed and
made ready for publication. The scope of the distribution of the Kokusai
news agency matter was never before, perhaps, more thoroughly
marked and, indeed, as the accompanying tributes and acknowledge-
ments will show, never so much appreciated or more thoroughly
recognized.
 “One of the remarkable evidences of the newspaper enterprise in
Japan was shown by the great Osaka afternoon newspapers, which, a
few hours after the message was delivered at the offices, had the
message printed on their afternoon Osaka editions three hundred
miles away.”
 The Division limits itself to sending out news of events here, believ-
ing that, in the long run, the best propaganda is merely to let American
events tell their own story. The editor abroad is given items that he
can reasonably be expected to print. The items are varied in appeal
and always have a current interest. No “cooked-up” propaganda is
distributed.
 This Division offices in connection with the Naval Press Censor.
The Press Censor, of course, sees that no military information or mali-
cious statements are cabled out of the country. The censorship is pre-
ventative; this Division has the constructive problem of seeing that the
American story is adequately told.
 Indicative of the willingness of the great press agencies to cooper-
ate, the following quotation from a letter written by the Managing
Director of Reuters6 is interesting:—
 “We carry out joyfully the instructions conveyed to us for the
handling of these telegrams. The amount of work entailed in the tele-
graphing all over the world and in the translating most accurately into
French of the despatch of three thousand words is literally gigantic.
That we undertake it gladly we have already said, for we know that
we are rendering good and true aid to the American government and
to the allied powers.”
 Until very recently the staff consisted of the director and Mr. Perry
Arnold, who was at one time in charge of the United Press bureau in
Washington and later was foreign editor for that organization. Lately

 6
 Not found.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 47
 28 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

the staff has been increased by the addition of Mr. Paul V. Perry,
who came from the Detroit Free Press where he was telegraph editor.
Abroad, the work of the Division is represented in Petrograd by Mr.
Sisson; in Moscow by Mr. Bullard; in Berne by Mrs. Whitehouse, and
in London by Mr. H. N. Rickey.

13. Memorandum From the Chief of the Military Intelligence
 Section, Department of War General Staff (Van Deman) to
 the Chairman of the Committee on Public Information
 (Creel)1

Memorandum No. 8 Washington, February 7, 1918

SUBJECT
 Liaison between Army Intelligence and U.S. Foreign Education Campaign.

 A campaign of foreign education (or U.S. propaganda) in order to
be intelligently prosecuted relies, of course, on accurate information.
The following is an outline of the kinds of information which will be
needed, together with an indication of what can be supplied by the
Army Intelligence Section.
 1. (a) The Propaganda Section will want to keep up with the latest
changes of popular feeling within Germany as regards the United
States. It will want to know any notable failures to inform, such as the
mutilated publication of President Wilson’s messages or the garbled
accounts of Secretary Baker’s statements on our armed forces. It will
want to know of any marked misconception Germans have in regard
to our war aims, etc.
 (b) The Army Intelligence Section with General Pershing now gets
the latest German newspapers, translates and estimates them, as well
as the latest Swiss and Scandinavian and Dutch papers.

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 111, Correspondence of Arthur Wood,
Box 2, R.H. Van Deman. No classification marking. An unknown hand made minor
editorial revisions throughout the memorandum, which have been incorporated into
the text. This memorandum is attached to a February 28 letter from Arthur Woods of
the Foreign Section of the CPI to Colonel Van Deman, in which Woods wrote: “I hope
that you are carrying out this plan and will let us have the information mentioned in
the different items as they come in.
 “We are particularly in need of anything to throw light on ways in which public
opinion anywhere in the world is being misinformed; and the effect produced by the
educational work this Committee is now doing.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 48
 World War I 29

 2. (a) The Propaganda Section will want to keep in touch with
popular feeling in Germany as hidden behind what the newspapers
give.
 (b) The Army Intelligence Section collates reports of agents within
Germany, of travelers from Germany, and of mail censors’ findings,
as supplied by the Allies, and by our own State, War, Navy and Justice
Departments. These reports generally tell a very different story from
that in the German newspapers.
 3. (a) Propaganda will want to know the run of feeling among
soldiers in the enemy trenches.
 (b) Army Intelligence collects information from prisoners and
deserters, overhears talk in enemy trenches, and often, through patrols
and raids, gets enemy letters and documents.
 4. (a) Propaganda will want to know actual conditions in the enemy
trenches, which affect morale, such as amount of food, conditions of
living, friction between infantry and artillery, jealousies between Prus-
sians and Bavarians, what the soldiers read, how often they get
relief, etc.
 (b) Army Intelligence,—through patrols and raids, as well as by
aerial observation, and from prisoners and deserters,—has the answer
to the above question.
 5. (a) Propaganda will want to know the exact character of certain
divisions in certain sectors, e.g., the location of divisions just transferred
from the East Front and probably undermined with Bolsheviki, the
location of Saxon regiments, probably with a big percentage of social-
ists, location of Bavarians, jealous of Prussians, or of Czecho–Slovaks
likely to desert.
 (b) Army Intelligence aims to locate every division in the Ger-
man Army.
 6. (a) Propaganda will want to know of any German army orders
affecting its work. For example, the reported General Army Order to
shoot any soldier caught reading propaganda dropped from the air
might make it advisable to restrict U.S. propaganda to small printed
paper slips, which a soldier could conceal.
 (b) Army Intelligence aims to supply such information.
 7. (a) Propaganda will most of all want to know what treatment is
meted out to its papers in the German trenches.
 (b) Army Intelligence can get some of this information from pris-
oners, from aerial observation and from patrols and raids. It can attempt
to get it from agents in Germany, can have them instructed to look
out for such information.2

 2
 An unknown hand wrote the following addition to this sentence: “+ can put them
in Germany for the purpose of finding out.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 49
 30 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 8. (a) Propaganda will want to know what methods of distribution
work best, aeroplane, trench mortar or patrol, and what new methods
are possible, such as balloons or kites.
 (b) Army Intelligence can make observations and studies of
these problems.
 9. (a) Propaganda will want to know other possibilities of extending
distribution, such as loading printed matter into machines of our Allies
engaged in reconnaissance, fighting or bombing, or such as distribution
by Allied patrols.
 (b) Army Intelligence can get information on this.
 10. (a) Propaganda will want to know what methods have been
tried and discarded; also the principal Teuton tricks, so as to avoid
them.
 (b) Army Intelligence is now making a study of what the Allies
have done in aeroplane propaganda; what methods they still follow,
and what won’t work; also what the Russians are now doing on the
East Front; also what the Teutons have done, especially their successes,
such as the misleading of the Italian Second Army last October.3
 R. H. Van Deman4
 Colonel, General Staff
 Chief, Military Intelligence Section

 3
 Reference is presumably to the Battle of Caporetto, which began on October 24,
1917, and in which the German army advanced rapidly against Italian troops.
 4
 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 50
 World War I 31

14. Telegram From the Embassy in Mexico to the Department of
 State1

 Mexico City, February 18, 1918, 5 p.m.

 790. From Murray to Creel. “I am proceeding in accordance with
instructions February 16th.2 Suggest personal drawing account in lieu
of salary maximum three hundred monthly from February 18th. I have
shown Mooser3 all our correspondence to date. While I am ignorant
of the nature his recommendation as inferred from third and sixth
sentences your cable, am loath at present to indorse ten thousand
monthly or any cumbersome local committee plan. Let us go slowly
until we get our bearings. Emphatically certain that it would be dis-
tinctly injudicious to involve Embassy or Consulate directly or overtly.
Nothing to be gained and disadvantage obvious. Committee’s branch
here should function on its own responsibility, working independently
with close relations with Embassy understood and in coordination
with other friendly bodies to obviate duplication and overlapping, but
always maintaining its supremacy in influence and control. Our work
must be done aggressively, openly, and cleanly with due regard for
dignity and conservatism and a complete avoidance of methods which
would place us on level with German propagandists. I shall investigate
with a view to possible action later expediency of encouraging friendly
newspaper by openly purchasing and using space at regular advertis-
ing rates or otherwise assisting them in reducing their expenses for
paper.”
 Summerlin

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 731, 103.93/
48. No classification marking. Blue. Received February 19 at 1:46 a.m. A handwritten
notation at the top of the telegram reads: “Copy to Creel. Feb 19, 1918. File RBM [?].”
Beneath this notation Patchin wrote: “Copy to Creel + File. PHP.”
 2
 In telegram 771 to Mexico City, February 16, Creel instructed Murray that he was
the “official representative Committee in Mexico and I want you to report on all press
matters and propositions for financial and educational cooperation with various allied
and private committees.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929,
Box 736, 103.9302/40d)
 3
 George Mooser, CPI representative sent to Mexico to take charge of a “film cam-
paign.” (Telegram 755 to Mexico City, February 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/32b)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 51
 32 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Russia to the Department of
 State1

 St. Petersburg, February 19, 1918, 3 p.m.

 2388. For Creel from Sisson. “February 19th. This is in reply to
your open undated cable requesting survey of general situation. My
telegram number 2363, thirteenth instant,2 State Department evidently
had not reached you when you sent message, as it answers some of
your inquiries.
 On future situation, if Germany does not take St. Petersburg, public-
ity work can go on with great ultimate after war advantage to America.
An all Russia distribution for pamphlets is already nearly complete on
large scale. An excellent pamphlet Bullard has just finished writing,
“Letters to a Russian Friend”,3 now on press. News pamphlets and
pamphlet editions various Wilson speeches all feeding out in increasing
volume. Printing plant here that compares well with best in America
relies almost solely on our work and helps enthusiastically. Red, white
and blue bands appear upon Bullard’s pamphlet. Covered distribution
of January eighth message in detail in previous cable. Can add that
German version did get over German line at center and parts of Aus-
trian line, the whole allotment. Speech of February eleventh4 is being
translated into German and Austrian and chief effort will be to get
into Austria. A soldier organization will do the work and the plan
is completed. Distribution should start in a week, fortunes of war
permitting.
 Cable service has got its roots down and its work at both ends is
beginning to please me. Compub cable brought the only copy Presi-

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 731, 103.93/
54. No classification marking. Green. Received on February 24 at 9:17 a.m. Patchin wrote
on the first page of the telegram: “Paraphrase sent to Creel. File. PHP.”
 2
 See footnote 6, Document 9.
 3
 Reference is presumably to Letters of an American Friend. See Complete Report of the
Chairman of the Committee on Public Information, p. 251.
 4
 Wilson’s speech to a joint session of Congress on February 11 assessed Austro-
German peace proposals made in response to his Fourteen Points address of January 8.
Wilson reiterated four points: “each part of the final settlement must be based upon the
essential justice of that particular case and upon such adjustments as are most likely to
bring a peace that will be permanent”; “peoples and provinces are not to be bartered
about from sovereignty to sovereignty as if they were mere chattels and pawns in a
game”; “every territorial settlement involved in this war must be made in the interest
and for the benefit of the populations concerned”; and “all well defined national aspira-
tions shall be accorded the utmost satisfaction that can be accorded them without intro-
ducing new or perpetuating old elements of discord and antagonism that would be
likely in time to break the peace of Europe and consequently of the world.” For the text
of the speech, see Foreign Relations, 1918, Supplement 1, The World War, vol. I, pp. 108–113.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 52
 World War I 33

dent’s last speech into Russia. Newspaper presentation sufficient to
obviate the necessity of bill-posting here. Distribution three hundred
thousand handbills begins in the morning and Moscow will have both
posters and handbills. Except for German and Austrian distribution
am letting Pub as test do this message job without help from me.
 General outlook therefore attractive until you put it to the test of
immediate war utility in a country distracted by civil war and warred
upon from without by a country which it may fight defensively, but
not with any intention of helping the Allies. They are wild international-
ists who not only in the beginning, but until lately, were willing to have
German support for their own ends of revolution. Germany thought she
could direct the storm, but the storm had such intention. No other
country who gives either aid or kindness will fare better. Anything
offered short of military aid will be accepted, and will not count in the
balance against the intended program of agitation in the United States
and among Entente nations. So on strict basis war, utility is lacking
for what the Bolsheviks will do they will do anyhow; but indirectly
America gains by having America all the time presented, and the
President’s influence in the crucial time of future general peace-making
grows largely through a continued Russian drive. I recommend that
the whole news and circulation plan go ahead to the end of the war
or until Russia is at actual peace.
 On meetings and oratory I have probably disappointed you. How
useless they would have been you can not appreciate until I tell you
face to face. Would have liked to have started outspoken Government
owned news paper, but man and mechanical power were both lacking.
Has taken a week, for instance, to get a permit for stringing one electric
wire for projecting machine. It takes me three days to get cash money
from bank. In such sheer unexampled disorganization of business life
it was sounder to let newspapers themselves be disseminators. Bullard
will try out a cartoon poster idea later. Believe you are forwarding
cartoons and posters to him now. If not, do so.
 With film publicity I have preparation and no films. Neither Bern-
stein or Mott party have come, or can come through Finland. Have
figured that I could go out week after Bernstein got here. Supposed
from outset you know as well as we that for nearly a month we have
been cut off from the world except by cable. Government ice breaker
carried out Madam Koloutai5 and body of World Revolutionists day
or so ago, but Finnish war now blocks travel. No couriers. Will come
out earliest possible date.

 5
 Aleksandra Kollontai, Russian feminist and head of the Commissariat for Social
Welfare.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 53
 34 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 Germany any day can unmake most of our plans. She declared
armistice ended noon today and is advancing already toward Revel
and Dvinsk.6 If advance is beyond Revel we will know that Petrograd
will fall in three to five days additional. We will not be here then.
Government, if it survives internal shock, will go to Moscow. Embassies
too. Will in that case send Bullard and group to Moscow, and if cannot
get away to the North will go myself. If silence falls do not worry. We
will be safe. Give my love to family. If Germans do not advance beyond
Revel things may go on as usual, but I think I see the Bolsheviks going
out and worse and faster peace makers coming in. Finally, we will
keep going as if the future were serene. Good luck.”
 Francis

 6
 Peace negotiations (see footnote 3, Document 7) had stalled on February 10, and
the Germans resumed their military attacks on Russia.

16. Editorial Note

 In Switzerland, a dispute arose between Embassy officials and the
Committee on Public Information (CPI) representative in Bern over the
degree to which the latter’s work should be publicly acknowledged.
Vira Whitehouse, CPI Commissioner in Switzerland, argued that she
should be allowed to operate openly as a CPI representative. Writing
to CPI Chairman George Creel on February 8, 1918, she reported that
“I have found on approaching editors of both classes of papers in
Switzerland that such information as your Department furnishes,
developed in the way I have already proposed to you, meets a warm
welcome, especially when connected with an exchange of news.” How-
ever, Whitehouse noted, not all Embassy officials were in accord with
this approach. Specifically citing Secretary of the Embassy in Bern Hugh
Robert Wilson, Whitehouse wrote: “Our main difference of opinion is
that he fears a frank news policy and I am convinced that it will
be great value in view of the basic resemblances between the Swiss
Government and our own and this conviction has been strengthened
by the conversations I have had already with editors and officials. The
other method to my mind resembles too closely that German method
which has brought the word propaganda into disrepute.” (Telegram
2599 from Bern, February 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal
File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/24)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 54
 World War I 35

 For his part, Wilson wrote Creel on the same day that “I feel
that acknowledged Governmental activities in propaganda are highly
inadvisable. Since the beginning of the war German propaganda has
flooded Switzerland to such an extent that public opinion in this coun-
try turns away in a natural reaction from any thing that tends to that
direction.” He continued: “Furthermore I am convinced that one article
written by an editor from conviction of his heart is of more value than
tons of literature and that personal and unofficial relations with editors
to explain America’s views is the best type of propaganda.” He con-
cluded: “I feel that if she were a recognized emissary from the American
Committee on Public Information this would preclude her from reach-
ing such relations with the editors of newspapers.” (Telegram 2600
from Bern, February 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File
1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/25)
 Carl W. Ackerman, a journalist and colleague of Presidential
adviser Colonel Edward House, wrote to House immediately after
Whitehouse and Wilson wrote to the Department, arguing against
Whitehouse’s open work: “Public opinion not influenced by editorials
but by news. German propaganda which is successful is German news
despatches. Our failure here is that little news from America printed.
Result that no one believes American war preparations serious. Eighty-
five percent news despatches concerning America speak of mistakes,
failures, miscalculations, food and coal shortages and of small army.
Perhaps fifteen percent constructive or favorable. Establishment official
bureau here would meet same reception as establishment of Swiss
official bureau at Washington. Everything submitted will be thrown
away. If America thinks its bureau an exception it is mistaken. Swiss
friend just returned from America, writing articles for NEUE
ZURCHER ZEITUNG was instructed by editors to recast some state-
ments favourable to America so as not to antagonize German readers.
Editor stated neutral policy of paper had offended Germans and editor
was informed that unless attitude friendlier coal would be cut off
by Germany.
 “Believe Mrs. Whitehouse can work effectively in certain lines
but American Government should not permit her to open bureau as
instructed. We need not a bureau but despatches distributed through
an American news agency such as Associated Press or United Press.
We must compete with German and Austrian agencies because they,
and not editorials and personality, influence public opinion.” (Telegram
2613 from Bern, February 9; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal
File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/26)
 Creel responded to Whitehouse’s telegram on February 16. He
informed her that James Kerney, CPI representative in Paris, was sched-
uled to arrive in Europe soon and instructed her: “Let your situation

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 55
 36 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

wait until arrival of Kerney and shipments when clear cut decision will
be made. Stop. Original instructions unaltered and President personally
instructed State Department of his approval of our plans but think
wise to wait before establishing office and presenting letters. Stop.
Continue survey and unofficial contacts. Stop.” (Telegram 1506 to Bern,
February 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–
1929, Box 736, 103.9302/40f)
 Whitehouse discussed her perception of this incident in her mem-
oirs, A Year as a Government Agent, pages 208–211, and reprinted rele-
vant documents on pages 289–316.

17. Letter From the Committee on Public Information
 Commissioner in Switzerland (Whitehouse) to the Chairman
 of the Committee on Public Information (Creel)1

 Bern, February 24, 1918

My dear Mr. Creel,
 I at once answered your telegram of February 16th—in which the
chief point was that I was to wait for a clear cut decision and in the
meanwhile continue my “unofficial contact”.2 You cannot realize the
impossibility of what you ask. No one is in Switzerland except for a
definite work. I am asked by everyone why I am here, and if I am to
have any real relations with them I must explain.
 Dr. Schleiken3 the editor of the Freie Zeitung, a man in whom
everyone has the greatest confidence, approves entirely of the manner
in which I propose to conduct our work, if I remain.
 Mr. Haguenin4 of the French Bureau de la Presse, has come to
approve entirely after I explained to him.
 The Legation here is in the hands of Mr. Wilson,5 a young man—
energetic but raw—32 years old, who has not been home for seven

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Correspondence of George
Creel, Box 25, Whitehouse, Vira. No classification marking.
 2
 For Creel’s instructions, in telegram 1506 to Bern, February 16, see Document 16.
Whitehouse’s response is in telegram 2685 from Bern, February 19. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/37)
 3
 Hans Schlieben, editor of Freie Zeitung.
 4
 Émile Haguenin, Director of the Press Bureau at the French Embassy in Bern.
 5
 Hugh Robert Wilson, Secretary of the Embassy in Bern from April 18, 1917.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 56
 World War I 37

years except twice for a few weeks. And a Mr. Allen Dulles,6 a young
man 25 years old, a nephew of Mr. Lansing’s. A nice young man, but
to my mind very ridiculous in his extreme fear of simplicity. He asked
me to come for a conference one day—said he had discovered a way
out of our difficulties which would delight both departments at home.
It was that I was to represent myself as the agent of the Associated
Press, who was here not to give news but to send news back to them!
The fact that it was as much a lie as the women and children fiction7
recommended it strongly to him. Several days ago two envelopes of
feature stuff came for me in the pouch, yesterday he told me they were
there and I could have them if I came for them. He said if the Legation
sent them to me and the hotel people (the porters!) noticed it, they
might take it as a recognition of my official position. Please laugh!
That’s why I am telling you all this silly stuff. I should like to be
Secretary of State for a few months and reorganize the department—
let in some modern daylight.
 These two young men, for instance, are steeped in old traditions
of intrigue and double dealing. The system of our diplomatic service
developes from young men of independent incomes, a class who did
very well doubtless at courts, such as the Russian autocracy and the
Germans used to have, but they do not represent our own democracy.—
One thing about our system which I approve entirely is the appointing
of ministers and of ambassadors from outside the service. Of course
the little secretaries hate it and say it threatens destruction to everything
because the ministers and ambassadors come and ignore a great deal
of the traditional cobwebby musty effects, which seem all important
to the trained diplomat. These diplomats are not American, they are
not democratic, they are not representative, they and their wives often
even make fun of their own country and country people. I spent a
winter at the Hague with the Lloyd Bryces,8 a winter in Berlin with
the Gerards,9 and here I am in intimate daily contact with the Legation
here—and I think it is time to bring our diplomatic service abreast

 6
 Allen Welsh Dulles, Second Secretary of the Embassy in Bern from April 18, 1917.
 7
 In telegram 1379 to Bern, January 22, Acting Secretary of State Polk informed the
Embassy that Whitehouse had been appointed “for the purpose of studying conditions
relation [relating] to women and children” and that “It is not now and never has been
the policy of the United States to conduct persuasive activities in any foreign country.
It relies entirely upon frank and open presentation of its aims and objects, and the secret
and corrupt methods of its enemies have never been attempted and will not be.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 736, 103.9302/12)
 8
 Lloyd Stephens Bryce, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the
Netherlands from November 16, 1911, until September 10, 1913.
 9
 James Watson Gerard, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Germany
from October 29, 1913, until the United States and Germany broke diplomatic relations
on February 3, 1917.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 57
 38 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

with the times! There, I am doing again what you told me not to, I am
behaving like a statesman and not like a press representative. When
you are President, please make me Secretary of State; I KNOW I could
do it.
 To get back to business:
 FREIE ZEITUNG. The Legation is all excited over the attacks by
the Germanaphile Swiss press on the Freie Zeitung because of the
statement contained in literature dropped by aeroplanes in Germany
that “we” are supporting and aiding the German liberals in Switzer-
land. If the members of the Legation had ever been in a political
campaign they would not lose their poise so completely over every
attack of the enemy—Dr. Schlieken takes it very calmly—just as I used
to take MRS LANSING’S10 and Mrs Wadsworth’s11 attacks on me—
as a pacifist! because I worked for suffrage in war times.
 The point of the difficulty is this: That the Swiss have already tried
once to suppress the Freie Zeitung on the ground that its opposition
to the German government was against their neutrality laws—At that
time a newspaper protest came from America against a democracy like
Switzerland suppressing a paper simply because it urged democracy
in Germany. It is feared that if these assertions (about our support)
are continued, a new attack might be made against the Freie Zeitung
on the ground that it is not a sincere expression of German Democracy,
but a subsidized attempt at propaganda on our part. Dr. Schlieken
thought it would be just as well if these assertions were not repeated,
hence I mentioned it in my cable of February 22nd. I said in the cable
Feb 19th that I would assume the responsibility of taking an office.12
The condition here about rooms and offices is worse here than in
Washington, because there at least you can bribe people to rent their
houses and offices. Here the Swiss who have lived through generations
in the same rooms won’t even be bribed. Ever since I have been here
I have been agitating and advertising for an office—at last I found a
dark little hole of four rooms I could have beginning May 1st, but one
of the rooms I could have at once. Then Wilson and I sent our telegram,
and I waited until your answer came. I assumed the responsibility of
taking the office—I went to get the one room—but in the meantime,
it had been taken, and as yet I have found nothing.

 10
 Eleanor Foster Lansing, wife of Secretary of State Lansing and opponent of
suffrage for women.
 11
 Alice Hay Wadsworth, wife of Senator James Wadsworth (R–New York) and
opponent of suffrage for women.
 12
 Neither the February 22 nor the February 19 cable was found.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 58
 World War I 39

 It will take, of course, an endless time to have a telephone put in,
and I am keen to be all ready to start work when the “clear cut” decision
comes. If it is against us, doubtless I can get rid of the office.
 In the meantime, the films and your operator will arrive and we
will have NOWHERE to show the films—no use to make of them
because you have never answered my cables about the Cinema Co—
and the necessary capital. And every day the Germans are buying up
more and more of the businesses. Do you understand that when I say
“BUY” I do not mean buy the buildings but the business, good-will,
fixtures, and LICENSES, which is important because the government
will not issue more licenses and I am prevented of course from even
approaching them on the subject.
 I feel confident of being able to do this work better than any one
here. I am sure I am of a higher order of intelligence and my experience
is so much wider than theirs—and that’s not saying very much. You
remember when I left I was full of distrust of my own ability. If the
decision is in our favor and it is possible for me to undertake the work
at all, I should like to get the work started and well organized—because
I see HOW to do it—and then I want you to find someone to take my
place if the war continues. I say that because I think there is a limit to
what can be accomplished in a little spot like this and I want to do
more fundamental work! I would feel I was helping more at home
agitating against some of the things that will be happening in our
own city.
 Has Mr. Aubert spoken to you of a Monsieur Godard? He is
the man who has charge of communicating with the French Commis-
sion in Washington. He has been here only a little longer than I. I
asked him what struck him most in the situation and he said it
was the smallness of the group here whose opinions count. He put
it at 200 men, for the whole of Switzerland including both factions,
pro-ally and pro-German, also foreigners, as well as Swiss—I was
struck by the same thing and have already written to you about
it—and the way these men gossip! Rappard is the gossipiest of
them all—
 The French Bureau de la Presse have at last taken me into their
very center—Haguenin has discovered that I can be helpful—I can
gain for him and myself an entree into any group through the women
because they all know who I am and are eager to see me and meet
me! Haguenin has been here for two years and at least has information
of great value.
 I spoke to Dr. Schlieben who has become a close friend of mine
about Mr. Waltiers (English agent) view of the French Maison de la
Presse as a huge fraud. Dr. Schlieben thinks that the Paris division is
no good—and the Swiss Division good only for its translations and

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 59
 40 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

analysis of the German press. I am sending you a copy of his report.
If I have an office here later would you like me to have this report of
theirs translated into English and abbreviated for your information?
Please answer this question. I can do it easily—if we continue!
 Yours sincerely,
 Vera B. Whitehouse13

P.S.
 Mr. Wilson told me last week that the Cable News, he thought,
had ceased coming. He said he would find out and let me know. He
has never done so. There is certainly no sign of it in any of the papers.
These papers reprint American news from London and Paris papers
showing how keen they are for it.
 This morning I very subtly (!) asked Mr. Dulles about the Cable
News and he says it is coming but does not know what use is made
of it! There is a fat round-faced boy here—a kind of attache called
*Day, who I think is supposed to do the translating. Perhaps he tries
his hand at the news when he has nothing else to do. He is only about
20 or 21, and I am confident has no sense of news values. The whole
legation is poisoned by antagonism to your department—Do you know
that? It seems that it must come from instructions or lack of instructions
from Washington.
 Frank Polk has been gossiping about me. Normie14 writes me please
to come home at once. He said he is told that Frank Polk says I sent
a furious cable to the State Department. I think he must be referring
to the first cable I sent to you protesting against “the women and
children” and saying I could not work under false pretenses.15 Anyway
Normie is much wrought up over my having “lost my temper” as he
says in a cable to the State Department, but does understand that there
must have been some provocation.
 I may tell you that every member of the Legation still says I am
here for women and children; although I have written to Wilson and
suggested that he would say nothing but refer people who enquire
to me.

 13
 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
 14
 Norman de R. Whitehouse, her husband.
 15
 See Document 16.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 60
 World War I 41

 *Day’s chief claim to distinction is that he is a nephew of Frank
Brown who “they” (the Legation people) tell you with bated breath is
president or vice-president of some bank! I knew him and think little
of him.16

 16
 There is additional documentation on the conflict between Whitehouse and
Embassy officials in Bern in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–
1929, Box 736, 103.9302. Whitehouse left Switzerland in March, but returned later in the
year. (A Year as a Government Agent, pp. 89–90, 106) On May 23, President Wilson wrote to
Lansing: “I have always regretted Mrs. Whitehouse’s return from Switzerland and the
misunderstanding of her and of her purposes on the part of our Minister there.” He
continued: “She is going to work there in a perfectly open way, not as a diplomatic
representative of course, but as one representing the Committee on Public Information,
and acting with my approval, and she is going to act again.” (Library of Congress, Papers
of Woodrow Wilson, Series 3: Letterbooks, 1913–1921, Reel 155, Vol. 50, 1918 May 6–29)

18. Letter From the Director of the Foreign Section, Committee
 on Public Information (Irwin) to the Committee on Public
 Information Commissioner in France (Kerney)1

 Washington, March 19, 1918

Dear Mr. Kerney:
 I have taken charge of the work of foreign propaganda, vice Com-
missioner Woods resigned. Mr. Hugh Gibson, as you doubtless already
know, is on his way to Paris via London. He will doubtless see you
and put you in touch with our plans. I cabled you today asking you
to report on progress and to tell me what you thought should be done.2
We are prepared greatly to expand the French work, and I shall very
shortly be sending you assistance. In the meantime, a great deal of
assistance can probably be picked up in Paris. I know the French better

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables, Reports,
and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr.
1919, Box 8, Kerney—Corres. March–July 1918. No classification marking. The letter was
sent to Kerney in care of the Embassy in Paris.
 2
 Telegram 3339 to Paris, March 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal
File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/91c)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 61
 42 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

than any other European people in this war, and so can perhaps do a
little judging on the situation, myself.
 In the first place, I am of the opinion that printed propaganda has
worn itself out a little in all countries, and that word of mouth stuff
is infinitely more valuable. I also know that the French are great on
conferences, and that public lecturers are excellent propagandists. Much
was done in an organized way last winter by such speakers as Herbert
Adams Gibbons.3 I think you should do all you can to organize the
Americans capable of making an acceptable speech in French language,
and sending them forth with the general ideas which we wish to
implant. This work is much better done by perhaps Americans than
by Frenchmen, provided the Americans can speak the language accept-
ably. If you are going heavily into that department please let me know,
because I think I can send you a few people from here.
 If I were you, I should avoid the mistake of allowing myself to be
closely connected with what we call “the ex-patriot bunch” in Paris.
These people look to Paris society and the French Official class for
their social sanctions, and are no more in touch with the real people
of France than a foreigner who had invaded New York society would
be in touch with the real people of America. Too much has been done
perhaps with the upper classes of the French and not nearly enough
with the people in general. Just before I left France in February, I took
a trip through the South in order to find what the people were thinking
and talking about, as regards America. I found that the German whis-
pering propaganda has been busy down there, and that nothing had
been done among them to controvert the idea that we are money
grabbing people who entered the war to prevent financial panic, who
are loaning funds to Europe at luxurious interest, and who, when the
allied nations are exhausted, will come over and collect on the mortgage
with fresh armies. As you have probably perceived by now, Europe
is getting very radical, and what is whispered among the submerged
classes today may be the dominant thought of the governing classes
tomorrow, so even in friendly France we cannot overlook the working
and peasant classes.
 Here is the thing upon which I suggest immediate action: In think-
ing over this matter of propaganda. I realize that the most effective
propaganda done in America during the period of our neutrality, was
done by prominent newspaper and magazine writers for our American
publications, who went to Europe, took one side or the other, came
back and wrote about it. A statement from Clemenceau, Maeterlinck,4

 3
 U.S. journalist.
 4
 Maurice Maeterlinck, Belgian author.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 62
 World War I 43

or Anatole France5 did not have nearly so much influence as a magazine
article by William Hard,6 Irvin Cobb7 or Richard Harding Davis.8 These
Americans had their own following among our magazine or newspaper
readers and talked our own intellectual language as the Europeans did
not. Now, I want to encourage star French journalists and literary men
to come to America and write us up. One problem confronts us there.
The European publications are run on a very much more narrow margin
of expenses than the American and cannot afford to pay huge expense
accounts as ours can. It may be necessary for us to offer to pay their
expenses. I dislike to do this for two reasons—first our money is some-
what limited in proportion to the job we have to do, and second this
method might be criticised. But, after all it is not really illegitimate,
and the main thing is to get the men here. If you can arrange for such
men, the more eminent the better, to visit America, we will arrange at
this end to have them taken in hand, given a good time and shown
everything.
 This is about the organization that I have suggested for most of
the European nations. We will have to modify it sometimes to suit
individual circumstances. First, the Director, second one or two expert
newspaper men or professional publicity agents; third, a bureau of
speakers in which should be included someone to take charge of distri-
bution and use of moving picture films; fourth, one or two first rate
American advertising men; at least one person whose job it is to travel
through the country and gather information for our use; about what
the people are saying about us with a view to ascertaining what our
needs are in the way of propaganda.
 Item four may strike you as curious. It is, in fact, one of my hobbies.
I have been watching both British and French propaganda. They are
both rather inept because these people are a generation behind us in
the advertising game. We invented and developed it, and we are the
only people, except the Germans, who have been trained to be experts
on psychology. I want to send over to Europe and use there, the kind
of American advertising man who has the priceless jewel of originality
in him—who will think of the thing that no one else will think of. Of
course, I should want his work gone over and experted by those who
better understand the people, in order to prevent his making a mistake.
Please do not understand this idea in its narrow sense. I do not want
a man to write American advertising. I want one to think of the thing
that no one else thought of before in the way of influencing people.

 5
 French author.
 6
 U.S. journalist.
 7
 U.S. author.
 8
 U.S. journalist.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 63
 44 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 Since you are new to France and do not, I understand, speak the
French language, I should suggest that you make connections with
someone who really understands the people and that you talk most
of your plans over with him and be guided by his advice. The French
are a people of great intelligence, as you know, but of various mental
peculiarities; methods that go great with us, frequently fall down abso-
lutely with them and vice versa. Moreover, in no other country of
Europe except Spain, is it so easy for the well intentioned outsider to
give offense to his public.
 Hugh Gibson will doubtless talk over our plans more fully when
he arrives.
 Wishing you every success in the job, I remain,
 Very sincerely yours,9

 9
 Printed from an unsigned copy.

19. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of
 State1

 Paris, April 2, 1918, 6 p.m.

 3502. For Compub from Palmer. Pershings offer unreserved assist-
ance against German offensive wholly sufficient.2 Encouragement to
Allies and our fighting will continue to strengthen Allied morale.
Strongly suggest concentration educational facts on enemy country
immediately. German soldiers and people begin to feel effect of heavy
casualties and failure of offensive. Gibson who is making remarkable
progress and thoroughly familiar European methods, should, I think,
be given authority and support to direct this work in cooperation with

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/
121. No classification marking. Blue. Received at 11 p.m. Patchin wrote at the top of the
telegram: “Copied to Creel Apl. 3, 1918. File. PHP.”
 2
 On March 28, Pershing visited General Ferdinand Foch, who had been named
Supreme Commander of the Allied Armies, and “placed at his disposal the whole
resources of the American Army for employment in the battle now in progress.” (“Persh-
ing Offers Army for Great Battle,” New York Times, March 30, 1918, p. 3) On March 21,
the Germans had launched a series of attacks along the Western Front.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 64
 World War I 45

Kerney with whom he has established cordial working relations. Work
would include two methods; first; use of airplane, trench guns, and
other army methods to reach German trenches; and second; through
Switzerland and Holland across frontier through socialist and other
sympathetic agencies to reach to people with reference to Presidential
message3 and appeals in keeping with his ideals and policies. As no
German soldier is allowed to possess, with his officers knowledge, any
literature of this sort it is important that matter be printed on small
sheets which can be compressed into pellet form for firing from guns,
dropping from planes, or private distribution in Germany. Important
that there be several of appeals that can be repeated and passed around
as element of time is vital and action may be necessary on short notice.
Advisable that printing be done here and that we write appeals aside
from keeping strictly to lines you laid down. In Switzerland, which
Gibson will visit before proceeding Rome, he will get further informa-
tion as to methods of distribution.
 Sharp

 3
 Presumably Wilson’s Fourteen Points; see footnote 4, Document 7.

20. Editorial Note

 One method of distributing publications in enemy territory pur-
sued by the Committee on Public Information (CPI) was the use of
balloons. On April 18, 1918, Director of the CPI Foreign Section Will
Irwin sent a telegram to Hugh Gibson, First Secretary at the Embassy
in Paris: “Have invention here which is great improvement on anything
formerly devised for getting literature to civilian population of Ger-
many. Consists of balloon about nine feet in diameter carrying appara-
tus which will hold ten thousand quarter size leaflets and feed them
separately on principle of automatic feed of printing press at rate of
12 or 24 per minute. Has bomb attachment which will destroy apparatus
when last leaflet is fed. Such a balloon with average wind currents
would have touring range of between five and seven hundred miles
and could therefore easily reach Prussia. Rises to about two and one
half miles and could therefore take advantage of the stable upper air
currents. Clock arrangement enables starter to make it begin feeding
at any time he desires after rising. Works perfectly on the ground but

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 65
 46 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

are going to have it tested soon as possible in actual flight. Apparatus
including balloon will probably cost about one hundred dollars apiece
making cost of distributing leaflets one dollar per thousand.” (Telegram
3601 from Paris, April 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal
File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/183s)
 On May 7, Irwin sent a telegram to CPI Commissioner in France
James Kerney in Paris: “Preparing to manufacture carriers for distribut-
ing balloon and question arises whether sheets of eight and half by
fourteen inches or nine by twelve inches are more easily and economi-
cally cut in France. Please see some practical French printer or book
binder and wire answer.” (Telegram 3910 to Paris, May 7; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/261j)
 Kerney sent a telegram on June 15 that confirmed the use of aerial
methods for distributing information: “Rifle grenades for shooting
propaganda into enemy trenches being used by our army as well as
French at every possible opportunity. Paper balloons also being used
for civilian propaganda. Other methods under experiment.” (Telegram
4219 from Paris, June 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal
File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/400)
 On July 22, Kerney sent another telegram from Paris reporting that
French, British, and Belgian representatives were “anxious to have
Americans assume distribution of material to be sent by balloon into
interior of Germany which is feasible because of our location at front.”
(Telegram 4541 from Paris, July 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 733, 103.93/537)

21. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
 Department of State1

 London, April 24, 1918, 6 p.m.

 9694. “For Creel from Sisson. April 24. Trust that London News
distribution center is not to be left even temporarily vacant when
Suydam returns to Holland. If Russell is coming he will need an active
and intelligent desk man for this place of work. London is natural
clearing house for distribution and utilization. Reuters has one marked
similarity to use of Westnik in Russia, the need of having material

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/
195. No classification marking. Blue. Received April 25 at 3:07 a.m. Patchin wrote at the
top of the telegram: “Copied to Creel + Irwin Apr 26, 1918. File. PHP.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 66
 World War I 47

rearranged for it here after initial receipt. One man must work inside
the Reuter machinery. Suydam has done this well for last fortnight.
Material coming by cable from New York does not yet measure up, it
is too long and too obvious, facts should be built up so that the reader
gets his own opinion, not sign posted with the opinion desired to be
conveyed, the sound rule of not handicapping fact stuff with edifying
opinion should be followed. In future American doings and plans
should be discounted for Continental use for awhile. Accounts of deeds
are the thing. The statement that one new ship was added to tonnage
today will get wider publicity than the plan for a thousand in six
months. Should not one news man be stationed at army headquarters
in France to wire direct to London, looks so to me, if you are to have
a working machine. Am leaving Friday”.2
 Page

 2
 April 26.

22. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of
 State1

 Rome, April 30, 1918, 9 p.m.

 1558. For Irwin from Gibson. Following plan of activities in Italy
submitted for your consideration. Our purpose should be to:—
 One: Improve morale of Italian people of all classes.
 Two: Counteract effects of German propaganda which is being
done effectively through various channels.
 Three: Counter attacks on German campaign of misrepresentation
concerning the United States its aims and preparations.
 Four: Keep the Italian people impressed with our great and rapidly
increasing resources and our determination to aid Italy in every possi-
ble way.

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 732, 103.93/
221. No classification marking. Green. Received May 2 at 8:15 p.m. Patchin wrote on
the first page: “Para[phrase] sent over. File. PHP.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 67
 48 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 Five: Spread understanding of the liberal ideas for which we are
fighting with a view, not only to maintaining public opinion enthusiasm
but also to strengthen intelligent public opinion so that it will resist
reactionary tendencies.
 The means we have at our disposal to accomplish these ends are:
 One: There should be made accessible to all the people good transla-
tions of the President’s utterances bearing on the war. These should
be put out so far as possible under the names of Italians prominent in
different ways with varying comment for the enlightenment of different
classes. The people hold the President in deep reverence and a compre-
hensive campaign for the spread of his ideals and purposes would be
effective and of inconsiderable cost. Material should be furnished to
writers and speakers on American war aims as set forth in the Presi-
dent’s speeches. One of the reasons for lack of popular enthusiasm
seems to be that there has not been enough appeal to democratic ideals.
 Two: Moving picture campaign which should be undertaken at
once and on large scale. Poorer and more ignorant classes who are
most dangerously infected with anti-war spirit are not always to be
reached through press or pamphlets campaigns but show deep (#)2 in
American films. Believe picture campaign will show more results here
than in France and that effort should be concentrated here. In a small
way good effects have been secured from small supply of films
already furnished.
 Three: The Press campaign is relatively simple here and can be
handled on established lines. Italian papers show more interest in
American news and articles than either French or Swiss papers and
committee has secured gratifying amount of space. There should be
organized in the United States a campaign of letters written by Italians
to their friends and families in this country telling of the war spirit of
America, the feeling for Italy, the privations in food and other necessi-
ties that Americans are willingly accepting so that the Allies can be
supplied. The more ignorant classes will place more credence in such
letters than in printed information.
 Five: Speakers Bureau should be strengthened and enlarged. La
Guardia3 has done good work but there should be a number of other
Italian speaking Americans traveling constantly about the country talk-
ing about America and its aims. Good Italian speaking manager for
the Bureau should be sent at once.

 2
 As in the original. Presumably it signifies an omission or garbled text in the
transmission from Rome.
 3
 Fiorello LaGuardia, who was elected to Congress in 1916 (R–New York), took
leave during World War I to serve in the Army Air Service. He commanded the U.S.
air forces on the Italian-Austrian front.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 68
 World War I 49

 Six: Commercial propaganda, Red Cross activities, visits of Italian
correspondents, and public men to our bases and front in France, still
pictures and such other that as may suggest themselves from time
to time.
 The organization at Rome alone will not be able to handle the
situation properly. There should be active sub centers at Milan, Turin,
Florence, Genoa and Naples, some of them under direction of our
Consular officers and some under especially assigned men; also repre-
sentatives at Padua for propaganda in enemy countries. The problems
presented at these different places are quite varied and need close and
constant supervision. Consul at Milan has done good work mostly at
his own expense. Other districts neglected except as their needs could
be understood and attended to from Rome.
 Situation here is undoubtedly fraught with grave danger which
may readily lead to another disaster. This situation demands an imme-
diate and energetic campaign of education. We are in a particularly
advantageous position to undertake it as there seems to be more confi-
dence here in the power and honesty of the President than in any
of the Allies. Ten thousand dollars a month should be considered a
minimum for effective work in Italy and it should be made available
at once so that our people can go to work and get results. Time is the
vital element and a decision one way or the other should be taken at
once; a month from now it may be too late. We must be prepared
to spend money as the situation requires in such a critical situation,
inadequate resources are hardly worth applying.
 We have an earnest and competent crowd here and they should
be given full support if we are to do anything worth while. Foregoing
is substance of plan agreed upon in full conference with them.
 Nelson Page

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 69
 50 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

23. Report Prepared in the Military Intelligence Branch,
 Department of War General Staff1

 Washington

 [Omitted here are a cover sheet and table of contents.]
 COSTA RICA
I. OBJECTIVES.
 Costa Rica is the egg nearest decomposition in a basket where the
explosion of one would set off four other bad eggs. Any stench raised
in Central America would divert slightly our military resources but
might seriously cloud the political horizon. America’s political offen-
sive against Germany would suffer if forced intervention in Central
America made the whole Latin American continent fearful of the United
States and gave Germany the chance to raise a cry of “Yankee
imperialism.”
 [Omitted here is Part II, “Controlling Factors.”]
III. PROPAGANDA STATUS.
 German Propagandists are numerous and powerful in Costa Rica
and their close association with political plotters has been indicated
above. Their object is the obvious one, pilloried by President Wilson,
to create disturbance to divert United States energies. In this case
they work for the definite end of forcing the kind of United States
intervention which would invite the cry of “Yankee Imperialism” and
give Berlin a talking point against the American war aims.
 They probably hope to have disturbances serious enough to cause
real embarrassment to our military affairs.
 There are indications that German wireless stations are concealed
in Costa Rica. The trail of Germans who have been making maps and
surveying strategic positions has been picked up in Costa Rica in more
than one place. A startling example of the mysterious speed with which
isolated German colonists, three days’ ride from the sea coast, have
received European war news ahead of those on the coast at the cable
ends, was recorded last November when the Germans of the interior
told an American mahogany buyer the news of the Italian defeat before
those who got only cable news had learned of it. It was believed that

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 133, Manuals Giving Psychological Esti-
mates of Foreign Countries, Prepared by the Military Intelligence Branch of the General
Staff, Feb.–June 1918, Costa Rica Psychologic Estimate. No classification marking. There
are two typewritten dates on the first page of the report: February 27, 1918, and May
1, 1918.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 70
 World War I 51

a wireless station in Costa Rica was a great aid to von Spee’s2 operations
in the Pacific.
 Under the Episcopacy of Bishop Johann Gaspard Stork3 of San Jose
the number of German subjects as priests or members of the seminary
has more than quadrupled. They are scattered throughout the country
and certainly are used for the transmission of information besides
talking German propaganda under the mantle of religion.
 The “Nueva Era” is a four-page daily published in San Jose by
Bishop Stork. Its circulation is small but articles from it are sometimes
reproduced by the provincial papers. It is violently anti-American and
strictly “neutral”, i.e. pro-German.
 Types of ‘neutral’ articles are:
 a. Defense of Germans:

 1. how badly they are treated—trade cut off.
 2. they are lied about and represented as anarchists.
 3. how splendidly they are as individuals: von Hertling4 a glory
of Catholicism.
 b. Wicked Allies:

 1. won’t make peace when the Pope asks them to.
 2. perfidous England, etc.,
 3. they control the cables and send them out falsely.
 4. they practice “frightfulness” themselves, e.g. throwing bombs
on Jerusalem.
 Types of anti-American articles are:

 a. American imperialism, e.g. the invasion of the “Latin American
Republic” of Haiti.5
 b. Hypocrisy of the Monroe Doctrine.6

 2
 Maximilian von Spee, German admiral killed at the Battle of the Falkland Islands,
December 8, 1914.
 3
 Bishop Juan Gaspar Stork.
 4
 Georg von Hertling, German Chancellor.
 5
 In 1915, President Wilson sent the Marines to Haiti in an effort to restore stability
after the assassination of Haitian President Jean Vilbrun Guillaume Sam. U.S. military
forces did not completely withdraw from Haiti until 1934.
 6
 In his December 2, 1823, message to Congress, President James Monroe outlined
a foreign policy that declared that, while the United States would not interfere with
European affairs and recognized existing European colonies in the Western Hemisphere,
it would not tolerate further attempts by Europeans to exert control over territories in
the Western Hemisphere.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 71
 52 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 c. America is the arch-hypocrite and oppressor of small countries,
won’t allow American Union,7 etc.
 Many pro-German propaganda newspapers have been shipped
into Costa Rica from Barcelona, Spain. On October 30th one printed a
telegram from Nauen commenting on the shooting of Mata Hari, and
adding, “She was shot by the very government which once acclaimed
Miss Cavill, an English spy, who confessed her guilt.”8
 On November 3rd one of these papers published the statement,
“The Yankee treasury has loaned the Italians $230,000,000 for purchases
in America.—American aid—to herself.”
 On November 6th a paper by a Venezuelan was published lauding
German achievements in all fields and ridiculing calling such
“barbarians.”
 November 4th this paper sketched the defeat of Italy “abandoned
by her allies.”
 The following Spanish newspapers have been sent from Barcelona
to Costa Rican addresses: “El Tiempo”, “El Debate”, “La Tribuna” and
“El Iris de Paz”. All are pro-German.
 Juan Kumpel’s “La Guerra” has been sent to all South American
countries, a German distributor in Chile estimating the number of such
pamphlets circulated by him as 125,000.
 Spain constantly tries to send into Costa Rica translations of Ger-
man war books notably “Germany and the European War” written
by Delbrueck, Treitschke,9 and a dozen other German professors and
officials, giving the usual German justifications and onslaughts on
England, France and America.
 From Mexico a steady stream of propaganda flows into Costa Rica
from the “Informaciones Alemanas”. The following is a sample list of
pamphlets in a single package intercepted in the mails:

“El Vampiro del Continente” Author Count Reventlow
“El General Mar le Von “ Oscar Boer
 Hindenburg”

 7
 Reference is presumably to the Pan American movement, a series of conferences
of Latin American states which began during the 19th century. At these conferences,
Latin American countries pushed for an “American” understanding of international law
which promoted non-intervention in a country’s affairs, hoping to blunt U.S. influence
in the region.
 8
 Mata Hari (born Margaretha Zelle), a dancer executed by the French in 1917 on
charges of espionage. Edith Cavell, a British nurse executed by the Germans in 1915 for
helping Allied soldiers escape German-occupied Belgium.
 9
 Hans Delbrück and Heinrich von Treitschke, German historians.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 72
 World War I 53

“El Coalicion Contra la “ P. de Cordoba
 Argentina”
“El Problema Submarino” “ Emilo Huidobro
“La Dominacion Britanica en las “ W.J. Bryan
 Indes”
“La Protection al obreo an “ Roberto Schmidt
 Alemania”
“El Mowe” “ Conde de Dohna
 Schlodien
“De Kameron Hasta la Trinchera “ M. Kirsch
 Alemana”
“Grammar of the German published by Otto Ruppert.
 Language”

 In sum, the list of known Germans and anti-Americans now at
work in Costa Rica is upward of three hundred. The list of publications
sent in and out of Costa Rica in every direction is now over fifty.
 The American answers are obvious, indicated by the character of
the German attack.
 The principal feature of the situation at present is the prevalence
of German agents and German reading matter in contrast to the lack
of American news, American books, American films and American
agents.
IV. AMERICAN PROGRAM.
 1. Costa Rica now the key to Central America.
 The need for American use of psychologic influence is indicated
by the political situation and is emphasized by the very active pro-
German propaganda existent there. Moreover the American embargo
needs explanation to Costa Ricans.10
 The opportunity is indicated by the high percentage of Costa Rican
literacy and by the rather friendly attitude to the United States.
 The prospect for the immediate future is confined to the sending of
news dispatches but later there can be added special articles for the
papers and magazines, pamphlets, moving pictures and the active aid
of Americans resident in San Jose, etc.,
 2. Summary of Factors to be kept in mind.
 In general Guatemala is the most pro-American state in Central
America. Costa Rica is next. Nicaragua is the most anti-American,

 10
 In October 1917, the United States passed the Trading with the Enemy Act, which
restricted trade with enemies during times of war.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 73
 54 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

therefore pro-German. Salvador is pro-German because of German
capital. Honduras is pro-Mexican.
 The merchant class is the chief power in Costa Rica. There are no
big commercial houses representing the United States. The United Fruit
Company, far and away the most powerful concern in Costa Rica,
owning more land than any one except the government, is British in
the eyes of the people, since its ships sail under the British flag though
its capital is American. The British embargo on coffee, Costa Rica’s
chief export, has caused some feeling against Britain.
 Germany has the Hamburg-American Line offices, owns most of
the coffee plantations and has fifteen large wholesale houses in San
Jose. Consequently there is a strong pro-German colony, many of whose
members are married to Costa Ricans.
 The only real enthusiasms felt for any foreign country are for
France. Costa Rican higher education is mostly in Paris.
 One other economic fact should be kept in mind by American
psychologists. Inasmuch as the middle class is poor and as there is
absolutely no work for girls in Costa Rica prostitution is very wide-
spread. There are not more than forty girls holding jobs in San Jose
and women look upon these as degraded in comparison with the
prostitutes.
 The ever present factor is that Costa Ricans, even those most friendly
to the United States, have always shown signs of fear lest the United
States government should have designs on the country. This persistent
apprehension is the underlying factor in all Latin American countries
and just now is being continuously harped on by pro-German propa-
gandists’ cries of “the ogre in the North” and “the vulture casting
longing eyes on all Latin Republics.”
 As regards publicity, billboards, pamphlets and handbills are exten-
sively used to influence public opinion. Movies are popular and are a
great medium of advertising. Newspapers are important, uncensored
and widely read. The chief papers are “El Tiempo”, Port Limon (English
and Spanish); “El Heraldo de Atlantico” (Spanish weekly) Port Limon;
“L’Informacion” (Spanish daily) reaches all classes, San Jose; “La
Republica” (Spanish daily) San Jose; “El Noticiero” (Spanish daily) San
Jose; “La Prensa Libre” (Spanish daily) San Jose.
 3. Dont’s for American psychologists as obtained from students of
Costa Rica are:
 (1) Don’t brag. The Latin American is sick of hearing how big the
United States is. It is what he fears most. Let him infer how powerful
the United States is, don’t rub it in directly.
 (2) Don’t represent the United States as perfect, or Americans as
thinking themselves superior to every other race. Better say that the

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 74
 World War I 55

United States has big faults but is struggling ahead faster and more
democratically than any other nation.
 (3) Don’t threaten. The Latin American is intensely proud. Flattery
appeals to him, with understanding of his difficulties and eternal
expression of personal solicitude for him.
 (4) Don’t say “Americans and America”. Say the “United States.”
Latin Americans resent describing the United States as the whole of
America.
 4. Things to emphasize are:
 (1) United States war preparations, their efficiency, thoroughness
and speed.
 (2) United States unity and determination to win a just peace.
 (3) The anti-imperialistic war aims of the United States as declared
by President Wilson, but guard against representing Wilson as a dicta-
tor, ambitious to dominate the war and the world.
 (4) America’s intervention makes Allied victory certain. German
propagandists’ great cry in Latin America is “Alemania vencera”, “Ger-
many will win”.
 (5) United States traditional friendliness for Republics. Emphasize
any honor shown in the United States to South American visitors,
writers and artists.
 (6) The passing of the bumptious American globe trotter and the
tricky American salesman. Tell of the reform in United States ideals
of business and the new determination to please Latin American busi-
ness men.
 (7) America’s changing attitude toward labor and new curb on
corporations which exploited workers in the United States just as in
Latin American countries.
 Open and above-board direct education, will have its hardest sledding
in Latin America where indirection, flowery courtesy, flattery and
“palaver” are indispensable.
 5. The three general principles laid down for American psychologic
efforts, however, are just as valid here as any where, viz:
 (1) The United States is in this war for ten years if need be.
 (2) The United States will make peace any day, on democratic anti-
imperialistic terms.
 (3) The United States is feeling the world-wide impetus toward
reform, is changing rapidly and is ending some of the very abuses
which hit her neighbors hardest.
 Calm, courteous, confident reiteration of the fact that the United
States can not lose the war will carry furthest and deepest.
 6. What Can Be Done Now.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 75
 56 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 The steady feeding of daily news dispatches to Costa Rican papers
and to papers in nearby countries for reprint in Costa Rica can be
extended at once.
 7. What Can Be Done In The Future.
 Besides daily news dispatches, special articles can be mailed as soon
as distributing agents are arranged for. The forwarding of American
newspapers and magazines in quantity to clubs and libraries is
really important.
 Special articles can be mailed from the Foreign Press Bureau for
Costa Rican papers and magazines. Reprints of articles in United States
papers praising Latin America are extremely powerful.
 Pamphlets, in Spanish, of United States war aims are influential.
Pamphlets explaining the United States embargo are especially needed.
 Moving pictures are popular and influential. Besides films which
the United States government can send, several film agencies sell to
Latin America and their sales to Costa Rica can be especially adapted.
The subjects outlined above can be filmed, together with general educa-
tional pictures of United States’ scenery, industries, personalities, etc.
 Americans living in Costa Rica could easily be utilized for psychol-
ogic influence of the most penetrating kind by an agent sent directly
to them.

24. Editorial Note

 On June 25, 1918, Consul John Silliman in Guadalajara, Mexico,
forwarded to Director of the Foreign Section of the Committee on
Public Information Will Irwin several photographs of the reading room
“being well supplied” by the Committee on Public Information Com-
missioner in Mexico City, Robert H. Murray. The photographs are
available in the Online Supplement, Appendices A.1–A.4. These photo-
graphs illustrate the types of window displays created for passers-by,
as well as rooms stocked with literature and posters supporting the
war effort. (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence,
Cables, Reports, and Newspapers Received from Employees of the
Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr. 1919, Box 14, Murray—Corres—
March–June 1918) In Mexico, reading rooms were also established in
Mexico City, Vera Cruz, Aguascalientes, Leon, Durango, and Irapuato.
(Complete Report of the Chairman of the Committee on Public Information,
page 162)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 76
 World War I 57

25. Letter From the Committee on Public Information
 Commissioner in France (Kerney) to the Chairman of the
 Committee on Public Information(Creel)1

 Paris, June 28, 1918

My dear George:
 I suppose we all of us get credit for a lot of things that we don’t
have so much to do with. I know I got a great deal of glory out of
“America’s Answer to the Hun” that really belongs to E.B. Hatrick and
C.J. Hubbell.2 It is easily the best piece of propaganda that we have
had in Europe, and I am certain that you will find it of untold value
in America.
 They have many times risked their lives, and their deeds of daring
have attracted the widest attention in the army. They were the first
Americans to get to the Chateau-Thierry front having been sent out in
a General Staff car, under a special order from General Pershing. Gen-
eral di Robilant, Military Representative of Italy at the Inter-Allied
Council at Versailles, says that the view they made of Chateau-Thierry,
while the shelling was the fiercest, is one of the best pictures, from the
viewpoint of the artillery technician, that he has ever seen.
 From the time of their landing here they have been most energetic
in their efforts and their work for the Committee on Public Information
has been of the very highest value. Hatrick has been instrumental in
reorganizing the Signal Corps photographic service, and in having
shipped to America all original negative films. As you know, when
they first came to France, the Signal Corps was badly demoralized in
its photographic end. The Signal Corps now has seventeen operators
in the field and is able to render highly efficient service.3
 With kindest regards, I am
 Very sincerely yours,
 James Kerney4

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Correspondence of George
Creel, Box 11, Hatrick, E.B. No classification marking.
 2
 For America’s Answer, see the Online Supplement, Appendix A.5.
 3
 On July 31, Creel wrote to Edgar B. Hatrick: “In the matter of motion pictures
for war records and publicity purposes, it was not only the case that you showed rare
courage, risking your life time and again, but you also acted throughout with judgment,
discrimination and intelligence.” (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Corre-
spondence of George Creel, Box 11, Hatrick, E.B.)
 4
 Printed from a copy that indicates Kerney signed the original.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 77
 58 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

26. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of
 State1

 Rome, July 1, 1918, 6 p.m.

 1789. Compub for Irwin from Merriam. Film situation Italy requires
immediate attention French British Italian propaganda films. Public
resent laudatory films as most material dull and forced. Exceptional
opportunity here because popularity films as Italian amusement and
fact papers not as effective in certain provinces as films. Disappoint-
ment over many films sent this office and Y.M.C.A.; only twenty per
cent usable with careful reediting and censoring; much material dull
and old; need livelier stuff. No highly organized booking system here
but if had sufficient amount proper material could use powerful exist-
ing organizations such as Mutilati military hospitals etcetera and cover
Italy thoroughly together with usual commercial channels. Italians in
general have no conception United States resources, war actualities or
life. Good popular American dramas best for front as cannot give much
war material or industrial films there. Braden2 of Italian Y.M.C.A.
receiving complaints that United States film material not live[ly]
enough for Italian front. Film theater situation altogether different from
France; in Italy varied programme not shown; only one long five reel,
dramatic subject.
 Suggest this office [be] made official headquarters all American
films imported Italy and no other American films permitted to be
exhibited unless obtained from this office that the (?)3 Red exclude
Y.M.C.A. and other organizations wishing United States films get mate-
rial from us. To meet present demand require the following subjects
specially suited as follows: first, negative or not less than ten copies
of Wednesday and Saturday releases of Pathe Universal and other
weeklies and specials of interest. This is most important category; wish
to distribute bright weekly current events without obvious propaganda
or official markings and add amusing war caricature by popular Ital-
ian artists.
 Feel positive if weekly film properly developed can have enormous
influence supplementing press; second, send only panoramas of the
United States, one negative or two copies weekly; third, for the front

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 733, 103.93/
461. No classification marking. Red. No Distribution. Received on July 2 at 7:42 p.m.
Patchin wrote on the first page of the telegram: “Sent to Irwin 7/3/18. File. P.H.P.”
 2
 George Braden, sent by the YMCA to work in Italy with U.S. and Italian soldiers.
 3
 As in the original. Presumably it signifies an omission or garbled text in the
transmission from Rome.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 78
 World War I 59

and American camps to be distributed to Y.M.C.A. and Italian soldiers
good feature dramas essential, one negative or ten copies per week,
paramount, Goldwyn Triangle subjects not older than six months;
fourth, one negative ten copies of comedies Keystone, Sidney Drew
Universal weekly. Only a part of this organization self supporting; film
would be rented to Y.M.C.A. and Red Cross; most of our films must
be distributed gratis to reach proper places. These suggestions may
seem novel but are result hard work and study Italian situation.
 Nelson Page

27. Letter From the Chief of the Military Intelligence Branch,
 Department of War General Staff (Churchill) to the Director
 of the Foreign Section, Committee on Public Information
 (Irwin)1

 Washington, July 10, 1918

My dear Mr. Irwin:
 The following information is transmitted to you in furtherance of
our cooperation in the matter of propaganda into enemy countries.
 The Military Intelligence Branch is sending to the A.E.F. a group
of seven officers as the first step in putting into effect the plan agreed
upon by yourself, Mr. Creel, Captain Blankenhorn, and myself in the
conference of June 20th.2 The officers are Captain Blankenhorn, Capt.
Lippmann, Lt. Griscon, Lt. Merz, Lt. Ifft, Lt. Miltenberger, and Lt.
Woolley.3 The reason for sending these officers is made plain by recall-
ing the conference of June 20th.
 At that conference it was agreed that in the case of propaganda
into enemy countries the conditions of cooperation between the Com-
mittee on Public Information and the Military Intelligence Branch
should be reversed: that is, that the Military Intelligence Branch should
have executive responsibility for such propaganda while the Commit-
tee on Public Information should cooperate by supplying propaganda

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 13, Military Intelligence and CPI Agreements. No
classification marking.
 2
 No minutes of the June 20 meeting have been found, but see Document 29.
 3
 Ifft is George Nicholas Ifft II. Griscon, Merz, Miltenberger, and Woolley are not
further identified.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 79
 60 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

for distribution. In allied and neutral countries the Committee has
executive responsibility while the Military Intelligence Branch cooper-
ates with information and criticism, as before.
 In accepting executive responsibility for enemy countries the Mili-
tary Intelligence Branch saw the necessity for obtaining the fullest
possible information on all the conditions affecting such propaganda.
This information is only obtainable abroad. Therefore the above named
officers are being sent primarily to obtain the necessary information
for recommending a definite plan of action and secondarily for begin-
ning the organization abroad necessary to put the plan into effect.
 The Secretary of War, who is also a member of the Committee on
Public Information, has personal knowledge of our plans.
 Will you keep us informed as to your progress in obtaining men
for your Editorial Boards abroad?
 M. Churchill
 Colonel, General Staff
 Chief, Military Intelligence Branch
 Executive Division

28. Letter From the Director of the Foreign Section, Committee
 on Public Information (Irwin) to the Chief of the Military
 Intelligence Branch, Department of War General Staff
 (Churchill)1

 Washington, July 12, 1918

Dear Colonel Churchill:
 Your communication of July 10th2 states the thing perfectly satisfac-
torily with one exception. Paragraph III, perhaps, does not quite express
my understanding of the agreement between the Committee on Public
Information and the Intelligence Department. Rather, perhaps, this
paragraph needs further definition to prevent any kind of misunder-
standing after I leave the department.

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 13, Military Intelligence and CPI Agreements. No
classification marking.
 2
 See Document 27.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 80
 World War I 61

 The agreement, as I interpreted it, was that the Intelligence Depart-
ment should have control of the distribution of propaganda into enemy
countries, while the Committee should furnish the material therefor. So
far my idea perfectly agrees with the statement in your letter; however, I
wanted it to be understood that the Committee should have final
judgment upon the character of the propaganda, and that the work
should be laid out by the American representative on the Inter-Allied
Board for propaganda into enemy countries which has its headquarters
in London. I further expressed myself at that meeting and now repeat
in writing, that we should arrange for the heartiest cooperation and
exchange of ideas between the two branches—that the Military Intelli-
gence should be consulted as to its ideas on the character and policy
of the propaganda, while the Committee on Public Information should
assist in every manner in its power with the work of distribution.
 We have virtually appointed Dr. G.H. Edgell of Harvard Univer-
sity3 head of our propaganda work into enemy countries through Italy.
He should be on his way to his post in a few days. By the next steamer
we are sending over Lieutenant Ferdinand Pisecky to act as writer and
interpreter in the Bohemian language. Lieutenant Pisecky is a native
Bohemian who deserted as early as possible from the Austrian army,
was incorporated into a Jugo-Slav division organized by the Russians
and fought with them until the collapse of Russia, when he was sent
to the United States by the Czecho-Slovak National Council to organize
their work here. He has warm recommendations from Captain Voska.4
 I telegraphed to Europe asking James Keeley, former publisher of
the “Chicago Herald”, to act as general director of our work in Europe
and as a member of the London board.5 He has not yet returned an
answer, but I think he will accept.
 May I express my appreciation of your prompt action in sending
an investigating committee abroad.
 Yours as ever,6

 3
 George Harold Edgell, historian of architecture.
 4
 Captain Emanuel Voska of the Millitary Intelligence Branch, assigned to the Com-
mittee on Public Information because of his expertise on Central Europe.
 5
 Keeley was the CPI representative to the Inter-Allied Board for Propaganda
Against the Enemy, which met regularly under Lord Northcliffe’s direction. Lord North-
cliffe (Alfred Charles Williams Harmsworth) directed British propaganda in enemy
countries.
 6
 Printed from an unsigned copy.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 81
 62 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

29. Letter From the Director of the Foreign Section, Committee
 on Public Information (Sisson) to the Chief of the Military
 Intelligence Branch, Department of War General Staff
 (Churchill)1

 Washington, July 23, 1918

Dear Colonel Churchill:
 The working arrangement between the department of Military
Intelligence and the Committee on Public Information on the matter
of Propaganda into Enemy Countries is based fundamentally upon the
closest cooperation between the operating forces of both organizations.
 On both labor and responsibility the line division of activities is
of the simplest. The parallel is that of Industrial Manufacture and
Distribution.
 The Committee on Public Information is equipped to prepare and
manufacture the product, utilizing both its own and Army Intelligence
sources of material. The mechanical responsibility for their manufacture
will be upon the operating forces of the Committee, in France and in
Italy—that is, editorial preparation, translation, printing, etc. In this
work it will have the advisory aid of the representatives of Military
Intelligence.
 The responsibility for distribution, both as to mechanical means,
and choice of operating field at the fronts will be upon Military Intelli-
gence, that problem being wholly military.
 The Inter-Allied Enemy Propaganda editorial board, containing
representatives of Great Britain, the United States, France and Italy
will have the oversight of the editorial policies, and the American
member of the board, James Keeley, will be the active head of the
Committee on Public Information’s operating forces, with headquarters
at Paris. Professor G.H. Edgell, who will be the head of the Committee’s
Italian unit on Enemy Propaganda, will be under the general supervi-
sion of Mr. Keeley. Both the French and the Italian units will be supplied
with forces of writers, translators and advertising men as needed. Mr.
Keeley will be in Paris in time to consult with Captain Blankenhorn

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 13, Military Intelligence and CPI Agreements. No
classification marking. On July 23, Sisson wrote Creel that Churchill had “received no
letter from Irwin or from you” on an agreement between CPI and MIB. He therefore
drafted the letter printed here and asked Creel to “countersign both copies” if it “meets
with your views.” (Memorandum from Sisson to Creel; National Archives, RG 63, Entry
105, Director’s Office of the Foreign Section, General Correspondence, Box 7, Creel, Geo.
June–August 1918)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 82
 World War I 63

and his superiors by the time the Military Intelligence party arrives
in Paris.
 To summarize, the Committee on Public Information will manufac-
ture the product, utilizing to the full the advisory aid of Military Intelli-
gence in securing useful material. Military Intelligence will distribute
the product. The essence of the agreement is the spirit of cooperation
on mutual problems.
 This letter is going to you in two copies. If it meets your approval
will you countersign one copy and return it to the Committee?
 Yours very sincerely,
 Edgar Sisson
 General Director Foreign Section

 APPROVED
 M. Churchill
 Colonel, General Staff
 Chief, Military Intelligence Branch
 Executive Division2

 2
 To the left of Sisson’s and Churchill’s signatures, Creel wrote: “Approved. George
Creel.” Because it bears all three signatures, this copy was apparently forwarded to
Churchill on July 24 and returned by him on July 30. (Letter from Sisson to Churchill,
July 24, and letter from Churchill to Sisson, July 30; both in the National Archives, RG
63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign Section, General Correspondence, Box 13,
Military Intelligence and CPI Agreements)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 83
 64 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

30. Letter From Edwin Björkman of the Division of Work
 Among the Foreign Born, Committee on Public Information,
 to David F. Swenson1

 Washington, July 31, 1918

My dear Mr. Swenson:—
 Your pamphlet containing “The Spirit of America in the War” and
your Independence Day address, arrived this morning.2 Looking over
the pamphlet I found on page 11 the following note:
 “Written for the Committee on Public Information, for translation
into Swedish, to be circulated as American propaganda in Sweden;
first published in the Minneapolis Journal Sunday May 19, 1918.”
 As soon as I read this I sent you the following wire:3
 “Must protest against note in your pamphlet saying Spirit of Amer-
ica in War written for Committee on Public Information quote to be
circulated as American propaganda in Sweden unquote. Please hold
pamphlet if not already distributed. Statement of note incorrect and
injurious to American cause. Letter follows.”
 I am extremely sorry that you should have included a reference
to American propaganda in Sweden in your pamphlet, which, under
such circumstances, is likely to prove as harmful as otherwise it might
prove useful. They are extremely sensitive in regard to this kind of
thing in Sweden, and we have been most scrupulous in respecting
their feelings on this score over there. I may add that the American
government is strongly averse to any form of work among other nations
that may be described as propaganda in the sense given to that word
by various German activities during the present war.
 While, in writing you to obtain the article in question, I mentioned
that it would be published in Sweden, this did not imply any carrying
on of propaganda on our part. The whole tone of my confidential
circular, of which I enclose a copy,4 shows that we desired merely to
obtain certain expressions of feeling and opinion among the Swedes
in this country that would convince Sweden, both for our sake and for

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 4, Bjorkman—August 1–20. No classification mark-
ing. Swenson was Professor of Philosophy at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.
 2
 The pamphlet is ibid. For “The Spirit of America in the War,” see Online Supple-
ment, Appendix A.6.
 3
 Dated July 31; a transcript is attached but not printed.
 4
 Confidential circular 2, April 29; attached but not printed. The circular states that
articles “will not only be published in Sweden, but they will also be syndicated for
simultaneous (free) use by the entire Swedish press in this country.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 84
 World War I 65

its own, that the American nation stands absolutely united in the pur-
suit of the war.
 I hope you can see your way to withdrawing the pamphlet from
publication in its present shape. There is no objection to your mention-
ing that “The Spirit of America in the War” was written at the request
of, or for the Committee on Public Information, but it is more than
inadvisable, it is incorrect, to say that it was written “to be circulated
as American propaganda in Sweden.”
 I think so much of your work, your personality, and your general
attitude, that I am extremely sorry to appear in the part of a critic, but
I have no choice in this matter.
 Hoping to hear from you as soon as possible, I remain,
 Very sincerely yours,5

 5
 Printed from an unsigned copy. In a letter of July 31, Björkman informed Creel
of the problem, advising that the pamphlet be “suppressed until the offending note has
been amended.” (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 4, Bjorkman—August 1–20) On August 5, Guy
Stanton Ford, Director of the Committee on Public Information’s Division of Civic and
Educational Publications, wrote a note to Sisson: “Professor Swenson is a sensible, well
balanced philosophic sort of man and his use of the phrase ‘Propaganda in Sweden’
was purely a slip. Bjorkman is perfectly right in calling his attention to it. I think he
will straighten it out in the best way and with less fuss and display than Bjorkman’s
letter might suggest. I think their two temperaments will neutralize each other so the
matter will work out amicably.” (Ibid.) Sisson wrote a letter to Bjorkman on August 6
in which he commented: “I fancy the situation has smoothed itself out by this time.” (Ibid.)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 85
 66 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

31. Letter From Heber Blankenhorn of the Military Intelligence
 Branch, Department of War General Staff to the Chief of the
 Military Intelligence Branch, Department of War General
 Staff (Churchill)1

 [Paris,] August 1, 1918

Dear Col. Churchill:
 We are by no means ready to make final reports, but I write infor-
mally just after our first real move since coming over.
 We had a fast trip, a funny reception at the port of debarkation, a
busy two days in Paris, then Lippmann and I reported at G.H.Q. and
planted Ifft there as a temporary liaison officer because it was already
obvious to us, as it was to Col. Nolan,2 that the main office for the job
will have to be in Paris.
 We expected to find three organized and working Inter-Allied
Propaganda Boards, one in Paris, one in London and one in Padua,
which would be landmarks in the field, with which we would have
to deal and to which we could immediately designate liaison officers.
Those Boards are ghosts. This afternoon we sat-in at a session of the
so-called Board here. It is essentially the new French Army Board for
propaganda into enemy countries, headed by Commandant Chaix,3
and International only by virtue of the fact that an Italian, an English-
man, three Belgians and three Americans (Hugh Gibson, Lippmann
and I) were present to hear what the French had done and were plan-
ning. We were announced as having ideas. We declared ourselves there
to listen, not to exploit plans.
 Here in a nutshell is the situation. The French at last are doing
quite a good deal of propaganda in a precise, intelligent fashion, freely
playing the American card as their trump, and mainly through the
energy of Major Chaix, a Clemenceau personal appointee, attempting
to expand their efforts with an intensified air program, greater use of
smuggling through Switzerland, and reaching out to touch off Albania
and Bulgaria. All the propaganda the American Army has distributed,
be it noted, is this French propaganda, not “scrutinized by myself” as
specified by Secretary Baker. The British in the second compartment
of the nutshell are also doing a good bit, mainly with balloons but not

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 5, Blankenhorn—Military Information Abroad. No
classification marking. The letter was forwarded to Sisson by Captain Francis Churchill
Williams “for your information” under an August 26 covering memorandum.
 2
 Dennis Edward Nolan.
 3
 Edmond Aimé Louis Chaix.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 86
 World War I 67

with aeroplanes. The Belgians are anxious to have the whole program
center around the distribution of Belgian newspapers and literature.
What the Italians are doing was not indicated at the meeting today.
All this means that there is considerable stirring of the ground but no
clear and scientific ploughing and not an American machine on the
whole farm.
 For us the matter is simple! Far from being hampered by Allied
activities, we cannot even count on very effective help and must build
up our own organization. I think this is fortunate. It will mean slower
work in the start. Just now America is in the position of being so
utterly laggard that the American word which is the big noise in the
propaganda field is being spoken solely by our Allies. They are yell-
ing it.
 We are just beginning to forsee something of the size and character
of the various divisions of the organization which the Army will have
to have. The main use of our present force of course is to do the
Intelligence job of finding out what is needed. I had set August 15 as
a date on which to send back a first rough draft of organization and
needs, but I suspect such date will be nearer August 30. Much depends
on the trip to London, which begins the day after tomorrow.
 All in the party are well. Many inquiries concerning you and the
fortunes of the Branch were addressed to us at G.H.Q. we just missed
Van Deman but hope to see him within a fortnight. He seems to be
doing what I should call surplus jobs. All G.H.Q. is fired these days
with elation over the record of our men of July 4 and 144 and marvelous
tales of unbelievable praise by men around Foch are current. For one
thing this indicates the ripening of time for propaganda.
 Most sincerely yours,5
 Heber Blankenhorn

 4
 July 4 was the Battle of Hamel, in which Australian and U.S. troops defeated the
Germans. While the July 14 reference is unclear, it may refer to the Second Battle of the
Marne (July 15–18), also an Allied victory.
 5
 Printed from a copy that indicates Blankenhorn signed the original.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 87
 68 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

32. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
 Department of State1

 London, August 9, 1918, 11 a.m.

 937. Urgent. For Creel and Sisson Compub from Keeley. Confer-
ence Inter-Allied Board starts next Wednesday August 14th2 and
lasts remainder week. French, Italian Governments sending expert
staffs various phases propaganda and British staff be present to
report and advise. After conference called to order by Northcliff
Representatives of the four nations would be formally called upon to
present position of their Governments as to the Extent of Cooperation
matters of policy, technical methods of distribution, plans of getting
information into enemy countries by other than military methods,
the use of agencies in neutral countries including press, moving
pictures, personal efforts &, the education of prisoners of war, the
constitution of a permanent central organization arising out of the
deliberations of the conference. As United States is newest participant
in work conference practically called to give us details of what other
nations have done and to afford us opportunity of defining our
positions. I cabled over week ago asking for statement of position
of Government.3 Regard it imperative that I have fullest possible
statement to present to conference and urge you secure from all
necessary quarters information and scope of powers it is desired to
intrust to me for presentation. Have arranged for captains Lippman

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 733,
103.93/644. No classification marking. Blue. No Distribution. Received at 1:10 a.m.
on August 10. Patchin wrote on the first page of the telegram: “Copied to Creel +
Sisson. Aug 12, 1918. File. PHP.” An attached note by Patchin, August 12 (misdated
July 12) reads: “NB, Dear Salmon, Attached marked Urgent rec’d 1.10 a.m. Friday
got to me about 4:30 p.m. today. PHP.” The response, August 13, reads: “Dear
Patchin: This was rec’ved 1:10 A.M. Aug. 10th. Even at that it is bad and I regret
it was not called to your attention if not before surely on Sunday. More ‘Pep’ is
required and I trust you will have no further cause for complaint. D.A.S.” (Ibid.)
David A. Salmon was Chief of the Bureau of Indexes and Archives, Department of State.
 2
 Keeley represented CPI at the Inter-Allied Conference on Propaganda in Enemy
Countries, which met in London August 14–16. Minutes of the conference are in the
National Archives, RG 63, Entry 115, Reports of the Inter-Allied Conference on
Propaganda in Enemy Countries, Held at London, Aug. 14–16, 1918.
 3
 Not found.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 88
 World War I 69

and Blankenhorn to attend conference but Lippman says they will
be present as observers only.4
 Page

 4
 Creel and Sisson responded in telegram 755 to London, August 13, sending
Keeley a “synopsis” of the agreement between the CPI and MIB (see Document 29).
They also informed Keeley of the following: “Blankenhorn and Lippmann advisory
only. Army spending million dollars for automatic balloons. Committee bearing
expense of printing.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box
733, 103.93/672f)

33. Memorandum From J.F. Abbott of the Military
 Intelligence Division, Department of War General Staff to
 Francis Churchill Williams of the Military Intelligence
 Division, Department of War General Staff1

 Washington, August 29, 1918

SUBJECT
 U.S. Propaganda in Japan

 1. During the past winter there was shown throughout Japan the
film which under the title “Battlecry of Peace” (?) was given much
publicity in this country during the campaign for preparedness two
or three years ago. The purpose of this film here was to dwell upon—
even to exaggerate the military impotence of the United States and one
feature of it showed the sack of New York City by an invading power.
It is obvious that while the purpose of this propaganda film in this
country was not misunderstood, yet the Japanese populace who saw
it by thousands gained quite different impressions. An additional bad
feature lay in the fact that it is a Japanese custom to have an “explainer”
(benshi) who conducts an explanatory monologue while a film is being
shown. It may be inferred that in the present instance the benshi every-
where rose to the occasion as patriotic Japanese.

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 13, Military Intelligence, Sept 18–Feb 19. No
classification marking.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 89
 70 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 2. It occurs to the writer that it would be well worth while to
provide for some such counter action to the impression produced by
the film mentioned by providing for the immediate production in Japan
of the Official film “America’s Answer.”2
 3. The Universal Film Company is the largest organization in Japan,
having many theatres all over the country which it supplies. The
national agent in Tokyo is thoroughly loyal and anxious to serve the
United States and without doubt would be glad of the opportunity to
put on this film.
 4. To short-circuit the benshi it would be advisable to have the
“titles” done in Japanese. The writer will be glad to take the personal
responsibility for this end of the matter if the proposal is approved.
 5. The growing chauvinism in Japan incident to the dispatch of
troops into Siberia makes it advisable that such a project be carried
out soon.3
 J.F. Abbott4
 Captain U.S.A.

 2
 For America’s Answer, please see the Online Supplement, Appendix A.5.
 3
 On August 3, the United States announced that it was dispatching troops to
Vladivostok in cooperation with Japan “to render such protection and help as is possible
to the Czecho-Slovaks against the armed Austrian and German prisoners who are attack-
ing them and to steady any efforts at self-government or self-defense in which the
Russians themselves may be willing to accept assistance.” (Foreign Relations, 1918, Russia,
vol. II, pp. 328–329)
 4
 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 90
 World War I 71

34. Letter From President Wilson to Acting Secretary of War
 Crowell1

 Washington, September 5, 1918

My dear Mr. Secretary:
 Recurring to what I spoke of for a moment yesterday in our little
war conference,2 may I not ask for information about [illegible—activi-
ties?] I am very jealous about?
 I am told that the War Department is, through its intelligence
officers, in some way interesting itself in the matter of propaganda
abroad, and I would be very much obliged if you would make inquiry
and find how far this is true and what is being attempted, because it
is my wish to keep the matter of propaganda entirely in my own hands
and I had not known that any other agencies than those I had set up
were attempting to interest themselves in it. I regard nothing as more
delicate or more intimately associated with the policy of the administra-
tion than propaganda, and if any agency of the Army is attempting to
organize propaganda of any sort or to take a hand in controlling it, I
would be very much obliged if you would “call them off”. You will
know how to do so kindly and without intimating any criticism on
my part, but only my sense of the absolute necessity of my directing
that whole matter.
 Cordially and sincerely yours,3

 1
 Source: Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Series 2: Family and
General Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 99, 1918 Aug. 20–Sept. 16. No classification
marking. Also printed in Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 49, p. 449.
 2
 Although no other record of Crowell and Wilson’s “little war conference” was
found, on September 4 Lansing informed Wilson that Lippmann and Blankenhorn were
working on propaganda issues. (Ibid., pp. 433–434)
 3
 Printed from an unsigned copy.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 91
 72 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

35. Letter From Acting Secretary of War Crowell to President
 Wilson1

 Washington, September 8, 1918

My dear Mr. President:
 Referring to your letter of 5th September,2 concerning the interest
of the War Department in the matter of propaganda abroad, General
March3 advises me that the whole question of the propaganda abroad
with which Captain Lippman was concerned was handled by Secretary
Baker personally. The Secretary, after conferences with representatives
of the Bureau of Public Information; and with the Military Intelligence
Division, at which the Chief of Staff was present; and in response to
the initiation of this propaganda by the Bureau of Public Information,
directed the organization of the party consisting of Captain Blanken-
horn, Captain Lippman, Lieutenant Merz and Lieutenant Ifft. These
officers were to proceed to France to carry out confidential instructions
which were given to them by Secretary Baker in person. Secretary
Baker also wrote to General Pershing a letter in which he defined the
objects of this mission and gave General Pershing necessary instructions
as to his attitude toward it.
 A part of the propaganda proposed consisted of getting into the
territorial limits of the Central Powers certain information concerning
activities of the United States in connection with the war. The Bureau
of Public Information has not been able to successfully get such informa-
tion into Germany and Austria hitherto. The scheme involved the
preparation of certain propaganda matter which Secretary Baker pro-
posed to visé himself or have viséd by responsible officers who would
carry out his policy in the matter, so as to prevent exaggerated state-
ments being used in the propaganda.
 In accordance with the general scheme, the War Department has
placed orders for a number of balloons of small dimensions, which it
is proposed to start toward German territory from a base with the
American Expeditionary Force when the wind is favorable, these bal-
loons having a relatively small radius of travel so that they will be
sure to get to land within the limits of the Empire of the Central Powers.
The orders for these balloons have actually been placed and the carrying
out of the general scheme of this propaganda would be impossible

 1
 Source: Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow Wilson, Series 2: Family and
General Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 99, 1918 Aug. 20–Sept. 16. No classification
marking. Also printed in Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 49, pp. 487–488.
 2
 See Document 34.
 3
 General Peyton March, Army Chief of Staff.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 92
 World War I 73

without the coordinated work of the military establishment. You will
recall that in order to obtain the money for the purchase of these
balloons, it was necessary to ask you for $76,000 from your war fund
and this money was allotted by you for this purpose at the personal
solicitation of Secretary Baker, and it was understood that Mr. Creel
acted at the same time in obtaining this amount.
 Captain Lippman was placed upon this committee at the sugges-
tion of Secretary Baker himself. The committee arrived abroad and
shortly after its arrival in France a cablegram was received from General
Pershing announcing in general terms that the committee apparently
was well selected for the purpose in hand.
 In accordance with your instructions, orders have been given to
the senior officer of this committee, Captain Blankenhorn, to discon-
tinue any further activity and to report to Secretary Baker upon his
arrival. A cablegram has also been sent to Secretary Baker to be deliv-
ered to him upon his arrival, announcing what your action has been
in this matter and it is expected, as the entire matter was handled by
Secretary Baker personally, that he will then communicate with you
concerning it.
 While the War Department, of course, intends to carry out exactly
what you desire in this matter, it would seem that the field for propa-
ganda of the class indicated could only be reached by the assistance
of the military establishment. In propaganda work in other countries
the Military Intelligence Division has never assumed any control or
direction. The Military Attachés at Madrid, Berne, and other places
have been told to place themselves at the disposal of the representatives
of the Bureau of Public Information and to cooperate with them to any
extent that they desire, but they have never attempted to initiate any
such propaganda themselves.
 Sincerely yours,
 Benedict Crowell
 Acting Secretary of War

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 93
 74 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

36. Memorandum From the Director of the Military Intelligence
 Division, Department of War General Staff (Churchill) to the
 Military Attaché in Rome (Buckey)1

 Washington, September 30, 1918

SUBJECT
 Cooperation of Military Attachés with Committee on Public Information

 1. Your attention is invited to the enclosed copy of a circular letter
sent from this office to all military attachés serving in neutral countries.2
The object of this letter was to insure the complete and hearty coopera-
tion of our military attachés with the representative of the Committee
in the country in which they are located.
 2. In this connection it is desired to inform you that our own
relations with the Committee here in Washington are the very best
that can possibly exist. General Churchill, Director of the Division, and
Mr. Creel, Chairman of the Committee are both serving on numerous
committees where there is a complete and satisfactory understanding
and exchange of views. Our liaison between ourselves and the Commit-
tee’s Office and representatives in Washington is complete in every
detail, and a very frank and agreeable exchange of information and
data is carried on every day.
 3. We keep one thing and one thing only in mind, and that is that
we are all members of a common cause and are all working together
in the interests of the United States looking towards a successful conclu-
sion of the war in which we are now engaged.
 4. A letter recently received from the Committee indicates that
possibly there has been some lack of cooperation between your Office
and their representative, Captain Charles E. Merriam in Rome, and we
are taking the liberty of going over the various points that have been
brought to our attention with a full assurance that our belief in your

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Correspondence of George
Creel, Box 4, Censorship Board. No classification marking. Drafted by Lieutenant Colonel
Walter F. Martin (Cavalry, U.S. Army). Churchill forwarded this memorandum and the
September 9 circular (see footnote 2 below) to Creel under cover of an October 2 letter.
(Ibid.) Mervyn C. Buckey was the Military Attaché in Rome from February 14, 1918.
 2
 Attached but not printed is a September 9 memorandum from Churchill to all
military attachés stating: “The Military Intelligence Division, and Military Attachés in
particular, have, however, no authority whatever to initiate propaganda nor to interfere
with or criticize the work, methods or personnel of the representatives of the Committee
in this field. The Committee on Public Information is absolutely its own judge as to the
nature and the amount of propaganda material it shall select and the methods and
avenues to be employed in the distribution of propaganda.”

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 94
 World War I 75

tact and judgment is so well founded that these little minor differences
can easily be corrected and obviated in the future.3
 5. The differences that have been brought to our attention are,
that having known of available space for committee offices you did
not inform the representative, although requested to do so. That you
did not cooperate in the attempt to have the premises requisitioned by
the Italian government. That you kept Kingsley Moses for a month
as a clerk after the Ambassador had been persuaded to bring
him from Foggia for Captain Merriam. That in the absence of the
Ambassador, Moses was transferred to your office for work as a
clerk, while he was acting as head of the Speakers Bureau there. That
you declined to furnish blocks of passes to the C.P.I. representative for
Y.M.C.A. and Red Cross with the result that they are inconvenienced
and pay money for speakers who might take slightly different routes
from those deemed necessary when starting from Rome.
 6. While we do not ask for a report on the above mentioned matters,
we do think that a closer cooperation would be productive probably
of better results. Plainly speaking, what we want is that you and Captain
Merriam get together and iron out all the difficulties or misunderstand-
ings that may possibly exist.
 7. Another report is to the effect that you did not notify the Commit-
tee’s representative of the arrival of troops at Genoa, thus preventing
proper publicity and the taking of moving pictures, although requested
to do so. Also that you failed to notify them of the arrival of troops
from France, with the same effect, although requested.
 8. With respect to these last items, it may be possible that you
were acting under orders to maintain secrecy with respect to these
movements, or that there may have been some other good and well
founded reason for not informing the Committee’s representative. This,
of course, we are unable to judge from this distance.

 3
 Telegrams documenting the Embassy’s complaints about CPI Commissioner Mer-
riam, including Merriam’s disputes with Buckey, are in the National Archives, RG 59,
Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 735, 103.93. An October 18 letter from Thomas Page
to Lansing summarized the complaints. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File
1910–1929, Box 735, 103.93/1193) Merriam recorded his views in “A Report on Lieut.
Tedeschi, Liaison Officer of Col. Buckey, American Military Attaché at Rome,” dated
September 21. (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables, Reports,
and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr.
1919, Box 12, Merriam—Corres.—Oct–Dec 1918)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 95
 76 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 9. In closing, we do, however, wish to once again call your attention
to the necessity of the very closest cooperation that can possibly be
had, and by so doing you will receive and have the full support of
this your Home Office.4
 M Churchill5
 Brigadier General, General Staff

 4
 Wilson commented on the situation in a letter to Lansing on October 5: “I know
Merriam and know his quality so well that it is hard for me not to believe that there has
been some misunderstanding on Page’s part.” (Library of Congress, Papers of Woodrow
Wilson, Series 2: Family and General Correspondence, 1786–1924, Reel 100, 1918 Sept.
17–Oct. 13)
 5
 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

37. Letter From J.F. Abbott of the Military Intelligence Division,
 Department of War General Staff to the Director of the
 Division of Films, Committee on Public Information
 (Beeman)1

 Washington, October 3, 1918

Dear Sir:
 I take pleasure in transmitting herewith the Japanese version of
the titles for “America’s Answer”,2 which has been delayed owing to
my “leave” intervening. I have taken the liberty of altering the text in
the following particulars:

 1. The second person has been altered in every case to the imper-
sonal statement.
 2. #3 has been rendered much as in the original. I have doubts
however as to whether the allusion to tyrants and tyranny will pass
the Japanese censor. If the whole title were out it would not make a
great deal of difference.

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 13, Military Intelligence, Sept 18–Feb 19. No
classification marking. In an October 4 letter, Byoir thanked Abbott for his sugges-
tions. (Ibid.)
 2
 For America’s Answer, see the Online Supplement, Appendix A.5.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 96
 World War I 77

 3. #5 “Your Leader” I assume is President Wilson and the transla-
tion reads “President Wilson, Commander in Chief of the American
Forces on Land and Sea.”
 4. #17—omitted—to anticipate the Japanese censor who will not
permit any allusion to “liberty” on a film. (This is of my personal
knowledge.)
 5. #42 Reference to “democracy” omitted for same reason.
 6. #47 Reference to Kaiser’s sons omitted as unintelligible to Japa-
nese audience and likely to be misunderstood.
 7. #67 Approximately translated “Some collection of hats!” The Jap
wouldn’t understand hat-checking.
 8. #79, Reduced to prosaic statement.
 9. #92 Translated “Digging for Independence”—not very good but
the word ‘democracy‘ is absolutely banned.
 10. #100 Not remembering whether the “couriers” are birds or
men—translated merely “a narrow escape.”
 11. #135 Allusion to “Over there” omitted.
 I suggest that you have the titles set up in the size of type desired, by
one of the Japanese papers in New York, (Japanese-Amer. Commercial
Weekly), and the proof sent to me. It will expedite matters if you attach
my section designation (M.I.2.) to my address.
 Very sincerely,
 J.F. Abbott3
 Captain U.S.A.

 3
 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 97
 78 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

38. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
 Argentina1

 Washington, November 5, 1918, 9 p.m.

 For Sevier from Sisson. If Germany accepts armistice terms, Com-
mittee work of news distribution in foreign countries will still continue
throughout period of session of peace conference, as Committee’s serv-
ice will be the means of interpreting views of Unistates at that confer-
ence, where Committee will have staff and distributing facilities. Keep
your news distributing organization at high pitch of efficiency.
 Lansing

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 735, 103.93/
1218e. No classification marking. Blue. Cipher. A stamped notation on the first page
reads: “Signed by A.A. Adee.” Also sent to Beijing, Tokyo, Archangel, Rio de Janeiro,
Santiago, Paris, London, The Hague, Lima, Stockholm, Vladivostok, Bern, Mexico City,
and Copenhagen. The text of each telegram is identical except those to Rio de Janeiro,
Beijing, and Tokyo, in which the final sentence is stricken out.

39. Editorial Note

 As the war drew to a close, the Committee on Public Information
employed numerous means to distribute material in foreign countries.
Examples are included in the Online Supplement.
 Appendix A.7 is a “catalog insert supplied to American firms” for
inclusion in U.S. commercial catalogs shipped abroad. Although the
sample is undated, it is attached to an October 1918 report from Edward
Bernays, Foreign Section, Committee on Public Information. (National
Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign Section,
General Correspondence, Box 16, Poole—Report Sept 1918)
 Appendix A.8 is a pamphlet version of President Woodrow Wil-
son’s September 27, 1918, speech in New York on the League of Nations.
It was sent to Director of the Foreign Section, Committee on Public
Information, Edgar Sisson under cover of an October 7 letter from
Frank J. Marion, Committee for Public Information Commissioner in
Spain. Marion wrote: “We made a rush job of the President’s speech
on The League of Nations and got it out in pamphlet form, 5000 copies,

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 98
 World War I 79

and distributed it to the atheneums, schools, libraries, officials etc. of
Spain within four days of its delivery. It was our first effort at pam-
phleting and I think it was a good start. Am sending you copies under
another cover. We have the country covered with pictures of the Presi-
dent—very timely just now.” (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105,
Director’s Office of the Foreign Section, General Correspondence, Box
19, Attention of Mr. Sisson) For the text of Wilson’s speech, see Foreign
Relations, 1918, Supplement 1, The World War, volume I, pages 316–321.
 Appendix A.9 is a portrait of Wilson created for distribution in
Italy. It is attached to an October 18 letter from Henry Atwater, Director
of the Division of Production and Distribution, Committee on Public
Information, to Associate General Director of the Foreign Section, Com-
mittee on Public Information, Carl Byoir. (National Archives, RG 63,
Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign Section, General Correspond-
ence, Box 3, Atwater-Donald Lee Oct 18–Mar 19)
 Appendix A.10 is an article published in the Swedish newspaper
Socialdemokraten on October 18. It was forwarded by Eric Palmer, Com-
mittee on Public Information Commissioner in Sweden, to Sisson on
October 19. Palmer wrote: “I enclose herewith Mr. Henry von Kramer’s
first article on his visit to France, where he was sent by Compub at
my suggestion.
 “This is a rather remarkable article and I recommend that it be
used in the United States as the impression of a wellknown Swedish
journalist, with the further distinction of being stepson to Hjalmar
Branting. The material can also be used in Compub service to other
countries.
 “I am arranging to distribute the von Kramer article throughout
Sweden in places where the Socialdemokraten does not reach.
 “Copies of the von Kramer article are also going to Mr. Björkman.”
(National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 21, V)

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 99
 80 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

40. Letter From the Director of the Foreign Press Bureau,
 Committee on Public Information (Poole) to the Chairman of
 the Committee on Public Information (Creel)1

 New York, November 15, 1918

Dear Mr. Creel:
 I want to give you my reasons why it seems to me, from over a
year’s constructive work as director of this division, that work along
these lines should be continued on a permanent basis as a part of our
government’s administration in relation to foreign countries.
 As to my own part in such work—while feeling it a privilege to have
served in this way during the war and assuring you of my willingness to
continue serving through the coming three or four months of world
wide discussion, if you care to have me do so—I shall then expect to
be relieved, to continue my work as a writer. The work here is for an
editor. I know that my own value is much greater as a writer, and I
feel that for the kind of writing that I wish to do, there will be a large
field of usefulness in the years ahead. My feeling is strong in this matter
and my decision final.
 My opinion is, however, that in some manner this work should go
on. You may say that work of this kind belongs to the State Department.
Perhaps it does, and it seems to me that a bureau along these lines
should either be attached to the State Department or at least cooperate
closely with it both here and in foreign countries, as we have been
doing during the war. But the need of such work being permanent
appears to me plain and urgent. If we are entering an era of more and
more open diplomacy, in order to make the policies of this government
most effective abroad we must use the legitimate methods of publicity
to reach widely the great masses of people in other countries with the
significant facts about the life and purposes of this nation. To present
such facts widely we need men especially trained in reaching the large
public by presentation in popular form.
 Such work is by no means simple. If the proposed League of
Nations becomes a reality, countless questions will arise of such imme-
diate moment that this nation will need to present quickly to all coun-
tries its policy on each question, the reasons for its policy, and also the
support of such policy by the nation at large, as evidenced in U.S.
editorials, statements of prominent citizens, organizations, etc. There

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director’s Office of the Foreign
Section, General Correspondence, Box 16, Poole—Reports Nov. 1917–April 1918. No
classification marking. The armistice took effect on November 11.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 100
 World War I 81

may be certain great crises where the delay of a few days or even hours
in the transmission of such news will work considerable harm. The
prompt and accurate work required will need a cable service from the
U.S. reaching out all over the world.
 Again, this nation will doubtless have many large aims and policies
of a more permanent nature for which it wishes to build up support
in the court of world opinion. For this it will rely, I presume, not on
a tremendous army but on a campaign of fair and open discussion
throughout the world. Moreover, as in each nation the trend seems to
be more and more toward democracy, the need will increase for a
wider and wider appeal to the great masses of people in each land, in
the building up of such friendly support. This will require a mail service
here, an adequate staff in this country to gather news and opinion to
a much fuller extent than the limited cable service can do.
 Such a mail service would also write or edit articles of all kinds
dealing with significant aspects of our national life and growth, and
would illustrate some of the best possible photographs, cuts, mats, etc.
Such work will be of the first importance—for to gain agreement abroad
with our foreign policies we must gain the good will of the world and
arouse a friendly interest in all the aspects of life and work in the U.S.
 For this part of the work there will be needed a large film service
as well—for I believe that every year the medium of films will be used
more and more to reach the hundreds of millions of people for whom
the moving pictures make a much stronger appeal than does the writ-
ten article.
 So much for the home part of the service. There will also be needed
in each of the countries men able wisely to select from the cabled and
written material sent them, and translate it in colloquial style—men
thoroughly familiar with the means of distribution in that country
through the daily press, the weekly and monthly periodicals, technical
journals, window display, photographs, lectures, film theatres, etc.
 All this, of course, should be done in cooperation with the embas-
sies or legations abroad and in harmony with the policy of our State
Department.
 Such a service, however, if it is to be of real value, must not be of
the “official propaganda” sort which has been employed recently by
many foreign governments. Although it must be reliable and strictly
in conformity with the policies of our State Department, it must be
more than this. It must be a service so well written, in the foreign style,
so well edited and planned, that foreign editors will use it widely
because of their certainty that it will interest their readers. Nothing
will more quickly prevent such use than a service evidently “propa-
ganda” and “official.” Remember that in years to come, as the nations
[are] brought together, in each country more and more news, from

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 101
 82 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

other lands will compete for a place in newspapers and magazines.
Our material must therefore be put into the most presentable form.
 You may be sure that other nations will continue and increase the
work of this kind which they are already undertaking in a much larger
way than we have done. And when such nations develop policies
hostile to our own, they will campaign in this way against us, and
their points will have to be met unless we are willing to suffer defeat
in each big national purpose.
 It will also be urgent to clear away all points of misunderstanding
or misconception that already prevail or will arise in foreign countries
in regard to this nation, its life, work, ideals and opinions, its purposes
both here and abroad. This means that we must inform foreign coun-
tries not only on current news and opinion here, but that also through
various articles and pamphlets of authoritative opinion and interpreta-
tion we must inform them of the growth in past years, of certain chief
aims and tendencies of ours as they now affect the outside world. In
brief, we shall have to explain to them in popular form not only our
present but our past.
 Also it will tremendously help such new democracies as will proba-
bly arise in Russia, through the Balkans, Central Europe and elsewhere,
if we can send them sound practical articles giving them the benefit of
our experience during the long slow process of building up a democracy
here. They will be eager to learn of all the various ways and means,
both political and industrial, by which we have steered a safe course
between the extremes of autocracy and anarchy, the methods found
to be practical in self-government of all kinds, how our government
is able to help the people and how the people control the government—
both federal, state and municipal. All such material, presented through
popular but authoritative articles, through pictures, films, etc. will be
immensely valuable to liberal groups in each country who are trying
to steer the same safe middle course. There are signs that the world is
entering now a critical stage of transition with dangers of reaction on
one side and Bolshevism on the other. It will greatly promote the safety
of true democracy everywhere if the liberal groups in each country
can be thoroughly informed of each other’s work.
 Just to give one example, it will help the Russian liberals if we can
show, by articles, pictures and especially films to the millions of Russian
peasants, the life of the American farmer, his use of modern machinery,
schools for his children, automobiles, newspapers, rural delivery and
all the other advantages he enjoys. Our embassy and consular service
in Russia as at present organized is not adequate for this task. It will
mean, through papers, periodicals, agricultural journals, lectures, film
theatres, etc. reaching out to all classes of people there and showing
them what we have done and are doing, giving them the benefit both

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 102
 World War I 83

of our successes and mistakes in the many experiments we have made,
picturing the life of our farmers and our workingmen, our children in
cities and villages, our free schools and colleges, all kinds of free educa-
tion here, public health work of all kinds, work of industrial welfare.
It will be especially urgent to overcome a widely prevailing opinion
in Russia that our exporters are looking on Russia as a field for huge
and unfair profits in the future. We must show our real purpose, which
will be, I suppose, to open up legitimate trade connections on a basis
of mutual advantage.
 Again in our approach to the peoples of Germany and Austria it
will be of the utmost importance quickly and convincingly to explain
to them what attitude we decide to take, in order to avoid on the one
hand any danger of another German militarism arising and on the
other hand to meet the menace of a permanently embittered nation
that might become a breeding ground for trouble in Europe in the
generations to come.
 Our foreign trade to all countries will doubtless have an immense
expansion in the near future. With this will go a great advertising
campaign abroad conducted by exporters here through their export
journals to foreign countries, through window displays, through
foreign newspapers and all other possible mediums. They will use
every possible device, including films, to promote their campaigns.
The pictures they give of American life and national aims will closely
affect our relations with such foreign countries, and should therefore,
it seems to me, be balanced and controlled by the friendly cooperation
of this government in all such campaigns, so as to insure against possi-
ble blunders and misstatements. For upon our commerce will depend
the good or bad will toward us that will arise throughout the world.
This will be especially true in the near future when the world will have
special need of our manufactured products. In many countries it has
been said by hostile propagandists that we are to become a huge
imperialistic commercial power using our domination in ways unfair
to other nations in the world’s market. Such attacks need to be answered
by a campaign to show our real policy—a free field for all.
 It will be the same with our food products. For years to come the
world will face a shortage of food and will be eager to know the extent
of our supplies of such products. It will immeasurably strengthen the
good will of the world toward this country if we can show both the
abundance of our resources and our generous purpose to share to the
greatest possible extent our bounty with others who need it most. In
this connection I have already spoken of how the life of the farmer can
be used to show to other people what a free but orderly government
can do for the man who tills the soil. Such informative work means
reaching not only the popular press but also agricultural journals.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 103
 84 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

 Again, in the field of education it will immensely increase the good
will toward us if we can keep other countries informed of the thousands
of young men and women who will doubtless be trained in our schools
and colleges to go abroad in all kinds of foreign work connected with
our industries, commerce, education, etc. Moreover, if there is to be a
more liberal and brotherly world, no better means of building it up
could be found than to bring together the teachers of all countries in
a great international exchange of ideas of all kinds as to the education
of children and the moulding of the citizen who will run the world of
tomorrow. This can perhaps best be done through the world’s educa-
tional journals. In this field we have much to offer in the way of
suggestions drawn from our experience in our educational system,
federal, state and municipal. But we have also much to learn. And
certainly, in all parts of such a service, we should take pains to avoid
any too superior attitude. We should show ourselves ready and eager
to learn. Some say that in the coming age the one great word will be
Education. If so, it is certainly urgent to provide a means by which the
best ideas of each country can be given at once to all the rest.
 This applies also to the field of medical service and public health.
For the popular and medical press abroad we should describe all such
activities here that may be valuable suggestions for public health in
other countries and we should also show how we benefit here from
the many suggestions from abroad. In this section, we should show
our willingness to help in all kinds of relief and reconstruction work
in Europe, and in this field we can also show our own essential democ-
racy, in the great progress that all movements for public health have
made over here in the last twenty years. Also in every possible way
should be shown how the new international order can help the progress
of medical science and how medical science can strengthen the new
international order.
 To promote such special news exchange, in the more important
foreign countries, as now we have a commercial attache at our embas-
sies or legations, it might be well to add educational, agricultural and
possibly medical attaches as well.
 At any rate there should be in each important foreign country a
Bureau of the kind here described, with cable, mail and film divisions,
cooperating with our consular and diplomatic service. And here in the
United States there should be the same three divisions to gather and
send the material.
 As for the actual organization, I can make suggestions only for the
mail division, in which I have had experience here.
 Briefly, in this office we have been organized as follows. First, we
have a news feature service made up of extracts and “re-writes” from
about 200 daily newspapers from all sections of the United States and

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 104
 World War I 85

giving all shades of opinion; also from several hundred general and
technical magazines, trade journals, etc., as well as from all sorts of
federal and state government reports, and reports of private
organizations.
 We have also special men here dealing with various fields of activi-
ties, such as agriculture, food conservation, industry and finance, labor,
education, religion, medicine.
 In connection with these is a section supplying to hundreds of U.S.
exporters printed and picture material to be distributed by them in the
hundreds of thousands of business letters, catalogues, etc. which they
send to foreign countries.
 In addition, we have had on our staff or connected with this Bureau
men with a special knowledge of Russia, Sweden, Norway, Denmark,
Holland, France, England, Spain, Italy, Austria, Germany and also
Latin American countries.
 Finally, we have an art department which produces photographs,
cuts, mats, etc. to illustrate articles, and large re-prints to be placed in
the several thousand shop windows now available to us in foreign
countries; also posters and picture post-cards showing forth war aims
and activities.
 Some such organization perhaps might be valuable as a basis to
build on.
 I have not tried to set all this out in order or in any detail but
merely to make suggestions for what seems to me a tremendous need.
I hope that if this meets with the approval of the government, minds
far abler than my own will combine my suggestions with others and
draw up a strong and adequate system of publicity work abroad,
without which it seems to me that the effort to build a new international
order will meet with little or no success in the critical years ahead.
 Should some such plan be adopted, there exists in our records here
a vast wealth of suggestion for one who is to build up on a permanent
basis such a service for the United States. There are also, I think, some
men on this staff who would be exceedingly valuable for such work
if they could be persuaded to undertake it. For the main direction of
such a service I know of no one more fitted than yourself.
 Sincerely yours,
 Ernest Poole2

 2
 Printed from a copy that indicates Poole signed the original.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 105
 86 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

41. Letter From the Assistant Director of the Division of Foreign
 Picture Service, Committee on Public Information (Tuerk) to
 the Chairman of the Committee on Public Information
 (Creel)1

 New York, November 25, 1918

Dear Mr. Creel:
 We understand that Select Pictures plans to release on December
1st, a five reel subject, THE ROAD THROUGH THE DARK featuring
Clara Kimball Young.
 We reviewed a copy of this picture at our office on November
23rd, and beg to advise that many of its features make it objectionable
both for exhibition in the United States, and for export to other
countries.
 In this picture Clara Kimball Young plays the part of Gabrielle, a
French girl, in love with an American student. The scene is laid in
France. To separate Gabrielle from her lover, her parents send her to
live with an aunt in a village on the Meuse. She corresponds with her
lover by means of a love code which makes their letters appear innocent
to her parents.
 This picture is prejudicial to the French because it shows the inhab-
itants of this village as offering no resistance to the Hun invaders.
Gabrielle’s aunt gives her gold with which to buy off the Huns “as
they did in 1870”.
 This picture also makes a very strong bid for sympathy for Ger-
many. It shows the German officer too honorable to accept gold. He
prevents a private from carrying off Gabrielle. He treats her with great
kindness and consideration. Acts of barbarism and the attempted burn-
ing of the village are portrayed as committed by privates, contrary to
explicit orders from the Imperial Government.
 The German officer, Von Strelitz, takes Gabrielle as his mistress to
Berlin. So far as the audience can tell, she turns pro-German. The last
few hundred feet of the picture reveal that she has been acting as
a spy for the allies all through the picture and communicating the
information which she gathers to her American lover by means of their
love code.
 The presence of many laboratory titles in the print which we
projected indicates that this picture has under-gone a drastic revision,
to adapt it to the change in the military situation. As it stands the

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 1, General Correspondence of George
Creel, Box 3, Brulator, Joseph C. No classification marking.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 106
 World War I 87

picture abounds in technical errors and is wholly inconsistent with
American public opinion.
 Capt. Gleason’s2 office of the Military Intelligence is acquainted
with these facts having viewed the picture with us. We hope to see a
complete copy of this picture before it is released and to receive
complete title sheets so that we can discuss the picture more in detail.3
 Yours very truly,
 DIVISION OF FOREIGN PICTURE SERVICE
 John Tuerk
 Assistant Director

 2
 Not further identified.
 3
 The film was released later that year.

42. Telegram From the Consulate in Irkutsk to the Department
 of State1

 Irkutsk, March 7, 1919, 11 a.m.

 168. Following from Irkutsk. “March 7, 11 a.m. Subject opinion
Consular Officers Siberia on continuance Compub struggle. Consul
Caldwell2 at Vladivistok says “Belive Compub has been successful and
could do good by continuing”. Consul Emory3 at Omsk says “It was
evidently a mistake to demobilize the Russian division of Compub at
this time. This mistake was all the more to be regretted because Compub
was helping more than any other one American organization to explain
away other mistakes in our Siberian policy. Compub at Omsk was
doing splendid work and enjoyed great popularity with Russian public
and press which was increasing daily.”
 Vice Consul Ray4 at Novo Nicolaevsk says “I have many requests
for these bulletins and believe they have done much to enlighten the

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Decimal File 1910–1929, Box 735, 103.93/
1557. No classification marking. Sent via Beijing. Received March 11 at 5:08 a.m.
 2
 John K. Caldwell.
 3
 Reference is to John Augustus Embry.
 4
 Apparent reference to Lacey Gray.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 107
 88 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

Russian public relative to our ways of doing business, education and
farming and American life in general. In my opinion it should be
continued”.
 Vice Consul Williams5 at Cheliabinsk says “Concerning proposed
liquidation in American Press Bureau I call attention to importance of
its store house just now. The store is in charge of a Russian who has
opened a branch in the city where American publications are given
out and he has often fifty calls daily for them. Recently he circulated
this district with some publications and a letter requesting recipient to
advise if he wished further publication of bureau and inquiring in
what he was especially interested. Henceforth letters were sent to repre-
sentative people from lists secured from Zemstvos cooperatives and
other reliable sources and replies now being received evince much
interest. A Russian from the front called on me yesterday stating he
had seen press bureau pamphlet concerning Imperial Government of
Germany in Russia, that this pamphlet was in great demand and he had
called to see how many copies he could get for front where publications
explaining present situation in Russia are so needed. In the present lack
of understanding of our attitude toward Russia it seems unfortunate to
draw out [withdraw?] an institution of reliable information in a territory
where rumor and inaccurate statement circulate often as the only source
of information as (*)6 for people as for the course of the world move-
ments of this present time. Most likely withdrawal of such a work will
cause much comment because of the recent publicity given it through
letters mentioned. The press has already stated that this action is with
the mobilization plans of the allies which makes appear that our interest
in Russia in this respect was only account of loans and it would seem
that America cannot afford to demobilize such institutions in Russia
at this stage”.
 Vice Consul Thomas7 Krasnoyvsk says “consider it very unfortu-
nate that Compub not to consider its useful work. Press and all classes
people have shown greatest interest in publications. This work was
especially helpful to Proletariat in discouraging struggle work out good
scheme of cooperation. This class does not understand our institutions
but nevertheless feels that our democracy must be its model and looks
to us to be their teachers.”
 Vice Consul Hadley,8 resigned says “The demobilization of the
Compub is most unfortunate particularly at this time and if the demobi-

 5
 George W. Williams.
 6
 As in the original. Presumably it signifies an omission or garbled text in the
transmission from Irkutsk.
 7
 Edward B. Thomas.
 8
 Howard D. Hadley.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 108
 World War I 89

lization means the discontinuance or serious curtailment of the work
it was doing in Russia it will mean that still another wonderful opportu-
nity to do work helpful alike to Russia and to America has [been]
allowed to pass. The Compub was doing splendid work in interpreting
America to the Russians and this work was sure to prove very helpful
not only to Russia but to the farmer the laborers and the business men
of America but the mistake that has been made in demobilizing the
Compub can still be largely remedied if the help it was doing shall be
carried on by other American agencies in Russia. Very much can be
done in the way of revival of the Russian newspapers in both news
and editorial columns from the spread of interesting helpful news
about America. This work can be done to a large extent by Consular
Officers on their own initiative. What is needed is patience tact work
with the owners and editors of daily papers. Had no serious trouble
as Vice Consul in getting practically all Compub material into the
Orenburg and Novo Nicolaevsk dailies and the cooperative magazines.
I also succeeded in getting the leading daily of Novo Nicolaevsk to
publish a special American number. This thirteen long articles in it
about America”.
 Vice Consul Palmer9 Ekaterinburg says “at first I thought little of
the Compub but always tried to help along as far as possible. But after
looking into the question more closely and having seen their work
while Brown was here I have come to think much in their work and
certainly believe it should be continued if at all possible. I gave Compub
representative here a letter in which I expressed regret that his work
had been so unexpectedly cut off, that I believe the Compub was the
basis of a great trade getting movement and that I had hoped that
finally it might be fused into and become part some sort of a practical
organization or perhaps better call it information office and that I felt
in this way they would do good for America. At least they were getting
well into connection not only this people here and especially with the
papers but were reaching a class of people in the district which is not
a reader of newspapers and yet is to my mind a class of potential bulk
not to be neglected. I believe however, that telegraph service should
be improved as we generally get news too late peddle out here. The
Compub should certainly not only be continued but pushed to the
limit”.
 Consul Thompson10 Irkutsk says “I have been identified with this
work since August 1917 when begun by Consul General Summers11 this

 9
 Henry Palmer.
 10
 Alfred Ray Thompson.
 11
 Maddin Summers.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 109
 90 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

(under?) appriation [appropriation?] and having worked this (under?)
Department of State/Compub representative in Irkutsk and can testify
to increasing local demand for weekly bulletin on the part of military
organizations, peasants associations and great middle classes who are
grasping blindly for same democratic ideals but who are unable to
find expression of same through primitive Russian press. Feel this work
should be continued Department of States appropriation for at least of
(a?) year longer as it is very important for the Department of State to
have the machinery for explaining to Russians American aims particu-
larly in connection with railway control to offset the propaganda of
certain disgruntled Russian railway officials who will be deprived of
opportunity of receiving bribes.
 My own views on subject have been fully set forth in my number
126 February 20, 6 p.m.12 Have been informed that Japan is establishing
a Compub in Siberia. In short time I shall send Department an estimate
of funds needed to continue this work.” Harris.13
 Reinsch14

 12
 Not found.
 13
 Ernest Lloyd Harris, Consul General in Irkutsk.
 14
 Paul Samuel Reinsch, Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to China.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 110
 World War I 91

43. Report by the Director of the Scandinavian Branch of the
 Division of Films, Committee on Public Information
 (Smith)1

 undated

 REPORT OF GUY CROSWELL SMITH, DIRECTOR
SCANDINAVIAN BRANCH OF THE DIVISION OF FILMS OF THE
 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INFORMATION.
 Upon my arrival in Stockholm on April 1, 1918, from Petrograd
where I had been connected with the Committee’s office, I was
appointed to take charge of the distribution of American official films
in Sweden, Norway and Denmark. Upon investigation of the situation
I found that an immense amount of German propaganda and drama
films were being presented in the picture theatres throughout these
countries. The Scandinavians like films very much and to the large
attendance at the five hundred odd theatres was constantly being con-
veyed a broad influence—always of course, for the German point of
view. The propaganda films showed the success of the Germans and
Austrians, scenes in German cities, munition factories, etc., all tending
to demonstrate how Germany was winning the war. And there was
absolutely no representation as to what the United States was doing.
In Sweden, particularly, the German film propaganda was especially
damaging toward the existence of any ideas of fair neutrality for the
reason that the Swedes were practically all inclined to be pro-German
and the influence of these films was a constant stimulus in the same
direction.
 I foresaw that our films would have to be forced upon the theatres
and distributing companies in some way. The supply of American
drama films in the country was limited on account of the embargo that
had existed, which for a time, had excluded the possibility of importing
films from the United States. This condition had made it easy for the
German film producers to get in their product but they sold only with
the provision that some German propaganda subjects would be taken
with the drama films.
 After conferences with the representatives of the War Trade Board
in Stockholm, Christiania and Copenhagen I formulated the following
plan which in its operation practically drove German propaganda and

 1
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables, Reports,
and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr.
1919, Box 21, Smith, Buy—Berne—Cables Jan June ’19. No classification marking. Smith
forwarded the report to Rickey under a June 1 covering letter written from New York.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 111
 92 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

drama films from the Scandinavian market. Shortly before my arrival
in Stockholm, the export prohibition on American drama films had been
provisionally raised and shipments again began to come—addressed to
the American Legations in the various countries. Before releasing these
to the consignees, they signed agreements that the films would never
be shown in any programme with a German drama or propaganda
film and that one reel of official American would always be shown
with them. This agreement they in turn made with the theatres before
distributing. The three largest companies controlling theatres in Scandi-
navia further agreed that they would never permit any films previously
received to be shown in the same programme with German subjects.
Inasmuch as American films were much more popular with the public
on account of their superiority, the effect of these agreements were
quickly evident. German films were gradually forced out to such an
extent that in three months after my arrival it was difficult to find a
theatre showing German drama films and the German propaganda
films had been completely driven out and replaced by our official films.
I kept a close check on the programmes throughout the three countries
and in the few instances where theatres did not keep their agreement
and showed a German film their ability to get American film was
discontinued.
 During the eight months I was in Scandinavia, I distributed about
100,000 feet of official films. This included American industrial subjects;
Hearst-Pathe and Universal Weeklies showing the Allies war activities
and events in the United States; “Pershing’s Crusaders”2 and the Allied
War Review. These pictures were first shown in the best theatres of
the capitals—Stockholm, Christiania and Copenhagen and then went
in rotation to the smaller houses in these cities and afterward through-
out the other cities and towns of the three countries. Thus, where
previously this immense number of theatregoers had received pictured
war news, only through German eyes they now saw what we were
doing, and, in the industrial subjects, the big American interests, and
the drama films thoroughly American in subject and characters instead
of German.
 In the motion picture announcements of a recent copy of a Stock-
holm newspaper I noticed that out of twelve theatres, eleven were
showing completely American programmes and one French, but no
German films were announced. Apparently German lines have not
come back although it is several months since our control ended.
 Guy Crosswell Smith

 2
 For clips from Pershing’s Crusaders, see the Online Supplement, Appendix A.11.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 112
 World War I 93

44. Editorial Note

 In the final report of the Committee on Public Information, dated
June 1, 1919, Director of the Foreign Section Edgar Sisson wrote: “From
Paris the first Sunday in February, 1919 [February 2], I cabled around
the world demobilization orders for all offices of the committee, except
those of New York, London, and Paris. The offices demobilized by that
order were Copenhagen, Stockholm, The Hague, Berne, Prague, Rome,
Madrid, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Lima, Colon, Mexico City, Peking,
Vladivostok, Harbin, Irkutsk, Omsk, and Archangel.
 “To the Siberian and Russian offices the chief leeway in time was
granted, but it was impossible to allow them to operate beyond March
15. The last members of the group did not reach the United States until
late in June, 1919.” (Complete Report of the Chairman of the Committee on
Public Information, page 213)
 Despite the cut-off, some offices continued to produce material
well into 1919. See the Online Supplement, Appendix A.12 for an
example of such work. This newsletter was produced by the CPI for
distribution in Russia, where the civil war was ongoing, on March 17,
1919. (National Archives, RG 63, Entry 106, Correspondence, Cables,
Reports, and Newspapers Received from Employees of the Committee
Abroad, Nov. 1917–Apr. 1919, Box 2)
 Commissioners of the CPI at the various overseas offices submitted
their final reports to Chairman of the Committee on Public Information
George Creel, which are included in Complete Report of the Chairman of
the Committee on Public Information, pages 149–290. President Woodrow
Wilson formally abolished the Committee on Public Information by
means of Executive Order 3154 of August 21, 1919.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 113
 94 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

Appendix A

A.1. Photograph1

 1
 Reading Room of the Allies Right Hand Show Window. [Caption is in the original.
See Document 24.]

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 114
 World War I 95

A.2. Photograph1

 1
 Reading Room of the Allies. Interior. Partial View. Note the American flags and
War poster. Serious looking gentleman in shirt sleeves is the Manager. [Caption is in
the original. See Document 24.]

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 115
 96 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

A.3. Photograph1

 1
 Reading Room of the Allies. Interior. Partial View. [Caption is in the original. See
Document 24.]

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 116
 World War I 97

A.4. Photograph1

 1
 See Document 24.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 117
 98 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

A.5. Movie Still1

 1
 America’s Answer (1918).
 Source: National Archives, RG 111, Records of the Office of the Chief Signal Officer
(1960–1985), Documentary Films, ca. 1914–ca. 1944. Distributed by the Committee on
Public Information. 9 reels.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 118
 World War I 99

A.6. Pamphlet1

 1
 The Spirit of America in the War
 Source: National Archives, RG 63, Entry 105, Director's Office of the Foreign Section,
General Correspondence, Box 4, Bjorkman—August 1–20.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 119
 100 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

A.7. Catalog Insert1

 1
 See Document 39.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 120
 World War I 101

A.8. Pamphlet1

 1
 See Document 39.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 121
 102 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

A.9. Portrait of President Wilson1

 1
 See Document 39.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 122
 World War I 103

A.10. Newspaper Article1

 1
 See Document 39.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 123
 104 Foreign Relations, 1917–1972, Public Diplomacy

A.11. Movie Still1

 1
 Pershing’s Crusaders (1918).
 Source: National Archives, RG 111, Records of the Office of the Chief Signal Officer
(1960–1985), Documentary Films, ca. 1914–ca. 1944. Distributed by the Committee on
Public Information. 3 reels.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 124
 World War I 105

A.12. Newsletter1

 1
 See Document 44.

383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 125
 383-247/428-S/40002
X : 40002$CH01 Page 126 – blank – no folio