Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–1, Documents on Global Issues, 1969–1972 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2005)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1969-76ve01).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Documents on Global Issues, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–1)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976

Volume E–1

Documents on Global Issues, 1969–1972

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on June 1, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
June 2018

Documents on Global Issues, 1969–1972 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–1)Contents

Preface

Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Documents on Global Issues, 1969-1972Chapter 1. U.S. Policy Towards Terrorism, Hijacking of Aircraft, and Attacks on Civil AviationIsraeli Attack on Beirut Airport and Hijacking of TWA Flight 840, January-December 1969 (Documents 1-36)

Policy Towards Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad, April 1970-April 1971 (Documents 37-44)

U.S. Response to Hijackings by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Additional Anti-Hijacking Measures, September 1970-June 1972 (Documents 45-89)

The Olympic Attack and the Anti-Terrorism Initiatives, September−December 1972 (Documents 90-121)

Chapter 2. U.S.-Cuba Hijacking Agreement, 1969-February 1973 (Documents 122-142)

Chapter 3. U.S. Policy Towards International Production and Trafficking in Illegal Drugs (Documents 143-227)

Chapter 4. International Cooperation in Space, 1969-1972 (Documents 228-286)

Chapter 5. International Environmental Policy (Documents 287-331)

Chapter 6. Oceans Policy (Documents 332-444)

Errata

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. Those regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George H. W. Bush on October 28, 1991, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State’s Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series must include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purpose of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This electronic–only volume is part of the subseries of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important decisions and actions of the foreign policy of the administration of Richard M. Nixon. This is the second Foreign Relations volume to be published in a new format, that of electronic–only publication. Approximately 25 percent of the volumes scheduled for publication for the 1969–1976 subseries, covering the Nixon and Nixon–Ford administrations, will be in this format. The decision to institute this change was taken in full consultation with the Department’s Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, which was established under the Foreign Relations statute. The advantages of this new method of presenting documentation are evident in this volume: the format enables convenient access to more key documentation on a broader range of issues, all or any portion of which can be easily downloaded. Annotation–the value added element of documentary editing–is still present in limited form, but not to the scale of a Foreign Relations volume. This electronic–only publication results in substantial savings in cost and time of production, thus allowing the series to present a fuller range of documentation, on a wider range of topics, sooner than would have been possible under a print–only format. These advantages compensate for the fact that this Foreign Relations volume is not an actual book bound in traditional ruby buckram. The Department of State, the Historian, the General Editor, and the Historical Advisory Committee are all dedicated to publishing the great majority of the volumes in the Foreign Relations series in print form; these are also posted in electronic format on the Department of State’s website. While the future of research in documentary publications is increasingly tied to the ease of use and availability of the Internet, the Department of State will continue to use both print and electronic–only versions to make the Foreign Relations series available to the widest audience possible. In that sense, this innovation is in keeping with the general principles of the series begun by President Lincoln and Secretary of State Seward and continued by subsequent presidents and secretaries of state for more than 140 years.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, E–1

This volume documents the foreign policy of the Nixon administration concerning global issues, sometimes also called transnational issues. The table of contents provides the best idea of the kinds of issues documented by this topical, global issues volume: terrorism, hijacking, and other attacks on civil aviation; international narcotics control; international cooperation in space; international environmental policy; and oceans policy. This is by no means a complete list of the global issues that the Nixon administration confronted. Others, such as energy, disarmament, refugees, and human rights, will be covered in separate volumes in the 1969–1976 subseries. During the period covered in this volume, there were a number of refugee problems that resulted from regional conflicts or civil wars; however, the Nixon administration usually approached such refugee problems individually, rather than dealing with them as part of a global problem. Although not then considered to be a major factor in general U.S. foreign policy, human rights violations–especially the question of religious persecution–surfaced repeatedly during the period from 1969 to 1972. Again, the Nixon administration approached the problem bilaterally rather than multilaterally. Any attempt to link human rights into a single compilation with some ideological or philosophical coherence would not represent how contemporary policy makers conceived the issue. It is the opinion of the editors that this volume covers the era most faithfully by focusing on those topics that the first Nixon administration recognized as distinctly global issues and dealt with on a transnational basis. Topics treated primarily on a bilateral or regional basis can be found in other volumes in this subseries.

The Nixon administration was the first in U.S. history to grapple with a major terrorist threat to civil aviation, diplomats, and other representatives of nations, including Olympic athletes and ordinary citizens. Hijackings, the hostage taking of U.S. citizens, and attacks against and assassinations of U.S. diplomats occurred prior to 1969, but the U.S. Government had neither formulated an overall policy in response to these terrorist incidents, nor designed a plan of action for unilateral, bilateral, or multilateral action to prevent them. This volume documents the beginning of that effort to develop an overall policy towards terrorism and to forge an international campaign to combat it. The Nixon administration also faced a serious drug addiction problem at home and sought to attack that problem by eliminating its perceived causes: illegal opium production and the illicit narcotics trade. An increasingly sustained effort against illegal international drug trafficking is documented in this volume. The volume also demonstrates that Nixon and his major foreign policy advisers were concerned with international environmental issues. Environmentalism in the United States had a transnational aspect, with a growing but still incomplete realization that the earth consisted of one interconnected environment. Exploration of outer space, as well as the use of near space for communications and photoreconnaissance by the U.S. Government and private companies, increased dramatically during the period. The section on international space cooperation documents a dialogue among the Nixon administration’s science and political advisers about the wisdom of international cooperation, especially its relationship to commercial and international security concerns. The final section covers U.S. oceans policy, including fisheries and potential economic and military use of the oceans’ sea beds, as well as territorial limits, rights of passage, and other law of the sea questions. The largest chapter in the volume, it reflects the Nixon administration’s emphasis on law of the sea as a major international issue.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations electronic–only volumes follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. The original text is reproduced exactly, including marginalia or other notations, which are both visible on the facsimile copy of the document and described in the source note. There is also a text version of the document. The editors have supplied a heading, a summary, and a source note with additional relevant information, as required, for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected in the text file. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the text, and a list of abbreviations, persons, and sources accompanies the volume.

Bracketed insertions in roman type are used on the facsimile copy and in the text file to indicate text omitted by the editors because it deals with an unrelated subject. Text that remains classified after declassification review is blacked–out on the facsimile copy and a bracketed insertion (in italic type) appears in the text file. Entire documents selected for publication but withheld because they must remain classified are accounted for by a heading, a source note, and a bracketed note indicating the number of pages not declassified. These denied documents are listed in their chronological place in the volume.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Historical Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. The Historical Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes, as it deems necessary, to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations.

Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Review

Under the terms of the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act (PRMPA) of 1974 (44 U.S.C. 2111 note), the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) has custody of the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The requirements of the PRMPA and implementing regulations govern access to the Nixon Presidential historical materials. The PRMPA and implementing public access regulations require NARA to review for additional restrictions in order to ensure the protection of the privacy rights of former Nixon White House officials, since these officials were not given the opportunity to separate their personal materials from public papers. Thus, the PRMPA and related implementing public access regulations require NARA to notify formally the Nixon estate and former Nixon White House staff members that the agency is scheduling for public release Nixon White House historical materials. The Nixon estate and former White House staff members have 30 days to contest the release of Nixon historical materials in which they were a participant or are mentioned. Further, the PRMPA and implementing regulations require NARA to segregate and return to the creator of files private and personal materials. All Foreign Relations volumes that include materials from NARA’s Nixon Presidential Materials Staff are processed and released in accordance with the PRMPA.

Declassification Review

The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of all the documents published in this volume. The review was undertaken in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958, as amended, on Classified National Security Information, and applicable laws.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State and other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government. The final declassification review of this volume, which began in 2000 and was completed in 2005, resulted in the decision to withhold no documents in full, to excise a paragraph or more in one document, and to make minor excisions in one document. The editors are confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that this volume is an accurate record of the foreign policy of the first Nixon administration towards global issues.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project of the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II), at College Park, Maryland.

The editors also wish to acknowledge the Richard Nixon Estate for allowing access to the Nixon Presidential recordings, and the Richard Nixon Library & Birthplace for facilitating that access.

Susan K. Holly did the research, initial selection, and initial annotation for the sections on U.S. Policy Towards Terrorism, Hijacking of Aircraft, and Attacks on Civil Aviation; U.S. Policy Towards International Production and Trafficking in Illegal Drugs; International Cooperation in Space; and International Environmental Policy. Edward C. Keefer made revisions in selection and annotation for those sections to bring the volume into conformity with the approved format for electronic volumes. The final section on Oceans Policy was researched, selected, and annotated by William B. McAllister, under the supervision of Louis Smith, Chief of the General and European Division, and the general direction of the General Editor.

Susan C. Weetman, Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division, and Dean Weatherhead coordinated the declassification review. Kristin L. Ahlberg, Renée A. Goings, Florence M. Segura, and Jennifer Walele performed the copy and technical editing of the list of documents, summaries, and annotation. Kristin Ahlberg also compiled the list of abbreviations. Richard A. Moss and Chris Tudda scanned the documents, prepared them for on–line publication, and devised the Internet format.

Marc J. Susser
The Historian

Bureau of Public Affairs
September 2005

Sources Sources

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It also requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Many of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high–level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All the Department’s indexed central files through July 1973 have been permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration at College Park, Maryland (Archives II). Many of the Department’s decentralized office (or lot) files covering the 1969–1976 period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred or are in the process of being transferred from the Department’s custody to Archives II.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Nixon and other White House foreign policy records, including tape recordings of conversations with key U.S. and foreign officials. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries and the Nixon Presidential Materials Project at Archives II include some of the most significant foreign affairs–related documentation from the Department of State and other Federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Access to the Nixon White House tape recordings is governed by the terms of the Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act (P.L. 93–526; 88 Stat. 1695) and an access agreement with the Office of Presidential Libraries of the National Archives and Records Administration and the Nixon estate. In February 1971 President Nixon initiated a voice activated taping system in the Oval Office of the White House and, subsequently, in the President’s Office in the Executive Office Building, Camp David, the Cabinet Room, and White House and Camp David telephones. The audiotapes include conversations of President Nixon with his Assistant for National Security Affairs Henry Kissinger, other White House aides, Secretary of State Rogers, other Cabinet officers, members of Congress, and key foreign officials. The clarity of the voices on the tape recordings is often very poor, but the editors make every effort to verify the accuracy of the conversations. Readers are urged to consult the recordings for an appreciation of those aspects of the discussions that cannot be fully captured in a transcription, such as the speakers’ inflections and emphases that may convey nuances of meaning, as well as the larger context of the discussion.

Research for this volume was completed through special access to restricted documents at the Nixon Presidential Materials Project. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still–classified documents. The Nixon Presidential Materials Staff is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication.

Sources for Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume E–1

The editors, Susan K. Holly and William B. McAllister, undertook research for this volume with initial assistance from Bruce Duncombe. President Nixon usually opted not to concentrate on global issues, instead delegating policy direction and implementation to the Department of State and other relevant executive agencies, departments, and advisers. Nevertheless, White House involvement in the decision–making process and policy formulation certainly occurred, as in the cases of the problem of illegal drugs and international cooperation in space. Consequently, the files of the Department of State provide the best source for global issues and the records of the Nixon Presidential Materials, at Archives II, constitute another key foundation. Moreover, documents concerning topics covered in this volume are located in diffuse and diverse files that do not correspond to the usual types of files in other Foreign Relations volumes for the same subseries. It is best, therefore, to discuss the principal sources as they relate to each major topic.

Terrorism, hijacking, and attacks on civilian aviation and the U.S.–Cuba agreement on hijacking in early 1973 follow the diverse pattern of Department of State sources. Much of the hijacking of civilian aviation took place within the context of the Arab–Israeli dispute, so a good portion of the documentation, including that on the Black September 1970 hijackings in to Jordan, is filed under the massive POL 27 ARAB–ISR file in the Department of State’s Central Files. AV 12 and AV 12 US comprise the other principal hijacking files in the Department’s Central Files. Originally intended for general and U.S. aircraft and aeronautical equipment, the Department of State used these economic files to house records relating to the hijacking of aircraft. High profile hijackings necessarily gained the attention of the National Security Council Staff, the Special Assistant to the President, Henry Kissinger, and President Nixon himself. Researchers will find the best documentation on hijacking at this level in the Nixon Presidential Materials, National Security Files, Subject Files, Hijackings. Terrorism against diplomats and efforts to prevent it are covered primarily in two Department of State Central Files: POL 17 US, the general file for U.S. diplomatic and consular representation, and POL 23–8, another general file for demonstrations, riots and violence that was used as a repository for documentation on reporting on violence against diplomats as well as efforts to prevent it. The Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, 1976 Olympics hold the best documents on the Munich massacre of Israeli athletes. (Why the file designation is not 1972 Olympics is inexplicable and is probably a mistake.) The NSC Files, Haig Chronological Files, contain limited but valuable information on Munich, as do the White House tapes. For the post–Munich effort to combat terrorism, the Department of State Central File, POL 23–8, and the Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism provide the most fundamental documentation. The two best files for the negotiations leading up to the U.S.–Cuban hijacking agreement are AV 12 and the Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba.

The section on U.S. policy towards production and trafficking in illegal drugs draws heavily on the Nixon Presidential Materials because the Nixon administration, and especially Special Assistant to the President Daniel Moynihan, believed that the problem of heroin addiction in the United States required an international campaign to cripple the illegal opium trade. Extensive documentation on Moynihan’s initiatives as well as other memorandum to the President on the issue, and summaries of the Heroin Task Force are contained in the NSC Files, Subject Files, Narcotics. The best Department of State of State Central Files records on this topic can be found in SOC 11–5 and SOC 5–11 US, as well as the entire INCO–Drugs 17 series, including most importantly, INC 17 TUR, as well as INCO 17 US, INCO 17 US–TUR, and INCO 17 Drugs Southeast Asia, or Burma, and so on.

A diverse source base supports the section on the environment, with good files in both the Nixon Presidential Materials and the Department of State’s Central files. The most important Nixon source is NSC Files, Agency, CEQ (Council on Environmental Quality, the precursor to the Environmental Protection Agency). The Department of State Central Files’ SCI 41 designation provides the most useful information concerning general international environmental issues. SCI 41 UN and SCI 41–3 UN contain the best records for UN meetings and action on the environment. Initially at President Nixon’s urging, NATO undertook an environmental initiative through its Commission on the Challenges to Modern Society (CCMS). SCI 41 NATO is a key file that is supplemented by the Nixon Presidential Materials, Agency Files, NATO. Accounts of other organizations’ meetings and initiatives dealing with the environment are filed in the Department’s Central Files under SCI 41 ECE and SCI 41 OECD. One Department of State Lot File that provides a useful perspective for this section, and previous sections as well, is the President’ Evening Reading, Lot 74 D 164, prepared by the Department of State. This lot file contains short summaries about significant foreign policy developments, including substantial references to global issues interspaced through this four–year period. It provides insight into the information that the Department shared with the President in a thumbnail sketch.

Presidential administrations regularly treated space exploration and cooperation as high– profile issues. The Nixon Presidential Materials, NMSC Files, Subject Files, Space Programs, and the NSC Files, Agency Files, NASA, contain the best records of U.S. space policy for this period. See also the NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), National Study memoranda (NSSMs) and National Decision memoranda (NSDMs) files relating to cooperation in space. The best single Department of State Central File is SP 10 US. Researchers should also consult SP 1–1 and SP 1–1 US–USSR.

The large section on Oceans Policy draws primarily on three sources: The Department of State Central File, POL 33–8; Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Subject Files, Seabeds; and the Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files) relating to National Security Study Memoranda (NSSMs) and National Security Decision Memoranda (NSDMs) on fisheries, seabeds, and law of the sea. This section also relied upon Department of State lot files, but no single one figured prominently, so researchers should consult the list of sources.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Central Files. See National Archives and Records Administration

Lot Files. These files have been or will be transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration in College Park, Maryland, Record Group 59.

National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, Maryland Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State Central Files

AV 12 US: United States aircraft and aeronautical equipment (hijackings of)

INCO–DRUGS ASIA SE: general policy, drugs in Southeast Asia

INCO–DRUGS BURMA: general policy, drugs in Burma

INCO–DRUGS FR: general policy, drugs in France

INCO DRUGS 17 THAI: general policy, drugs in Thailand

INCO–DRUGS TUR: general policy, drugs in Turkey

INCO–DRUGS 17 US: United States drug laws and regulations

INCO–DRUGS 17 US–TUR: United States–Turkey relations, drug laws and regulations

INCO–Fish US: United States fishing industry

OAS 3: meetings and organization of the Organization of American States

ORG 7/NM: visits, narcotics matters

POL 23–8: organizations and conferences

POL 33–4: territorial waters

POL 33–5: continental shelf

POL 33–6: high seas

POL 33–8: Law of the Sea

POL SP–US: Spanish–United States relations

POL 27 ARAB–ISR: military operations, Arabs and Israelis

POL 17 US: United States diplomatic and consular representation

SCI 31: oceanography

SCI 41: science, environment

SCI 61–3: science, anthropology

SCI 41 BRAZ: science, Brazilian environment

SCI 41 ECE: science, environment, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

SCI 41 OECD: science, environment, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

SCI 41 UN: science, environment, United Nations

SCI 41–3 UN: science, United Nations environmental matters

SCI 41–3 NATO: science, North Atlantic Treaty Organization environmental matters

SOC 11–5: traffic in narcotics

SOC 11–5 ECOSOC: traffic in narcotics and the United Nations Economic and Social Council

SOC 11–5 US: drug trafficking in the United States

SP 1–1: international cooperation in space

SP 10 US: United States space flight and exploration

SP 1–1 US–USSR: United States–Soviet cooperation in space

UN 3 GA: United Nations, General Assembly

Lot Files ARA/LA Files: Lot 74 D 467
Files of the Assistant Secretary and U.S. Coordinator, Alliance for Progress

D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243
Material on Law of the Sea negotiations, including chronological files, briefing books, cables, and miscellaneous documents.

INR/GGI Files: Lot 00 D 221
Office of the Geographer and Global Issues Program files

IO/SCT Files: Lot 72 D 376
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission files and seabeds records

L/OA Files: Lot 72 D 505
Law of the Sea documents concerning fisheries issues, relations with Canada, seabed arms control, congressional relations, the Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment, industry interests, communications with the Department of Defense, pollution, and inter–governmental Law of the Sea consultative groups.

L/OA Files: Lot 73 D 391
Files of John R. Stevenson for 1969–70 covering regional negotiations, congressional relations, and subject files concerning Law of the Sea and ocean dumping.

L/OES Files: Lot 75 D 88
L/OES Subject, Country, and Chronological files

L/OES Files: Lot 76 D 293
Political and General Law of the Sea files

L/OES Files: Lot 80 D 288
Law of the Sea conference files including instructions for delegations to international negotiations, comparisons of draft treaty articles, and development of sea law–related National Security Study Memoranda and National Security Decision Memoranda

L/UNA Files: Lot 97 D 304
General United Nations Affairs files

OES/OLP Files: Lot 90 D 187
Law of the Sea Congressional documents

OES/OLP/OCEANS Files: Lot 90 D 180
Law of the Sea policy files concerning deep seabed mining, and bilateral and regional relations.

OES/OA/MLP Files: Lot 92 D 208
Law of the Sea position papers and instructions for delegations to international negotiations.

OES/OA/MLP Files: Lot 94 D 064
General Law of the Sea Files

President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164
Material Prepared for the Department of State for the President’s evening reading

S/S–I Files: Lot 73 D 288
National security files from the National Security Council and related papers concerning NSC matters retired from the files of the NSC desk

S/S–I Files: Lot 892 D 126
National Security Council, Council on International Economic Policy, and Under Secretary Committee miscellaneous files

S/S–I Files: Lot 83 D 305
National Security Decision Memoranda and related documents.

S/S–I Files: Lot 83 D 113
NSC Law of the Sea Policy reviews and guidance to international delegations.

Nixon Presidential Materials Project National Security Council Files Agency Files, Council on Environmental Quality

Agency Files, Department of State

Agency Files, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Agency Files, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Agency Files, Office of Science and Technology

Subject Files, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism

Subject Files, Hijackings

Subject Files, Narcotics

Subject Files, 1976 Olympics

Subject Files, Seabeds

Subject Files, Space Programs

President Memoranda, 1971

Country Files, Europe, Canada

Country Files, Latin America, Cuba

Country Files, Latin America, Brazil

Country Files, Latin America, General

Country Files, Middle East, Israel

Presidential Correspondence File, Pakistan, President Bhutto

Haig Chronological File, Haig Telcons Haig Chronological File, Haig Memcons

Saunders Chronological Files, National Security Council Operations Staff Meetings

National Security Council Institutional Files (H–Files) National Security Study Memoranda Files

National Security Decision Memoranda Files

Senior Review Group Meetings

Senior Review Group Minutes, Originals

Under–Secretaries Committee Memorandum Files

White House Central Files Special Files, President’s Office Files, Memoranda for the President

White House Tapes

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Manuscript Division Kissinger Papers

Published Sources

John M. Logsdon with Dwayne A. Day and Roger D. Launius (eds.), Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program, Vol. II, External Relations (Washington, DC: NASA History Office, 1996).

U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 92nd Congress, 1st Session, December 1971, Part 1, The Law of the Sea Crisis: A Staff Report on the United Nations Seabed Committee, the Outer Continental Shelf and Marine Mineral Development (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1972).

U.S. Department of State, Department of State Bulletin, 1969–1972.

U.S. Department of State, U.S. Participation in the U.N., Report by the President Congress, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1970–73).

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1969–1970 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1970, 1971).

Yearbook of the United Nations, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, Vols. 22–26, (New York: Office of Public Information, United Nations, 1971–1975).

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AALAPSO, Afro-Asian-Latin American Peoples’ Solidarity Organization

ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AF, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AF/I, Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AID, Agency for International Development

ALPA, Airline Pilots Association

AMB, ambassador

ANERA, American Near East Refugee Aid

ARA, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARA/BR, Office of Brazil Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARA/EP, Office of Ecuador and Peru Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARA/LA, Bureau for Latin America, Agency for International Development and Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARA/LA/APA, Office of Andean and Pacific Affairs, Bureau for Latin America, Agency for International Development and Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ARA/LA/APU, Office of Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay Affairs, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

ASAP, as soon as possible

ASTA, American Society of Travel Agents

ATA, Air Transport Association of America

ATF, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Department of Justice

BNDD, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Department of Justice

BOAC, British Overseas Airways Corporation

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

BSO, Black September Organization

C, Office of the Counselor of the Department of State

CAB, Civil Aeronautics Board

CBS, Columbia Broadcasting System

CCD, Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (United Nations)

CCMS, Committee on Challenges of Modern Society, NATO

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

CEP, Chile, Ecuador, and Peru

CEQ, Council on Environmental Quality

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CID, Criminal Investigation Division

CIF, Chinese Irregular Forces

CINCEUR, Commander in Chief, European Forces

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific Forces

CINCUSAFE, Commander in Chief, U.S. Air Force, Europe

CIO, Central Intelligence Organization, South Vietnam

CIOA, Committee on International Ocean Affairs

CIPME, Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment

CND, United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs

Comite, committee

COMSAT, Communications Satellite Corporation

CRC, OECD Committee for Research Cooperation

CSC, Communications Satellite Corporation

CSSR, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic

D, Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, Department of State

DALE, Office for Drug Abuse Law Enforcement

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDT, dichloro diphenyl trichloroethane, (pesticide widely used in the United States up until the 1970s)

DELS, Delegates

DirGen, Director General

DOD, Department of Defense

DOD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

D/LOS, NSC Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea, Office of the Deputy Secretary, Department of State

DAGLOS, Defense Advisory Group on Law of the Sea, Department of Defense

DOS, Department of State

DOT, Department of Transportation

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EE, Eastern Europe

E/OA/AN, Aviation Negotiations Division, Office of Aviation, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

E/OA/AP, Aviation Programs and Policy Division, Office of Aviation, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

E/TT/TD, Office of Telecommunications, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

E/ORF, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

E/ORF/FSE, Office of Fuels and Energy, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA/ACA, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of East Asian Affairs, Department of State

EA/J, Office of Japanese Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ROC, Office of Republic of China Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/ROK, Office of Republic of Korea Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

ECA, United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

ECAFE, United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East

ECE, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

ECLA, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America

ECOSOC, United Nations Economic and Social Council

EDT, Eastern Daylight Time

EEZ, Exclusive Economic Zone

ENDC, United Nations Eighteen Nation Disarmament Conference

ELDO, European Launcher Development Organization

EOB, Executive Office Building

EPA, Environmental Protection Agency

EPS, Executive Protective Service

ESC, European Space Conference

ESRO, European Space Research Organization

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/CAN, Office of Canada Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/GER, Office of Germany Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/FBX, Office of French, Benelux Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/RPE, Office of Organization for European Cooperation and Development, European Community and Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/SES, Soviet and Eastern European Exchanges Staff, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/SOV, Office of Soviet Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EUR/SPP, Office of Spain and Portugal Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

ExCom, Executive Committee

Exdis, Exclusive Distribution

Ex-Im, Export-Import Bank

FAA, Federal Aviation Administration

FAO, United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization

FAR, Forces Armées du Royaume (Royal Armed Forces of Laos)

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FCC, Federal Communications Commission

FCO, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, United Kingdom

FEER, Far Eastern Economic Review

FODAG, United States Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture

FMS, Foreign Military Sales

FonMin, Foreign Minister

FonOff, Foreign Office

FonSec, Foreign Secretary

FPD, Federal Political Department, Swiss Embassy, Cuba

FRG, Federal Republic of Germany

FRG, Government of France

FSI, Foreign Service Institute, Department of State

FSO, Foreign Service Officer

FY, Fiscal Year

FYI, for your information

GA, United Nations General Assembly

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GDR, German Democratic Republic

GNP, Gross National Product

GESAMP, Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection

GOA, Government of Argentina

GOB, Government of Brazil

GOC, Government of Cuba

GOE, Government of Ecuador

GOI, Government of India

GOI, Government of Israel

GOJ, Government of Jordan

GOL, Government of Lebanon

GOP, Government of Pakistan

GOT, Government of Turkey

GOU, Government of Uruguay

GPO, Government Printing Office

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GS, General Schedule

GUB, Government of the Union of Burma

GVN, Government of Vietnam

H, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations

HAK, Henry A. Kissinger

HEW, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

HR, House Resolution

HUD, Department of Housing and Urban Development

IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency

IAJC, Inter-American Juridical Committee

IATA, International Air Transport Association

IBM, International Business Machines

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICAO, International Civil Aviation Organization

ICJ, International Court of Justice

ICRC, International Committee for the Red Cross

ICSC, Interim Communications Satellite Corporation

ICSU, International Council of Scientific Unions

IDA, International Development Association

IDEP, United Nations Institute for Economic Development and Planning

IFALPA, International Federation of Airline Pilots Association

IFTW, International Transport Workers Federation

ILC, International Law Commission

ILO, International Labour Organization

IMF, International Monetary Fund

IMCO, Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization

IMSAP, International Marine Sciences Panel, National Academy of Sciences

INCB, International Narcotics Control Board

INCO, industries and commodities

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/DCC, Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/GGI, Office of the Geographer and Global Issues, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/RAR, Office of Research and Analysis for American Republics, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/XR, Office of External Research, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INS, Immigration and Naturalization Service

INTERPOL, International Criminal Police Organization

INTELSAT, International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/HDC, Office of Health and Drug Control, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/OES, Office of International Economic and Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/P, Office of Public Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/SCT, Science and Technology Agency, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IOC, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission

IO/TRC, Office of Transportation and Communications, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IRS, Internal Revenue Service

ISSC, International Social Science Council

IUCN, International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources

IWG, Intergovernmental Working Group

J, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

JAA, Jordan Arab Army

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

J/PM, Office of Politico-Military Affairs, Under Secretary for Political Affairs, Department of State

KMT, Koumintang

L, Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/AF, Assistant Legal Adviser for African Affairs, Department of State

L/ARA, Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

L/E, Assistant Legal Adviser for Economic Affairs, Department of State

L/EA, Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/LOS, Assistant Legal Adviser for Law of the Sea Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/M/SCA, Assistant Legal Adviser for Management and Consular Affairs, Department of State

L/OA, Assistant Legal Adviser for Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/OES, Assistant Legal Adviser for Oceans, International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/PMO, Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/SCI, Assistant Legal Adviser for Scientific Affairs, Department of State

L/SPA, Assistant Legal Adviser for Special Political Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/T, Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs, Department of State

L/UNA, Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Affairs, Department of State

LA, Latin America

LDC, less-developed country

LTA, long-term agreement

LOS, Law of the Sea

M, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Management

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

ME, Middle East

MFBR, Mutual Balanced Force Reduction

MFN, Most-Favored Nation

MIG, Soviet fighter aircraft named for designers Mikoyan and Gurevich

MisOff, Mission Officer

MSY, Maximum Sustainable Yield

NAC, North Atlantic Council

NACOA, National Advisory Committee on Oceans and Atmosphere

NAS, National Academy of Sciences

NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NASC, National Aeronautics and Space Council

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NCMRED, National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/ARN, Office of Lebanon, Jordan, Syrian Arab Republic, Iraq Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/IAI, Office of Israel and Arab-Israel Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State

NEAFC, North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission

NOAA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Nodis, No Distribution

Noforn, No Foreign Dissemination

NPC, National Petroleum Council

NSA, National Security Agency

NSC, National Security Council

NSDM, National Security Decision Memorandum

NSF, National Science Foundation

NSSM, National Security Study Memorandum

NTB, National Aeronautics and Space Administration Tech Brief; also National Transportation Board

O, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration

O/SY, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security

OAS, Organization of American States

OASGA, Organization of American States General Assembly

OAU, Organization of African Unity

OBE, overtaken by events

ODAP, Office for Drug Abuse Prevention

OECD, Organization for European Cooperation and Development

OECD/ENV, Organization for European Cooperation and Development Environment Committee

OEP, Office of Economic Policy, Department of Treasury

OES, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Department of State

OES/OA/MLP, Marine Law and Policy, Office of Ocean Affairs, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Department of State

OES/OLP, Office of Ocean Law and Policy, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Department of State

OES/OLP/OCEANS, Office of Oceans Affairs, Office of Ocean Law and Policy, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Department of State

OMB, Office of Management and Budget

OPEC, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries

OST, Office of Science and Technology

PAA, Pan-American Airways

Para, paragraph

PAO, Public Affairs Officer

PermRep, Permanent Representative

PFLP, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine

PL, Public Law

PLO, Palestinian Liberation Organization

PM, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State; also prime minister

PM/ISO, Office of International Security Operations, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

POLAD, Political Advisor

POW, Prisoner of War

PRC, People’s Republic of China

RAM, Research Applications Module

R & D, Research and Development

Recon, Remote Control

Reftel, Reference telegram

Rep, Representative

Res, United Nations Resolution

RG, Record Group

RGUB, Royal Government of Burma

RLAF, Royal Lao Air Force

RLT, Royal Lao Government

ROC, Republic of China

ROK, Republic of Korea

ROVN, Republic of Vietnam

RTG, Royal Thai Government

S, Office of the Secretary of State

S/FW, Special Assistant to the Secretary for Fisheries and Wildlife, Department of State

S/FW–COA, Coordinator of Ocean Affairs, Special Assistant to the Secretary for Fisheries and Wildlife, Department of State

S/NM, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Narcotics Matters

S/PRS, Office of Press Relations, Department of State

S/PC, Planning and Coordination Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe

SADOF, Shelf and Deep Ocean Floor (a working sub-group of CIPME)

SALT, Strategic Arms Limitation Talks

SAODAP, Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention

SARG, Syrian Arab Republic Government

SC, United Nations Security Council; also North Atlantic Treaty Organization Science Committee

SCI, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

SCI/EN, Office of Environmental Affairs, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

SCI/SAM, Office of Space and Atmospheric Affairs, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

SCI/SE, Office of Space and Environmental Science Affairs, Office of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

SLBM, Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles

SOSUS, Sound Surveillance System

SRG, Senior Review Group

SUDEPE, Superintendencia do desenvolvimento da pesca (fishery development agency), Brazil

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State while away from Washington

Septel, separate telegram

SNO, Special Narcotics Organization, Thailand

SRG, Senior Review Group

STS, Space Transportation System

SVN, South Vietnam

SYG, United Nations Secretary-General

TASC, Treatment Alternative to Street Crime

TASS, Telegrafnoye Agentsvo Sovetskogo Soiuza (Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union)

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams sent to the Secretary of State while outside of Washington

TMO, Turkish Soil Products Office

TWA, Trans-World Airlines

U, Under Secretary of State

UAR, United Arab Republic

UARG, Government of the United Arab Republic

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNCLOS III, Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea

UNCTAD, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNDP, United Nations Development Program

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNICEF, United Nations Children’s Fund

UNIDO, United Nations Industrial Development Organization

UNRWA, United Nations Relief and Works Agency

US, United States

USA, United States of America

USAFE, United States Air Forces in Europe

USAREUR, United States Army, European Command

USC, Under Secretaries Committee

USEC Brussels, United States Mission to the European Economic Communities in Brussels, Belgium

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USINT, United States Interest Section

USIS, United States Information Service

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USNATO, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

USNMR SHAPE, United States National Military Representative, Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers in Europe

USOECD, United States Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations

VA, Veteran’s Administration

VNAF, Vietnamese Air Force

WE, Western Europe

WEO, Western Europe and Other group

WHO, World Health Organization

WMO, World Meteorological Organization

WNRC, Washington National Records Center

WSAG, Washington Special Actions Group

List of Persons List of Persons

Abshire, David M., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from April 1970 until January 1973

Aga Khan, Prince Sadruddin, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 1965–1977

Agnew, Spiro T., Vice President of the United States

Aldirch, George H., Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Anders, William, Executive-Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council from 1969

Annenberg, Walter H., U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom from April 1969 until October 1974

Arafat, Yassir, Leader of Fatah and Chairman, Palestine Liberation Organization’s Central Committee

Arculus, Ronald, Head of the Science and Technology Department, British Foreign and Commonwealth Office

Argov, Shlomo, Chargé d’Affaires, Israeli Embassy, Washington, DC

Arguelles, Jamie, Spanish Ambassador to the U.S.

Armitage, John A., Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Department of State

Atherton, Alfred L. Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs from March 1970

Ash, Roy, Chairman, President’s Advisory Council on Executive Organization, 1969–1971; then Assistant to the President

al-Atasi, Nur al-Din, Chief of State and Premier, Syrian Arab Republic

Baker, Howard M., Senator (R–Tennessee); Chairman, Presidential Advisory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian Affairs, Department of State

Beaudry, Robert M., Country Director, Italy, Austria, and Switzerland, Department of State

Bavis, Jack, Representative, Air Line Pilots Association

Beam, Jacob D., U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union from April 1969 until January 1973

Behr, Colonel Robert M., Senior Staff Member, National Security Council, 1969–1971

Belman, Murray J., Deputy Legal Adviser, Department of State

Berg, Joachim, Assistant Secretary of the Interior, Federal Republic of Germany

Bergsten, C. Fred, Member, National Security Council Staff, January 1969–June 1971

Bernier, Robert E., European Representative, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Bessborough, Lord, Minister of State, British Ministry of Technology

Bevins, Charles I., Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs, Department of State

Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, President of Pakistan

Binaghi, Walter A., President of the Council, International Civil Aviation Organization

Black, Shirley Temple, Deputy Chairperson, U.S. Delegation to the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Blatnik, John A., Representative (D–Minnesota); delegate, United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Bohlen, Charles, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until January 22, 1969

Bondi, Professor Hermann, Director-General, European Space Research Organization

Borman, Frank, National Aeronautics and Space Administration astronaut

Brandt, Willy, West German Foreign Minister until 1969; thereafter Chancellor

Brittin, Burdick H., Deputy Special Assistant for Fisheries and Wildlife, Department of State

Brosio, Manlio, Secretary-General, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Brower, Charles N., Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs, November 1969–July 1971; then Deputy Legal Adviser, Department of State; Chairman of the U.S. Delegation to the Montreal Conference on Sabotage

Brown, Elizabeth A., Director, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Department of State

Bunker, Ellsworth, U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam

Burns, Arthur F., Counselor to the President, January 1969–January 1970; thereafter Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board

Bush, George H. W., Representative (R–Texas) until January 1971; U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations, February 1971–January 1973

Butler, Charles, Permanent U.S. Representative to the International Civil Aviation Organization Council

Butterfield, Alexander P., Deputy Assistant to the President

Caglayangil, Ihsan Sabri, Turkish Foreign Minister

Capote, Anillo, Cuban Vice Minister of External Relations

Candeau, Dr. M.G., Director-General, World Health Organization

Cargo, William I., Director, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, August 1969–July 1973

Carlson, Edward E., President and Chief Executive Officer of United Air Lines; Chairman, Air Transport Association of America Special Committee on Air Piracy

Carlucci, Frank, Coordinator for air piracy matters, Office of Management and Budget

Carrillo-Flores, Antonio, Secretary of Foreign Relations, Mexico; Assistant Secretary-General, United Nations

Carter, Jared G., Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser until September 1969; Assistant Legal Adviser for Special Political Affairs, Department of State; thereafter Deputy Director of Ocean Affairs, Department of Defense

Cary, Charles O., Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, Federal Aviation Administration

Cash, Frank E., Jr., Country Director for Turkey, Department of State

Castro Ruz, Fidel, Premier of Cuba

Charyk, Joseph V., President, Communications Satellite Corporation

Clift, Denis, Member, National Security Council Staff

Collado, Emilio G. (Pete), New York City attorney representing U.S. oil industry interests

Connally, John B., Jr., Member, Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, 1970; Secretary of the Treasury, February 1971–June 1972

Davies, Richard T., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, August 1970–December 1972

Davies, Roger P., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

David, Dr. Edward E., Jr., Science Adviser to the President, 1970–1972

Davis, Lt. General Benjamin O., Jr., Director, Office of Civil Aviation Security, Department of Transportation; Chairman, Interagency Committee on Aviation Security

Davis, Jeanne W., Director, National Security Council Staff Secretariat, 1970–1971

Davis, Dr. John H., Commissioner-General, United Nations Relief and Works Agency, 1959–1963; President, American Near East Refugee Aid

Dayan, Moshe, Israeli Minister of Defense

De Palma, Samuel, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, February 1969–June 1973

Demirel, Suleyman, Turkish Prime Minister

Denisse, J.F., President of Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales; member of 1970 “LeFevre Mission”

Dent, Harry S., Deputy Counsel to the President, 1969; Special Counsel to the President, 1969–1972

Dingell, John D., Congressional Adviser, Official Delegation to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Dobrynin, Anatoly F., Soviet Ambassador to the U.S.

Donelan, Joseph F. Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Administration, June 1971–March 1973

Downey, Arthur T., Member, National Security Council Staff

DuBridge, Dr. Lee A., President, California Institute of Technology until 1969; President’s Science Adviser, 1969–1970

Eastland, James O., Senator (D–Mississippi)

Eban, Abbas, Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs

Eisenhower, John S.D., U.S. Ambassador to Belgium, March 1969–September 1971

Egberg, Dr. Roger O., Special Assistant for Health Policy to the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare

Ehrlichman, John D., Counsel to the President, January–November 1969; Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, November 1969–April 1973

Eldin, Gerard, Deputy Secretary-General, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development from 1969

Eliot, Theodore L., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary and Executive Secretary of the Department of State, August 1969–September 1973

Ellsworth, Robert, U.S. Permanent Representative on the North Atlantic Council from May 1969–June 1971

Esenbel, Melih, Turkish Ambassador to the U.S.

Evensen, Jens, Legal Adviser, Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Feldman, Mark B., Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs, Department of State

Ferrer Figueres, Jose, President of Costa Rica

Fessenden, Russell, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, July 1971–December 1972

Finch, Robert H., Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1969–1970

Finlay, Luke W., Manager, Government Relations Department, Standard Oil of New Jersey

Fiorio, Franco, Counselor for Scientific Affairs, Italian Embassy, Washington, D.C.

Fischli, Alfred, Swiss Ambassador to Cuba, principal U.S. contact with the Castro regime as Ambassador of protecting power

Flanigan, Peter M., Assistant to the President for Economic Affairs, 1969–1972; thereafter Executive Director, Council on International Economic Policy

Fletcher, Dr. James C., National Aeronautics and Space Administration Administrator from 1971

Franco Bahamonde, Francisco, General, Chief of the Spanish State

French, Stuart P., Principal Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs; thereafter, Director, Law of the Sea Task Force

Freymond, Jacques, Vice President, International Committee of the Red Cross, 1965–1971; acting President, February–June 1969

Frutkin, Arnold W., Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Fulbright, J. William, Senator (D–Arkansas); chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 1959–1974

Genscher, Hans-Dietrich, Minister of the Interior and Chairman, Cabinet Committee on Environmental Control, Federal Republic of Germany

Gentile, G. Marvin, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security

Gibbons, Boyd, Secretary to the Council on Environmental Quality

Graham, Katherine, President, The Washington Post Company

Gravatt, Joan S., Aviation Programs and Policy Division, Office of Aviation, Department of State

Greene, Joseph N. Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

Green, Marshall, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, May 1969–May 1973

Greenhill, Denis, Permanent Undersecretary, British Foreign and Commonwealth Office

Greenwald, Joseph A., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February–July 1969; Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris, July 1969–October 1972; thereafter Representative to the European Communities in Brussels

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Gross, Nelson G., Ambassador, Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State, and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters

Habbash, George, Leader, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine

Haig, General Alexander M., Jr., Senior Military Assistant to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, January 1969–June 1970; Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, June 1970–January 1973

Halperin, Morton, Assistant for Programs, National Security Council Staff

Hammarskjold, Knut, Director-General, International Air Transport Association

Handley, William J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, November 1967–April 1969; Ambassador to Turkey, May 1969–April 1973

Handler, Dr. Philip, President, National Academy of Sciences from 1969

Hardin, Dr. Clifford M., Secretary of Agriculture, January 1969–December 1972

Harris, F. Allen, Special Assistant, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Hart, Parker D., U.S. Ambassador to Turkey, 1965–1968

Heg, James E., Captain, USN, Office of the Assistant Secretary for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense; Vice Chairman, Advisory Group of the Law of the Sea, Department of Defense; Representative, Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force

Helms, Richard M., Director, Central Intelligence Agency until February 1973

Herter, Christian A., Jr., Director, Office of Environmental Affairs; and Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs

Hertz, Martin F., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization

Heseltine, Michael, British Minister for Aerospace

Hickel, Walter, Secretary of the Interior, 1969–1970

Hill, Robert C., U.S. Ambassador to Spain, 1969–1972

Hillenbrand, Martin J., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, February 1969–April 1972; thereafter U.S. Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany

Hocker, Dr. Alexander, Director-General, European Space Research Organization

Hodsoll, Francis S., Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

Hoffman, Paul, Administrator, United Nations Development Program, 1966–1972

Holland, Jerome H., U. S. Ambassador to Sweden, April 1970–August 1972

Homann-Herimberg, Representative to the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees in New York

Hormats, Robert D., Member, National Security Council Staff, 1970–1972

Hoskinson, Samuel M., Member, National Security Council Staff

Hruska, Roman L., Senator (R–Nebraska)

Hudson, Miller N., Jr., Scientific Attaché, U.S. Embassy in Brazil

Hurwitch, Robert A., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs

Hussein, King of Jordan

Ignatius, Paul R., President, Air Transport Association of America

Ingersoll, John, Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Department of Justice

Irwin, John N., II, Under Secretary of State, September 1970–July 1972; thereafter Deputy Secretary of State

Jackson, Henry M., Senator (D–Washington), Chair, Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs

Jaffe, Dr. Jerome, Director, Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention, 1971–1973; also Special Consultant to the President for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs

Javits, Jacob K., Senator (R–New York)

Jenkins, Alfred Le S., Director, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Department ofState

Jibril, Ahmad, Leader, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine General Command

Johnson, Donald, Administrator, Veterans Administration

Johnson, U. Alexis, U.S. Ambassador to Japan until January 1969; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, February 1969–February 1973; Chairman, Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment

Jova, Joseph J., U.S. Permanent Representative to the Organization of American States, also U.S. Representative to the OAS Council from July 1969

Katz, Julius L., Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., Under Secretary of State, October 1966–January 1969

Keating, Kenneth B., U.S. Ambassador to India, July 1969–July 1972

Keldysh, Mstislav V., President, Soviet Academy of Sciences

Kennedy, David M., Secretary of the Treasury, January 1969–February 1971; U.S. Ambassador at Large for Foreign Economic Development, February 1971–March 1973; also U.S. Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, March 1972–February 1973

Kennedy, Richard T., Member, then Director of Planning Group, National Security Council Staff

Kissinger, Henry A., Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kleindienst, Richard G., Deputy Attorney General, January 1969–June 1972; thereafter Attorney General

Kosygin, Alexei N., Chairman, Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union

Krogh, Egil (Bud), Deputy Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, Executive Director of the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control

Labouisse, Henry R., Executive Director, United Nations Children’s Fund

Laird, Melvin R., Secretary of Defense

Landau, George W., Country Director, Spain and Portugal, Department of State

Lansalot-Basou, Leonce, Counselor, French Embassy, Washington, D.C.

Lefevre, Theodore, Belgian Minister of Scientific Policy and Planning; Chairman, European Space Commission; and leader of the European Space Conference Post-Apollo negotiating team

Leussink, Hans, Minister for Education and Science, Federal Republic of Germany

Levine, Melvyn, Member, Operations Staff, African and United Nations Affairs, National Security Council

Lindsay, John, Mayor of New York City

Loosch, Dr. Reinhard, Chief, International Scientific Affairs Section, Ministry of Education and Science, Federal Republic of Germany

Lopez Bravo de Castro, Gregorio, Spanish foreign minister

Low, Dr. George M., Deputy Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1969–1970; thereafter Acting Administrator, 1970–1971

Loy, Frank E., DeputyAssistant Secretary of State for Transportation and Telecommunications

Lucet, Charles, French Ambassador to the U.S. until April 1972

Lynch, William C., Captain, USN, Naval representative, Advisory Group on Law of the Sea, Department of Defense; Representative, Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force

Lynn, James T., General Counsel, Department of Commerce

Lynn, Laurence E., Director, Program Analysis Staff, National Security Council

Macomber, William B., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Management

Maechling, Charles Jr., Deputy General Counsel, National Science Foundation

Malin, Herbert S., Political Affairs Division, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Malmborg, Knute E., Assistant Legal Adviser for Administrative and Consular Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Mansfield, Mike, Senator (D–Montana); Senate Majority Leader

Mao Tse-tung, Chairman, Chinese Communist Party and Politburo of the People’s Republic of China

Marcellin, Raymond, French Minister of the Interior

Margain, Hugo B., Mexican Ambassador to the U.S.

Martin, Edward W., U.S. Ambassador to Burma, October 1971–November 1973

Mathews, Charles, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Mayer, Max, Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Science, Federal Republic of Germany

Maynell, Benedict W., Counselor, British Embassy, Washington, D.C.

McClory, Robert, Congressional Adviser; member, delegation to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

McDonald, Dr. Gordon J.F., Member, Council on Environmental Quality, 1970–1973

McGovern, George S., Senator (D–South Dakota); Democratic nominee for President, 1972

McIntyre, Stuart H., Officer in Charge, International Security Affairs, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State until April 1971; thereafter, Deputy Director, United Nations Political Affairs

McKelvey, Vincent E., Chief Geologist, United States Geological Survey, Department of the Interior; thereafter Director

McKernan, Donald L., Special Assistant to the Secretary for Fisheries and Wildlife, Department of State; Coordinator of Ocean Affairs after December 1970

McNamara, Robert S., President, World Bank

Meadows, John, Director, Office of Aviation, Department of State

Medici, Emilio Garrastazu, President of Brazil

Meeker, Leonard C., Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State until July 13, 1969

Meir, Golda, Israeli Prime Minister

Metcalf, Lee Warren, Senator (D–Montana), Member, Senate Subcommittee on Outer Continental Shelf, Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee

Meyer, Armin H., U.S. Ambassador to Japan, July 1969–March 1972; thereafter Chairman, Interagency Working Group of the Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism

Meyer, Charles A., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, April 1969–March 1973; also, United States Coordinator, Alliance for Progress

Michelmore, Laurence, Commissioner-General, United Nations Relief and Works Agency

Middleton, Lawrence, First Secretary, British Embassy, Washington D.C.

Millard, Guy E., Counselor, British Embassy, Washington, D.C.

Miller, William, Director, Office of Telecommunications, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Mitchell, John N., Attorney General, January 1969–February 1972

Moorer, Thomas H., Admiral, USN, Chief of Naval Operations until July 1, 1970; thereafter Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Morris, Donald R., Deputy Administrator, Office of International Affairs, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Morrison, W.L., Rear Admiral, USCG, Chief Counsel, Department of Transportation

Morse, John H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for European and North Atlantic Treaty Organization Affairs

Morton, Rogers C.B., Secretary of the Interior from 1971

Mosbacher, Emil, Chief of Protocol, Department of State

Moyers, Bill D., Special Assistant to President Johnson until 1966

Moynihan, Daniel P., Assistant to the President for Urban Affairs, January–December 1969; Counselor to the President, January 1970–January 1971

Mussard, J.A., Director, United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Myers, Dale D., Associate Administrator, Office of Manned Space Flight, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1970–1974

Nachmanoff, Arnold, Member, Operations Staff, Latin America, National Security Council

Ne Win, Chairman, Burma Union Revolutionary Council

Neuman, Robert H., Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs, Department of State

Newell, Homer, Associate Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Newhouse, Edgar L., III, Bureau of International Commerce, Department of Commerce; Executive Secretary, Committee on Law of the Sea, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce

Nitze, Paul H., Deputy Secretary of Defense until January 20, 1969

Nixon, Richard M., President of the United States

Nguyen Cao Ky, Vice President, Republic of Vietnam

Nguyen Van Thieu, President, Republic of Vietnam

Nordquist, Myron H., Office of Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Nutter, Warren, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

O’Donnell, Capt. J.J., President, Air Line Pilots Association

Ortoli, Francois-Xavier, Minister-Delegate to the French Prime Minister in Charge of Industrial Development and Scientific Research

Osgood, Robert E., Assistant for Programs, 1969–1970; Director, Planning Group, National Security Council, 1970–1971

Oxman, Bernard H., Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State; Assistant Legal Adviser for Ocean Affairs from November 1970

Packard, David, Deputy Secretary of Defense, January 1969–December 1971

Packard, Robert F., Director, Office of Space, Atmospheric and Marine Science Affairs, Office of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

Paine, Thomas O., Administrator, National Aeronautic and Space Administration, March 1969–September 1970

Palme, Olaf, Prime Minister of Sweden

Pardo, Arvid, Maltese Permanent Representative to the United Nations; Maltese Ambassador to the United States; High Commissioner to Canada; Head of Maltese delegation to United Nations Seabed Committee

Pecora, William T., Director, Geological Survey, Department of the Interior

Pedersen, Richard F., Counselor, Department of State from January 1969

Perez, Shimon, Israeli Minister of Transport

Peterson, Rudolph A., Administrator, United Nations Development Program

Phillips, Ruth H., Deputy Director, Office of Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

Phouma, Souvanna, Prime Minister of Laos

Pittman, Charles J., Office of Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Pogorny, N.V., Chairman, Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet

Pollack, Herman, Director, Office of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

Pollock, Howard W., Deputy Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce

Pompidou, Georges, President of France from June 1969

Porter, Dwight J., U.S. Ambassador to Lebanon

Popper, David H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs to 1969; Ambassador to Cyprus, 1969–1973; and Alternate U.S. Representative to the March 1972 Conference to Amend the 1961 Narcotics Convention

Prechtl, Fritz, President, International Transport Workers Federation

Price, Raymond, Special Assistant to the President

Rabin, Yitzhak, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S.

Ratiner, Leigh, Office of the General Counsel; Chairman, Advisory Group on Law of the Sea, Department of Defense; Representative, Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force; Director, Ocean Resources, Department of Interior; Staff Director, Office of Ocean Affairs, Department of Defense

Raymond, Jack, President, International Institute for Environmental Affairs

Rein, Bertram W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Transportation and Telecommunications, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Rennie, Sir John, Commissioner-General, United Nations Relief and Works Agency from May 1971

Richardson, Elliot L., Under Secretary of State, January 1969–June 1970; Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, June 1970–January 1973

Rifai, Zaid, Chief, Jordanian Royal Diwan

Ripamonte, Camillo, Italian Minister for Scientific and Technological Research

Rhinelander, John, Deputy Legal Adviser; Alternate Chairman of the U.S. Delegation to The Hague Conference on Hijacking, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Roa y Garcia, Raul, Cuban Minister of Foreign Relations

Rochat, Andre, Delegate-General for the Middle East, International Committee for the Red Cross, 1971; ICRC representative during the 1970 Jordan hijacking crisis

Rockefeller, Laurance S., Chairman, Citizens Advisory Committee on Environmental Quality; Member, Board of Governors, National Park Foundation

Rockefeller, Nelson A., Governor of New York

Rockwell, Stuart W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Rogers, William P., Secretary of State

Romney, George W., Secretary of Housing and Urban Development

Rondon, Fernando, Member, National Security Council Staff

Ross, Claude G., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs

Rossides, Eugene, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury

Ruckelshaus, William D., Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency, December 1970–April 1973

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State until January 1969

Al-Salamah, Ali bin Shaykh Hasan (Abu Hasan), Chief of Intelligence, Fatah

Salans, Carl F., Deputy Legal Adviser, Department of State

Salisbury, William R., Office of Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

Salmon, William C., Deputy Director for Operations, Office of Environmental Affairs, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

Samuels, Nathaniel, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Saunders, Harold H., Member, National Security Council Staff, 1969–1971

Scheel, Walter, Foreign Minister, Federal Republic of Germany

Schlesinger, James R., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget, 1969–1970; Assistant Director, Office of Management and the Budget, 1970–1971; Member, Atomic Energy Commission, 1971–1973

Schnyder, Felix, Swiss Ambassador to the United States

Schumann, Maurice, French Foreign Minister, June 1969–April 1973

Schwartz, Harry, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for International Narcotics Issues

Scowcroft, Brig. Gen. Brent M., Military Assistant to the President, 1972–1973

Scott, Hugh D., Senator (R–Pennsylvania); Senate Minority Leader, 1969–1977

Seaborg, Dr. Glen T., Chair, Atomic Energy Commission until 1971

Seelye, Talcott, Chairman, Jordan Hijacking Working Group; Country Director, Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, and Iraq, Department of State

Shaffer, John H., Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration

Shriver, R. Sargent, U.S. Ambassador to France, May 1968–March 1970

Shultz, George P., Secretary of Labor, January 1969–July 1970; Director, Office of Management and the Budget, July 1970–May 1972; Secretary of the Treasury, and also Assistant to the President, May 1972–May 1974; also head of the Council on Economic Policy from December 1972

Siberstein, Joseph A., Chief, Aviation Programs and Policy Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Simsarian, James, Chief, International Scientific and Technical Affairs Division, Office of International Economic and Social Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

Sisco, Joseph J., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, September 1965–February 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for Near East and South Asian Affairs, February 1969–February 1974

Spaey, Dr. Jacques, Chairman, European Space Inter-ministerial Committee; Secretary-General of the Belgian Science Policy Council

Springsteen, George S. Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until June 1972; Acting Assistant Secretary of State, June 1972–August 1973

Stackhouse, H.H., Country Director, Israel and Arab-Israel Affairs, Department of State

Stang, David P., Assistant to the Under Secretary, Department of Interior; Counsel to the Senate Interior and Insular Affairs Committee form October 1972

Stanovnik, Janos, Executive Secretary, Economic Commission for Europe

Stans, Maurice, Secretary of Commerce, 1969–1972

Stevenson, John R., Legal Adviser, Department of State, July 1969–January 1973; Chairman, U.S. Delegation to The Hague Conference on Hijacking, 1970; Chairman, Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force

Stoessel, Walter J. Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Strong, Sir Maurice, Secretary-General, United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Styles, Michael H., Chief, Aviation Negotiations Division, Office of Aviation, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

Sullivan, William, Director, Office of National Narcotics Intelligence

Sunay, Gen. Cevdet, President of Turkey

Swartz, Carl, Swedish Ambassador in charge of preparations for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

Terry, William M., Director, International Affairs, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce

Thoms, Guido, Deputy Minister for the Environment, Democratic Republic of Germany

Tillinghast, Charles, Chairman of the Board, Trans World Airlines

Timmons, William E., Deputy Assistant to the President for Congressional Relations, 1969–1970; thereafter Assistant

Toon, Malcom, U.S. Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, July 1969–October 1971

Towell, Timothy L., Office of Spain and Portugal Affairs, Department of State

Train, Russell E., Under Secretary of the Interior, 1969–1970; thereafter Director, Council on Environmental Quality, 1970–1973

Trezise, Philip H., U.S. Representative, Organization for European Cooperation and Development until 1969; Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

U Thant, United Nations Secretary-General, 1961–1972

Vaky, Viron P. (Pete), Member, National Security Council Staff, January 1969–1970

Vallimarsecu, Seban, Member, National Security Council Staff

Vanik, Charles A., Representative (D–Ohio)

Velasco Ibarra, Jose Maria, President of Ecuador

Volpe, John A., Secretary of Transportation, January 1969–February 1973

Waldheim, Kurt, United Nations Secretary-General from 1972

Webber, Robert T., Deputy Director, Office of Space and Atmospheric Affairs, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, Department of State

Weinberger, Caspar W., Deputy Director, Office of Management and the Budget, July 1970–May 1972; Director, May 1972–January 1973; Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare

Wellman, Harvey R., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Narcotics Matters

Wenk, Edward Jr., National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, Executive Office of the President

Wheeler, Earle G., General, USA, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff until July 2, 1970

Whitaker, John C., Deputy Assistant to the President

Williams, Maurice J., Deputy Director, Agency for International Development

Wilson, James M. Jr., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs

Wright, W. Marshall, Operations Staff, African and United Nations Affairs, National Security Council, 1971–1972

Yost, Charles W., U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations, January 1969–February 1971

Ziegler, Ronald, White House Press Secretary

Documents on Global Issues, 1969-1972Documents on Global Issues, 1969-1972

Contents

Israeli Attack on Beirut Airport and Hijacking of TWA Flight 840, January-December 1969 (Documents 1-36)

Policy Towards Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad, April 1970-April 1971 (Documents 37-44)

U.S. Response to Hijackings by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Additional Anti-Hijacking Measures, September 1970-June 1972 (Documents 45-89)

The Olympic Attack and the Anti-Terrorism Initiatives, September−December 1972 (Documents 90-121)

Chapter 1. U.S. Policy Towards Terrorism, Hijacking of Aircraft, and Attacks on Civil AviationChapter 1. U.S. Policy Towards Terrorism, Hijacking of Aircraft, and Attacks on Civil Aviation

Contents

Israeli Attack on Beirut Airport and Hijacking of TWA Flight 840, January-December 1969Israeli Attack on Beirut Airport and Hijacking of TWA Flight 840, January-December 1969

1. Telegram 294530 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal

Washington, January 1, 1969, 0202Z.

A message from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Loy to IATA Director-General Knut Hammarskjold expressing U.S. concern about recent hijackings. Loy condemned Israel for the attack on Khaldeh Airport in Lebanon and noted that the U.S. had registered disapproval of the Athens hijacking of an El Al aircraft.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Unclassified. Drafted by Loy (E/TT), cleared by Roger P. Davies (NEA) and Styles (E/OA/AVP), and approved by Rusk.

2. Telegram 6001 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, January 14, 1969, 1924Z.

A message from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Loy to IATA Director-General Knut Hammarskjold expressing U.S. concern about recent hijackings. Loy condemned Israel for the attack on Khaldeh Airport in Lebanon and noted that the U.S. had registered disapproval of the Athens hijacking of an El Al aircraft.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Unclassified. Repeated to Montreal, Ottawa, Beirut, London, and Rome. Drafted by Loy (E/TT), cleared by Roger P. Davies (NEA) and Styles (E/OA/AVP), and approved by Rusk.

3. Telegram 8296 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal

Washington, January 17, 1969, 2011Z.

The Department informed posts that at the ICAO meeting Lebanon would seek sanctions against Israel for the Beirut airport raid and gave details of Israel’s counter-complaint on the Athens El Al hijacking. The Department stressed its position that the ICAO should avoid political debate and concern itself with the technical aspects of aviation security.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to 25 posts and the U.S. representative to ICAO. Drafted by Thomas J. Carolan, Jr. (IO/UNP) on January 19; cleared in NEA/IAI, E/OA/AL, NEA/ARN, L/UNA, IO/UNP, and L/SCA; and approved by Popper (IO).

4. Telegram 9888 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel

Washington, January 21, 1969, 2342Z.

The Department informed the Embassies that the ICAO Council voted to consider the Lebanese complaint on the Beirut airport raid but to exclude the Israeli counter-complaint on the Athens El Al hijacking. Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the U.S. began to draft a resolution on prevention of violence against international civil aviation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Carolan; cleared in NEA/ARN and in substance in NEA/IAI and E/OA/AL; and approved by Brown.

5. Telegram 16529 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel

Washington, February 1, 1969, 0025Z.

Embassies Beirut and Tel AVIV were informed that ICAO President Binaghi announced that the ICAO Council had adjourned its extraordinary session to discuss the Beirut airport raid without reaching agreement on a course of action.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Montreal and USUN. Drafted by Carolan on January 31; cleared in NEA, E, and L; and approved by Brown.

6. Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Richardson to President Nixon

Washington, February 19, 1969.

Richardson reported that the Department of State had taken action in response to the Zurich El Al attack, and that a discussion had taken place between Israeli Minister Argov and Assistant Secretary of State Sisco. Sisco informed Argov that the U.S. was sending a letter of protest to the UN Security Council and urged France and the UK to do the same. The matter would also be placed on the ICAO Council agenda.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Lot File: 74D 164. Secret.

7. Telegram 146454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, August 29, 1969, 1544Z.

The Israeli Embassy reported that TWA Flight 840 from Rome to Tel Aviv had been hijacked and was presumed en route to Lebanon. Instructions to Embassy Beirut stressed U.S. insistence that all passengers be treated as a single group.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Flash. Repeated Flash to Tel Aviv, Rome, Ankara, Cairo, Amman, Montreal, and USUN. Drafted by Atherton; cleared in NEA/ARN, IO/UNP, and E/AV; and approved by Davies.

8. Telegram 147491 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy

Washington, August 30, 1969, 2153Z.

The Syrian Government hinted that the release of TWA Flight 840 passengers might be tied to the release of Syrian military pilots held by the Israelis. The Israeli Government told Syria and the United States that this would not happen.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv. Drafted and approved by Davies and cleared by Eliot.

9. Telegram 147505 From the Department of State to the Representative to the International Civilian Aviation Organization (Butler)

Montreal, Canada, August 31, 1969, 0251Z.

Butler was instructed to deliver an enclosed letter concerning TWA Flight 840 to the ICAO. The text includes details of the hijacking incident.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Harry Feehan (E/AO/AVP) and Loy on August 30; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, Davies, Carolan, and L; and approved by Loy.

10. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 31, 1969.

Davies and Williams discussed the Flight 840 hijacking situation. Williams reported that the Israeli Consulate in New York was harassing TWA, and that there was an organized effort to dictate TWA’s actions in connection with the hijacking. Davies said that the U.S. Government had urged the Israelis to cool the situation down, and that the U.S. would not allow the commercial considerations of one of its flag carriers to be damaged.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bryan H. Baas (NEA/ARN), and approved by Brown.

11. Telegram 147525 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel and the Consulate in Jerusalem

Washington, August 31, 1969, 1331Z.

The Department endorsed the positions taken by Chargi Zurhellen in conversations with the Israelis over TWA Flight 840 and defended the actions taken by TWA.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Davies, and cleared by Lloyd (S/S).

12. Telegram 147543 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, August 31 1969, 1934Z.

The Department of State reported a frank conversation between Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Davies and Israeli Chargi Argov on the hijacking of TWA Flight 840. Davies observed that he thought Syria might be looking for a way out of the situation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Baas and Davies, cleared by Lloyd, and approved by Davies.

13. Telegram 7222 From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 1, 1969, 1233Z.

Embassy Beirut expressed reluctance to use PanAm’s overflight issue as a way to pressure Syria over TWA Flight 840, and confessed that the Embassy could not think of any levers to secure the release of the remaining Israeli passengers. While deploring the PFLP hijacking, Embassy Beirut opined that Syria had handled the matter correctly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Limdis.

14. Telegram 5517 From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, September 1, 1969, 0830Z.

The Italian Foreign Office noted that the Syrians were again suggesting the swap of the Israeli passengers of TWA Flight 840 for imprisoned Syrian pilots; Embassy Rome commented that there was virtually no chance the Israelis would agree to this scheme.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv.

15. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 2, 1969.

Rogers briefed the President on the status of TWA Flight 840, detailed the action taken by the airline and the U.S. Government, and noted the arrival in Damascus of two representatives from the International Committee for the Red Cross.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Attached but not printed was a transmittal memorandum Sisco sent to Rogers indicating that the memorandum was drafted by Baas and cleared by Johnson and Davies.

16. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 3, 1969.

TWA Chairman Tillinghast reported to Deputy Assistant Secretary for Transportation and Telecommunications Loy conversations that had taken place between TWA executives and General Akil in Syria on the status of TWA Flight 840. The Syrians clearly stated their intention to hold the two remaining passengers until the Israeli Government freed their pilots. Akil also said that the PFLP would not benefit from the hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Loy. The conversation was held in Paris.

17. Letter from Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Eban to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 3, 1969.

Eban requested that the U.S. Government spare no efforts to free the two Israeli passengers of TWA Flight 840 in light of the worsening situation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. No classification marking.

18. Information Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 5, 1969.

Sisco provided Rogers with a status report on TWA Flight 840, noting action taken by the ICAO and the NATO Advisory Committee. Sisco highlighted the current efforts taken by the ICRC, World Health Organization, and the Governments of Italy and the USSR. He reported that the U.S. would ask the Israelis to consider the proposed Syrian pilot swap.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Seelye and cleared by Davies and Loy. A copy was sent to Johnson.

19. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 10, 1969.

The Department of State provided a follow-up report on TWA Flight 840 that noted on-going contacts with Italy and the USSR, a request for assistance to UN Secretary-General U Thant, emergency sessions of the ICAO, contact with Director-General of IATA Hammerskjold, and contacts with the ICRC.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Thomas J. Scotes (NEA/ARN) on September 9 and cleared by Sisco, Seelye, Loy, and in substance with Johnson.

20. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 17, 1969.

Rogers updated the President on efforts to resolve the TWA Flight 840 hijacking and free the remaining Israeli hostages. Rogers cited U.S. activity to gain adherence to the Tokyo Convention, efforts to resolve the Cuban hijacking situation, and work in the UN Security Council and the ICAO.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential. Drafted by Styles on September 16. Kissinger summarized and sent this memorandum to the President, stating that it “represented a reasonable package at the present time.” (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 131, Hijackings II)

21. Telegram 159327 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, September 19, 1969, 0004Z.

Acting Secretary of State Richardson informed Embassy Tel Aviv that Israeli Counselor Raviv had been told that third-party efforts to secure the release of the passengers of TWA Flight 840 had been exhausted. In the Department’s estimation, Syria would not agree to release the passengers without a face-saving quid-pro-quo. Raviv said the Israelis could not agree to any trade-off.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Repeated to Beirut, Rome, and USUN. Drafted by Thomas J. Scotes (NEA/ARN) on September 9 and cleared by Sisco, Seelye, Loy, and in substance with Johnson.

22. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 19, 1969.

The Department of State updated on-going efforts to resolve the TWA Flight 840 hijacking and noted that the Syrians had imprisoned the PFLP hijackers. The memorandum discussed the Syrian position on the Tokyo Convention, as relayed through IATA. Efforts also continued through Italy, the USSR, and the ICAO.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Seelye. Gleysteen signed for Eliot.

23. Telegram 3119 From the U.S. Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 20, 1969, 1902Z.

UN Ambassador Yost noted that he had urged the Syrians to take early action to resolve the TWA Flight 840 situation. Syrian Ambassador to the UN Tomeh urged the U.S. to continue “quiet diplomacy” and suggested that Israel release the captured Syrian pilots a few weeks after the release of the Israeli passengers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv, Beirut, and Rome.

24. Telegram 160323 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, September 20, 1969, 1646Z.

While sharing Embassy Tel Aviv’s concern that the Israelis might be losing patience over TWA Flight 840, the Department of State emphasized that it had little leverage to use with the Syrians. The Department rejected suggestions to be more aggressive with Syria by attempting to prevent its election to the UN Security Council, concluding that the prisoner/hostage swap would be the best way to end the crisis.

25. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 21, 1969.

Kissinger summarized Embassy Tel Aviv’s assessment of the TWA Flight 840 hijacking in telegram 35088 and attached to the memorandum a retyped copy of the telegram.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Secret. Nixon wrote “I agree” in the margin next to the last two recommendations and instructed Kissinger to “follow through.”

26. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of State Rogers and Israeli Foreign Minister Eban

New York, September 23, 1969, 5 p.m.

On September 20 Rogers and Eban discussed the Israeli passengers on TWA Flight 840 still held by Syrian hijackers. Eban said that the idea of linking the release of the passengers to the release of captured Syrian pilots was “intolerable.” Rogers agreed that the two cases could not be equated. Eban commended Italy’s efforts and said there was little more UN Secretary-General U Thant could do.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Atherton on September 23, and approved by Brown on September 27.

27. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Davies) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 25, 1969.

Davies recommended that Rogers send an oral message to Syrian President Nur al-Din al-Atasi on the TWA Flight 840 hostage situation. Attached was a telegram containing Rogers’ message to al-Atasi urging the Syrian Government to release the two remaining passengers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Baas and Davies and cleared by Seelye. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the attached draft telegram was drafted by Baas and Davies on September 24, cleared by Seelye, Wahl, Beaudry, and Loy, and approved by Rogers, and was sent to the Embassy in Rome.

28. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 28, 1969.

Eliot updated Kissinger on the status of TWA Flight 840. He noted that the Syrians were no longer afraid of Israeli reprisals, explained that the Italian Ambassador was highly critical of Israeli Government maneuvering, and informed Kissinger that the Department of State had sent Rogers’ message to Syrian President al-Atasi. See Document 27.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by Baas on September 26, and cleared by Seelye and Davies. Gleysteen signed for Eliot.

29. Telegram 662 From the Consulate in Jerusalem to the Department of State

Jerusalem, October 2, 1969, 1318Z.

Consulate staff reported on a U.S. dimarche to Israel on the proposed pilot-hostage exchange in the matter of TWA Flight 840. Rafael said that Israel would reject an out-right swap, but suggested a way in which the United States could be seen to pressure Israel and bring about a conclusion without an advance deal.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv.

30. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson) to President Nixon

Washington, October 2, 1969.

Richardson updated the President on diplomatic attempts to resolve the TWA Flight 840 incident.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Confidential. Kissinger sent the memorandum to Nixon on October 15 under a covering note summarizing the memorandum.

31. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 21, 1969.

Eliot provided a status report on the TWA Flight 840 hostages. According to confirmed reports, the Syrian Government had released the hijackers and requested outside mediation to bring the hostage situation to an end.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Baas and cleared by Seelye, Davies, Sisco, and Joan S. Gravatt (E/OA/AVP).

32. Telegram 4196 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State

Tel Aviv, November 6, 1969, 1320Z.

The Embassy reported that Rafael had told the DCM that Israel would participate in a three-way exchange with Syria and Egypt, conducted through the ICRC, to resolve the TWA Flight 840 hostage incident. He stressed the need for secrecy to avoid public debate in Israel.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

33. Telegram 4348 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State

Tel Aviv, November 20, 1969, 1302Z.

The Embassy reported that the three-way hostage exchange designed to resolve the TWA Flight 840 hostage incident appeared to have fallen through because of difficulties between the ICRC and the Syrian Government. Rafael renewed Israel’s threat to take action and asked the U.S. to try to get the ICRC mission moving forward.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

34. Telegram 195790 From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva, Switzerland, and the Embassy in Israel

Washington, November 21, 1969, 0107Z.

The Department of State instructed the Mission in Geneva to approach the ICRC as soon as possible to restore the swap agreement and bring the TWA Flight 840 incident to an end. Embassy Tel Aviv was asked to inform RAFAEL that the U.S. Government was approaching the ICRC and the UAR.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Beirut. Drafted by Baas on November 20; cleared by Sisco, Davies, and Seelye; and approved by Johnson.

35. Telegram 7660 from the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, November 26, 1969, 1740Z.

According to information from the Italian Foreign Ministry, the TWA Flight 840 three-way exchange had resumed. ICRC Representative Renard told the Italian Ambassador that the Israelis had accepted the Syrian request and would release the 2 pilots plus 11 other Syrians detainees if the Israelis were released in advance.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis

36. Telegram 203374 From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rogers in Bonn

Washington, December 5, 1969, 2331Z.

The Department of State informed Rogers that the Syrians had permitted TWA Flight 840 and its two remaining passengers to leave Damascus. Israel had released 13 prisoners to Syria and 50 detainees to the UAR, in exchange for 2 Israeli pilots.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Baas, cleared by Davies, Seelye, and Brown, and approved by Sisco.

1. Telegram 294530 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal 1. Telegram 294530 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal1

Washington, January 1, 1969, 0202Z.

Please pass following message to Office of Knut Hammarskjold, Director General, IATA from Frank Loy:

The Secretary his asked me to respond to your telegram of December 28 concerning recent attacks on aircraft of International Airlines. The Government of the United States shares your great concern at these developments. We believe that efforts to deal with serious political differences and disputes by interfering with and endangering safe and regular air transport not only threatens human life but also is destructive of a transport system of enormous importance to the world. It certainly in no way contributes to the solution of political and regional differences.

As you will have seen from press reports the United States has made its views known to all the Governments concerned, and has quite specifically and publicly condemned the action of Israel in attacking Khaldeh Airport. We have also registered our concern at the terrorist attack against the El Al aircraft at Athens. We are searching for other steps we might take to deal with this question and are prepared to consider with you any useful steps you might propose.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Unclassified. Drafted by Loy (E/TT), cleared by Roger P. Davies (NEA) and Styles (E/OA/AVP), and approved by Rusk.

2. Telegram 6001 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel 2. Telegram 6001 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, January 14, 1969, 1924Z.

Subject:

IA ICAO Meeting on Beirut Airport Raid

1. Israeli Emb Counselor Raviv called at Dept Jan 13 to discuss Jan 20 meeting of ICAO Council called consider Lebanese complaint re Israeli Beirut raid. Read Israeli counter-complaint to ICAO which dealt with attack on El Al airplane in Athens and earlier hijacking in Algiers.

2. In response to query, Deptoff stated US considered ICAO should not limit its consideration to Beirut incident but should examine broader question of threat presented to safe international air navigation by use of force and violence. US believed political aspects had already been dealt with in Security Council and ICAO should concentrate on question of safeguarding international civil aviation against all illegal interference. Stated USDEL had replied in this vein to ICAO in responding to notice of Jan 20 meeting.

For Ottawa, Rome and London: Canadian, Italian and UK Embassies have inquired concerning US attitude toward special ICAO meeting. Canadians and British were given copy of US reply to ICAO along above lines and British have now informed us they will take similar position.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Unclassified. Repeated to Montreal, Ottawa, Beirut, London, and Rome. Drafted by Loy (E/TT), cleared by Roger P. Davies (NEA) and Styles (E/OA/AVP), and approved by Rusk.

3. Telegram 8296 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal 3. Telegram 8296 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal1

Washington, January 17, 1969, 2011Z.

Subj:

ICAO Meeting on ME Aviation Incidents

Ref:

State 6001 (NOTAL)

For US Rep ICAO

1. Info received to date re Jan 2 Lebanese complaint to ICAO Council about Dec 28 raid on Beirut Airport indicates Lebanese rep at Jan 20 Council meeting will call for application of following sanctions against Israel: (a) expulsion of GOI from ICAO membership through amendment Chicago Convention at extraordinary ICAO Assembly; (b) Council request that member states refuse air navigation services to Israeli aircraft under their bilateral air transport agreements.

2. Israeli counter-complaint submitted to ICAO Council Jan 14 accuses Lebanon of violating international obligations under Chicago Convention qte by harboring in its territory terrorist organization that has accepted responsibility for committing acts of violence and for other threats against Israel civil passenger aircraft, thereby constituting grave danger to international civil aviation unqte. GOI requests Council consider and take prompt measures to protect international civil aviation from such incidents as July 23 El Al hijacking and Dec 26 attack on El Al aircraft in Athens, and to insure GOL and other govts concerned fully discharge their responsibilities in this regard. Israeli Embassy informs us GOI thinking tentatively of seeking to have Council President work out consensus condemning any illegal interference with international civil aviation.

3. We believe ICAO Council should avoid political debate and concern itself with technical aviation aspects of general subject raised by Lebanese and Israeli complaints, i.e., question of ensuring that international civil aircraft, their passengers and crews, and facilities required for their operation be safe-guarded against all illegal interference. Preliminary soundings with Canadians, Australians, British, Dutch, Germans and Italians here and in Montreal show them generally in favor of this approach. We hope you will be able attract additional support for it among other Council members in days to come.

4. Following points comprising US position on this matter are provided for your use. Info addressees, located in countries represented on ICAO Council, may draw on them in answering inquiries or discussing subject with host Govt officials. (a) UN Security Council is proper body to consider political aspects of subjects raised by GOL and GOI. SC has already done so, having adopted RES 262 unanimously on Dec 31. USG position was expressed very clearly at that time. (b) Bearing in mind ICAO’s specialized technical character, we believe ICAO Council should engage in effort to safeguard international civil aviation from all illegal interference and not allow itself be drawn into discussion of political matters already dealt with in proper international forum. (c) ICAO now looking into legal aspects of hijacking problem and US seeking bring into force International (qte Tokyo unqte) Convention on Crimes Aboard Aircraft and proposing additional protocol on hijacking. Problem now before Council, however, involves number issues not covered in these efforts and which should be considered in their entirety. (d) Most Council REPS have not been available in Montreal for informal discussion and consultation prior to Jan 20 meeting. It therefore desirable allow sufficient time for such consultation to take place after hearing statements of complainants and preliminary views of member states at initial meeting(s). We hope by time Council meets again on this subject agreement would develop in favor of defining problem in broad, non-political terms and referring it to Special Committee or Working Group. (e) US not prepared support sanctions or exclude or suspend any member state.

Rusk

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to 25 posts and the U.S. representative to ICAO. Drafted by Thomas J. Carolan, Jr. (IO/UNP) on January 19; cleared in NEA/IAI, E/OA/AL, NEA/ARN, L/UNA, IO/UNP, and L/SCA; and approved by Popper (IO).

4. Telegram 9888 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel 4. Telegram 9888 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel1

Washington, January 21, 1969, 2342Z.

Subj:

ICAO Meeting on ME Aviation Incidents

Ref:

State 8296

1. ICAO Council Jan 20 decided by vote of 11 (US) to 10 to consider ME issue in open meeting and, by vote of 14 to 12 (US), to confine its order of business to Lebanese complaint, thereby refusing to include Israeli counter-complaint. Latter vote followed statement by US rep that USG did not regard ICAO as appropriate or competent body to judge alleged responsibility of GOL for terrorist acts mentioned in Israeli letter of Jan 14.

2. In ensuing discussion, Lebanese REP gave relatively moderate statement, mentioning sanctions but giving no specifics and indirectly suggesting expulsion of Israel from ICAO but not in such way as to indicate serious effort to this end. Israeli rep Rosenne (Deputy Israeli PermRep to UN) covered points made in SC debates, expressing strong regret and surprise ICAO Council had not included Israeli letter on order of business. Statements by Tunisia, Belgium, US, Spain and Argentina followed, with all but Tunisian rep favoring Council consideration of general problem of how to protect international civil aviation from all acts of force and violence. Council Pres Binaghi interrupted Tunisian from chair to say he would not countenance political discussion.

3. Council agreed meet again Jan 21. Following completion of general statements we expect Council to adjourn until members have had time to consult to develop line of action. US rep already working with British, Australian and Canadian reps to develop draft resolution urging all states do utmost to prevent acts of violence against international civil aviation and establishing committee to study problem and recommend action designed to bring an end to such illegal interference.

4. Posts requested not include Amcongen Montreal as addressee on tels this subject. Dept will pass them to US Rep ICAO as occasion demands.

Bohlen
Acting

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to USUN. Drafted by Carolan; cleared in NEA/ARN and in substance in NEA/IAI and E/OA/AL; and approved by Brown.

5. Telegram 16529 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel 5. Telegram 16529 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Lebanon and Israel1

Washington, February 1, 1969, 0025Z.

Subj:

ICAO Meeting on ME Aviation Incidents

Ref:

State 13227, Beirut 965

1. ICAO Council Jan 31 adjourned sine die its extraordinary session called to consider Lebanese complaint re Dec 28 Israeli attack on Beirut airport. Council Pres Binaghi, having cleared his statement in advance with Council members, reported efforts to agree on course of action had not succeeded and concluded that adjournment sine die appeared be only course commanding unanimous support. (We understand this outcome was also acceptable to Israeli reps in Montreal.)

2. Adjournment came after Canadians made unsuccessful, last-ditch effort to salvage some basis for Council action. Although there were no objections to adjournment, USG-along with many other members-regrets Council’s inability to act on this occasion in positive manner on matter affecting entire international aviation community.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 27 ARAB-ISR. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Montreal and USUN. Drafted by Carolan on January 31; cleared in NEA, E, and L; and approved by Brown.

6. Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Richardson to President Nixon 6. Memorandum from Acting Secretary of State Richardson to President Nixon1

Washington, February 19, 1969.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT-Evening Report

1. Zurich El Al Incident-The Department has taken a number of diplomatic steps in connection with the attack on the El Al aircraft in Zurich on Tuesday. We issued a statement late yesterday deploring the incident shortly after we contacted the Israeli Embassy and informed it that we wished to stay in closest contact on developments.

This morning Joe Sisco discussed the incident with Israeli Minister Argov in the absence of Ambassador Rabin. Joe urged them to pursue steps which would keep the focus of world opinion in Israel’s favor on this critical problem and not to negate world reaction by taking some offensive commando-type retaliatory action. As a means of assisting in keeping the proper focus on the El Al incident, he informed Argov that we were transmitting a letter of protest regarding the incident to the UN Security Council for the information of the members. Argov also was informed that we were encouraging both the British and the French to do the same or at least issue public statements condemning the latest attacks. We were also asking our Ambassadors to contact a number of friendly governments who have an interest in freedom of international air traffic to come out publicly on this matter.

We have also taken steps today to place the general problem of freedom of air traffic on the agenda of the ICAO Council which will consider this on a priority basis at Monday’s meeting. We instructed our Ambassadors in various Arab capitals to take up the matter with their respective governments to see whether any steps could be taken by them to restrain such commando raids. Today Ambassador Barbour counselled restraint on the Israeli Government. Finally, we issued a further press statement at noon revealing the steps that had been taken.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the El Al incident.]

Elliot L. Richardson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Lot File: 74D 164. Secret.

7. Telegram 146454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 7. Telegram 146454 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, August 29, 1969, 1544Z.

1. Dept has been advised by Israeli Embassy, on basis telecon from Foreign Office in Jerusalem (Bitan), that TWA Flight 840 on route Rome to Tel Aviv has been hijacked, reportedly by PLFP, and is presumably en route to Beirut. GOI requests we make urgent approach to Lebanese authorities requesting that passengers be handled and released as single group without distinction as to religion or nationality.

2. Embassy should immediately approach GOL at highest available level to make following points: A. If info we have received is correct that hijacked TWA plane will land Beirut, we request GOL to facilitate earliest release of plane, crew and all passengers.

B. We most specifically request that all RPT all passengers be processed and released as group and that there be no separate treatment of Jewish passengers, whether Israeli or non-Israeli.

C. Experience shows that rapid processing and release of plane, crew and passengers essential in order avoid inevitable political complications and difficulties which could mount rapidly if release is delayed.

3. Should aircraft land at Cairo or Amman, post there should make above approach to host Government.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Flash. Repeated Flash to Tel Aviv, Rome, Ankara, Cairo, Amman, Montreal, and USUN. Drafted by Atherton; cleared in NEA/ARN, IO/UNP, and E/AV; and approved by Davies.

8. Telegram 147491 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy 8. Telegram 147491 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy1

Washington, August 30, 1969, 2153Z.

Ref:

State 147454

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

1. With reference para two reftel, full text of message received by Israeli Embassy follows: Quote-The Foreign Minister refers to what Mr. Davies has told Chargé that the Syrians may be hinting that the release of our passengers may be tied to the release of the Syrian pilots. Mr. Eban would like the U.S. Government to know and the Government of Syria to know that the Syrians should not repeat not entertain any hope to get the release of their pilots by keeping our passengers in Damascus. The opposite is true. If the Israelis will not be released with all the passengers, the situation will become infinitely graver. Unquote.

2. Embassy should pass this to Foreign Ministry with request that it be passed soonest to SARG.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv. Drafted and approved by Davies and cleared by Eliot.

9. Telegram 147505 From the Department of State to the Representative to the International Civilian Aviation Organization (Butler) 9. Telegram 147505 From the Department of State to the Representative to the International Civilian Aviation Organization (Butler)1

Montreal, Canada, August 31, 1969, 0251Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

You are hereby requested to deliver immediately the following letter to Mr. Diallo, Chairman, ICAO Committee on Acts of Unlawful Interference With International Civil Aviation: “Dear Mr. Chairman: I write to you to request that you call an immediate meeting of the Committee on Unlawful Interference With International Civil Aviation for the purpose of considering, and taking all appropriate measures in relation to, the hijacking of a Trans World Airlines plane to Damascus, Syria.

“On August 29, at approximately_______Greenwich Mean Time, TWA Flight No. 840, eastbound between Rome, Italy, and Athens, Greece, was hijacked by two persons and diverted to Damascus. Shortly after the aircraft landed at Damascus, but after all passengers and crew had disembarked, a timed explosive device, which apparently had been placed in the forward part of the aircraft by the hijackers, detonated and caused considerable damage to the cockpit and forward cabin areas of the aircraft. In their haste to leave the aircraft, in knowing anticipation of this detonation, several passengers were injured. Since the plane was inoperable, TWA arranged for the retrieval of the passengers and the crew by an aircraft chartered from Alitalia and flown into and out of Damascus on August 30, 1969, for that purpose. The Syrian Government released all passengers and crew except______passengers who were citizens of Israeli nationality, which the Syrian Government detained. Insofar as is known to my Government, the Government of Syria continues to detain these Israeli citizens.

“My Government considers these acts of armed interference and subsequent detention of passengers to constitute acts which interfere with international civil aviation, jeopardize the safety thereof, seriously affect the operation of international air services and undermine the confidence of the peoples of the world in the safety of international civil aviation within the contemplation of the preambulatory language of the Council’s Resolution No.___, which established the Committee of which you are Chairman.

“Respectfully, I remind you of ICAO Assembly Resolution No._____, passed at the 16th Assembly of ICAL in Buenos Aires on September 23, 1968. In relevant part, that Resolution invited all States, even before ratification of, or adherence to, the Convention on Crimes and Certain Other Offenses Committed on Board Aircraft to give effect to the principles of Article 11 of that Convention. In effect, this Article calls upon any Member State in which a hijacked aircraft lands to take all appropriate measures to return the aircraft to the lawful control of its commander, and to permit the onward passage of the aircraft, its passengers and its crew. “My Government assumes that the Government of Syria, being an ICAO contracting State, recognizes fully the obligations imposed on it by this Resolution as well as by Council Resolution No._____of December_____, 1968, which, in relevant part, ‘urges contracting States to take all possible measures to prevent acts of unlawful seizure of aircraft.’

“My Government believes that the failure of the Government of Syria to permit the prompt departure of all passengers on the aircraft in question is not only contrary to the explicit requirements or plain intent of these resolutions, but also tends to encourage rather than discourage acts of unlawful interference with international civil aviation. This is a matter of utmost concern to all nations. It is certainly of central concern to ICAO, whose very purpose of existence is the safe and orderly development of civil aviation, and it is of concern to the ICAO committee you chair. It is important for this committee to ascertain immediately what steps the Government of Syria intends to take to comply with the Resolutions described above, so that ICAO can determine what, if any, further actions appear to be in order.

“It is for these reasons that we ask you to convene this meeting on most urgent basis.

Charles Butler
United States Representative”

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Harry Feehan (E/AO/AVP) and Loy on August 30; cleared by U. Alexis Johnson, Davies, Carolan, and L; and approved by Loy.

10. Memorandum of Conversation 10. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 31, 1969.

SUBJECT:

TWA Hijacking

PARTICIPANTS:

Rodger P. Davies, Acting Assistant Secretary, NEA

Clyde Williams, TWA

Mr. Davies told Mr. Williams of his conversation with Shlomo Argov earlier in the morning. He informed Williams that he had told Argov in confidence about the bomb threat. Davies added that he told Argov that as a government we had an interest in all U.S. flags carriers and that if any harm were done to TWA’s material or commercial interests, consideration would be given to measures we could take to equalize the situation. Mr. Davies noted to Williams that Mrs. Meir’s statement had tended to trigger many of the emotional reactions that we have noted over the hijacking incident. Davies also briefed Williams on Argov’s explanation of Mrs. Meir’s ill-advised statement. He also informed Williams of his request to Argov that the Israeli Government do everything possible to cool the situation.

Mr. Williams noted that he has been continually harassed by the Israeli Consulate General in New York. He said the harassment has been so bad that his New York office has not opened today. He has been receiving telephone calls at home. Mr. Davies told him that if the Consulate General causes him any more trouble to let him know and he would ask Shlomo Argov to instruct the Consulate not to contact him further.

Mr. Williams said that there has been an organized effort to dictate to TWA what it should do in connection with the hijacking incident and that they have received threats that were not veiled. Mr. Williams thought that something could be worked out with the Syrians if their man (Mr. Wiser) can go through with his plan to go to Damascus. If something prevents this trip, there will be serious problems. He voiced fear that Israeli actions might have an adverse effect on this trip. Mr. Davies agreed that the Israelis would bear some responsibility for any adverse SARG reaction.

Mr. Wiser reported that TWA has been in constant contact with the Syrian Permanent Representative to the UN. The Ambassador is urging his Government to release the Israelis but he has made numerous references to the question of an exchange of prisoners.

In closing, Mr. Davies noted that he had told Shlomo Argov that there was a fair chance that the Syrians would go through the door we had left open for them.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bryan H. Baas (NEA/ARN), and approved by Brown.

11. Telegram 147525 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel and the Consulate in Jerusalem 11. Telegram 147525 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel and the Consulate in Jerusalem1

Washington, August 31, 1969, 1331Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

Ref:

Tel Aviv 3336

For Charge Zurhellen

1. Positions you took during exchange with Bitan fully endorsed. You should stress in strongest terms to Mrs. Meir and others that neither USG’s efforts nor those of TWA terminated and if Israelis persist in what seems here to be stimulation of emotions, they may well further exacerbate situation and seriously undermine current endeavors. Company’s efforts are not all on surface. Company itself without USG prompting is actively and seriously embarked on initiatives which hopefully will pay off and through USG requests GOI control emotional situation and harassment which only complicate their effort. Company believes Syrians desire to disembarrass themselves of situation in which they are not only in violation international air standards but holding as hostages four women and two aging men. Reports from Italians which we have shared with Israelis also reflect apparent Syrian discomfiture.

2. Israelis will by now have seen TWA statement which makes clear that company feels the strongest of obligations to detained passengers and will do everything in company’s power to secure their release. Contrary to Bitan assertion that Company stated pilot remaining to check repairs, Company statement makes clear that in connection with obtaining release of passengers “To this end, TWA Captain Dean A. Carter, and other TWA representatives in Damascus will now effect considerable effort on the scene to remedy this extremely distressing turn of events.”

3. Israel’s original demand that all passengers be left in Damascus unless all left was clearly unfeasible. Passengers other than Israelis were set free and could depart by normal means of transportation. TWA did not have it in its power to force them to remain. Given pressures from Greek and Italian Governments whose nationals were detained, to say nothing of reaction of Americans, company attempt to accomplish this would have aroused storm of protests and charges it disregarding its obligations to larger part of passengers. Israelis should also know that Company has never been able to establish direct communication with Syrians and that actual Syrian intentions other than those conveyed through Italians were known only when chartered aircraft landed. We and company believe leaving co-pilot and flight engineer would not have helped situation. Syrians would have been given opportunity to ignore subordinate members crew or to expel them. In addition, intelligence information from cockpit crew was essential and could not have been provided had these been left behind.

4. With respect to USG efforts, you should provide details of State 147502 covering efforts with other governments and note that special ICAO committee being requested to meet Monday morning. We believe this group will ask report from the SARG on their actions in the light of responsibilities as members of ICAO.

5. It is the consensus of agencies here that Israel is in favorable position vis-a-vis world opinion and that some governments recognize issue here over-rides Arab-Israel element and that Syrian association with Fedayeen action by holding passengers has serious implications for all. You should note also Under Secretary Johnson’s exchange with Soviet Charge as conveyed State 147510. Statement by President International Air Pilots Association calling for world-wide strike of pilots previously sent Embassy and may be useful reference during your discussion.

6. You may reaffirm that USG urges Israel to take no actions that might reverse favorable trends we see developing as hamper current endeavors.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Davies, and cleared by Lloyd (S/S).

12. Telegram 147543 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel 12. Telegram 147543 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, August 31 1969, 1934Z.

Ref:

Tel Aviv 3337

1. Davies (NEA) telephoned Israeli Charge Argov morning 31st and said US and Israel must stick close together in this critical period and he was both concerned and shocked over picture presented when he summoned to Dept early this morning. He proceeded to brief Argov on contents of Tel Aviv’s 3337 and Dept’s response.

2. He noted that TWA was receiving telegrams and phone calls whose content gave indication of organization and, this morning, a threat that bombs would be placed on all TWA flights if six Israelis not released from Syria by end of day. Obviously these acts triggered in part by Mrs. Meir’s statement could have serious consequences for TWA domestic traffic to say nothing of harassment in Israel. Davies said USG had great interest in integrity US air carriers and would be most seriously concerned should this apparent campaign have serious impact on TWA. Should this occur we would have to consider what USG might do under terms of our bilateral agreement to equalize situation. Davies told Argov that on personal and official basis he urged that GOI not add to problems of carrier. TWA has done its utmost to obtain release of all passengers and is using its best judgment to accomplish this end. Davies noted to Argov that TWA believes there is organized campaign being organized against Company and harmful effects of any possible boycott should also be apparent. Davies hastened to point out that we not accusing GOI of organizing boycott. We merely asking that GOI refrain from taking any actions that would exacerbate situation.

3. Argov replied that TWA had made very serious mistake in initial public statement when it indicated that captain of hijacked aircraft would remain behind in Damascus to supervise repair aircraft but made no mention that his remaining behind connected in any way with fate of six Israeli passengers. Argov had contacted TWA President Wiser who recognized importance of oversight and issued corrected statement that included reference to Israeli passengers. Argov emphasized that it was the first report that received play in press today and has left the impression of callousness on part of company which will be hard to overcome. People are reacting to what they have heard and read. Mrs. Meir’s statement in this context should be viewed as a natural reaction to the information she had on hand.

4. Davies replied he wished to be very frank. He not aware TWA statement given to him last night which contained reference to the Israelis was not the original. In any event, the Prime Minister of Israel as well as other officials should rely not on press reports but on official information communicated by company. Point is USG and Company have serious problem and Davies would ask on both personal and official basis that GOI and its representatives do nothing to complicate further the Company’s problems. He asked specifically that GOI do what it can to moderate reactions Davies also pointed out that TWA could suffer major damage and clearly neither of us wants this.

5. Upon digesting foregoing Argov’s reaction was explosive. He asked Davies if he were suggesting that the USG were preparing to retaliate against El Al for any damage that might be suffered by TWA. Davies replied that our actions would be of course guided by the provisions of our bilateral air agreement. Davies, speaking slowly in order permit Argov take notes, then said the following: “we are seriously concerned by the potential damage to our carrier which, through series of events including the Israeli Prime Minister’s reaction to press statements, now looms before us. We would appreciate all actions by the government of Israel and its representatives both here and in Israel to moderate the situation. We have a mutuality of interests in protecting the commercial rights of both carriers.”

6. Davies told Argov that we cannot inform him of all that is being done on the part of the Company at this time to free the Israelis but reiterated his appeal that Israelis not rock the boat. Argov said this real problem because of initial impression that TWA had abandoned passengers. Davies replied that we can understand there have been misunderstandings but in any event the Prime Minister’s statement was not helpful, and we hope corrective measures can be taken. Davies emphasized that what he had said was not in spirit of recrimination but was appeal for cooperation

7. Argov said that to extent possible he would share with our friends information on TWA's commendable efforts to help detained passengers. He noted, however, that there had been lapses (i.e. initial press reports on TWA position) but he noted that TWA President Wiser had been very helpful, particularly in issuing qte correction. Unqte

8. Davies ended conversation with personal observation that Syrians may be looking for way out of this situation. We prepared a tough public statement yesterday but we tried to leave a door open to SARG and we think there chance they will walk through it. Argov’s closing remark was that he hoped Davies would cool reactions within USG and said he would try do same in Jerusalem.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Baas and Davies, cleared by Lloyd, and approved by Davies.

13. Telegram 7222 From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 13. Telegram 7222 From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 1, 1969, 1233Z.

Subj:

TWA Hijacking

Ref:

State 147514, Beirut 7217

1 We reluctant use PanAm landing issue as lever with Syrians induce release remaining Israeli passengers. We strongly doubt landing ssue of sufficient importance to Syrians to have much influence on them. Our understanding, overflight rights much more important to PanAm than landing rights to Syrians and we fear if PanAm intervenes or its concern expressed on matter as sensitive as Israeli passengers, it might well jeopardize overflight rights without obtaining release of passengers.

2. Having said that, we are hard put to identify specific effective levers secure release remaining two Israelis. In counting our assets, and, we have practically none, we have somewhat (not much) better atmosphere in which to work. Syrians have over past few weeks taken several steps remove some of major discriminatory measures against USG and its nationals, ie removal of ban on US flag shipping and air overflights reopening Syria to US, UK tourists etc. although these measures obviously have large element Syrian self-interest, timing of them, all in one short period after two years of their existence, appear to indicate a shift in Syrian foreign policy away from almost total alignment with Soviets and other Communist countries and toward a more balanced foreign posture. This shift no doubt still faces strong Syrian internal opposition.

3. However much we deplore hijacking of plane by PFLP, SARG’s handling of hijack, with exception of Israeli passengers, has in our judgment and that of Dr Romano, Italian Charge in Damascus, been on the whole correct and expeditious considering fact have committee-type government and incident occurred on Friday when government offices closed. Romano also agrees that hijacking almost surely came as surprise to SARG and has presented it with real dilemma. (Romano has also told US PFLP hijackers are in Syrian custody and under interrogation). Issue of Israeli passengers obviously arouses deepest Syrian political emotions which in minds of many Syrians transcend any sense of responsibility for international obligation or consequences. Hot-heads who opposed relaxation restrictions described above would be arguing against release remaining Israelis at least without significant quid pro quo. If cooler Syrian heads are to prevail, they must be able to work in atmosphere where they not obviously responding to heavy overt foreign pressure. Such overt pressure in itself could become reason for Syrians delaying release of remaining passengers.

4. In these circumstances we think the best tactic to be employed for the release of the remaining two Israelis should be discreet but firm encouragement to the Syrians to abide by international standards of conduct leaving guns for later. Our reasoning is that the use of heavy guns particularly from the side of the Israelis is likely to make the Syrians dig in their heels rather than be more flexible. We now have the release of the four Israeli women. We should publicly welcome this development and use it as a peg on which to base expressions of confidence that Syrian authorities will apply same internationally recognized principles in the timely release of the remaining Israelis. Along with the Italians, the best channel for this might be the Pakistani Ambassador in Damascus who is highly respected by SARG leadership and whose country of course has a large airline.

5. Face is undoubtedly already involved in this problem and the passage of time and lessening of public furor over hijacking offers most promising prospect for emergency acceptable solution for release of these unfortunate people.

6. Romano concurs in general outline of above analysis.

Houghton

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Limdis.

14. Telegram 5517 From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 14. Telegram 5517 From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State1

Rome, September 1, 1969, 0830Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

Ref:

State 1474911; Rome 5510; Beirut 7217

1. Deputy DirGen Political Affairs FonOff tells US that in telephone conversation morning Sept 1, Italian Charge Damascus had reported that Syrians were again strongly suggesting exchange of two Israeli men for Syrian pilots in Israeli hands.

2. FonOff official again instructed Charge to make clear to Syrians that there was virtually no possibility Israel would agree to such exchange.

Stabler

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv.

15. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 15. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 2, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Report on Efforts in Connection with Hijacked TWA Aircraft

Our intensive efforts over the Labor Day weekend under the leadership of Under Secretary Johnson have begun to pay off. All of the passengers are now out of Syria, except two remaining Israeli male passengers. We have been in close and constant touch both with the Israelis and TWA officials throughout, and I believe the crisis atmosphere over the hijacking has eased. In particular this seems so in connection with the confrontation between TWA and the Israelis, although the company is not yet out of the woods. We will continue our efforts, by all feasible means, to help assure the release of the two remaining Israelis, though our assessment is that this process is likely to be protracted as was the case a year ago in securing the release of male Israeli passengers of an El-Al aircraft hijacked to Algeria. In particular, the Italian Government has played a major role and can be expected to be the principal focus in future efforts.

The current effort is primarily in the hands of TWA President Wiser who is now in Damascus discussing with the Syrians the question of release of the remaining two Israeli nationals and the repair and repatriation of the aircraft. In the past several days I have consulted several times with TWA Chairman, Mr. Tillinghast, whose cooperation has been extremely helpful to us throughout. In many ways this has been a classic example of cooperation between government and the private sector in our mutual interests. We hope to have some report from Wiser over the next forty-eight hours. In the meantime, both he and the pilot remain in Damascus. As part of our effort to mobilize international support which helped to achieve the release of the passengers we: (a) encouraged many governments with influence in Damascus to make their views known to Syrian authorities; (b) asked the Soviets to intervene with the Syrians and have word from them that our views have been conveyed (TASS reports have implied criticism of the hijacking); (c) convened an emergency session of the special committee of ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) which we believe will result in a further communication by that organization to the Syrians; (d) have been in touch with the Director General of IATA, Knut Hammarskjold, to mobilize the resources of that organization; and (e) are convening a meeting of the NATO Council in order to encourage our European allies to keep up the momentum on this matter.

In addition, we have made an intensive study of the possibility of organizing a broad boycott by the principal carriers using the new Damascus airport as a means of bringing further pressure, but regrettably have concluded this is not likely to prove a feasible course. However, we intend to pursue consultations with a number of other countries on the assumption that the threat of considering such a boycott may have a salutary effect in Damascus. We also have available a contingency plan for moving into the United Nations Security Council, though we are reluctant to pursue this course while other efforts through the TWA President and through the Italians are going forward, particularly since we do not feel the Council’s composition is such that the kind of positive action we would want would result. We will keep this latter course under current review.

According to press reports, two representatives of the International Committee for the Red Cross arrived in Damascus on September 1. We have no official confirmation of either their arrival or the role they may play, but the speculation in the press is that they may act as intermediaries to organize an exchange of the two Israelis for Syrian prisoners held by Israel.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Attached but not printed was a transmittal memorandum Sisco sent to Rogers indicating that the memorandum was drafted by Baas and cleared by Johnson and Davies.

16. Memorandum of Conversation 16. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 3, 1969.

SUBJECT:

TWA Hijacking

PARTICIPANTS:

Charles Tillinghast, Chairman of the Board, TWA

Tom Huntington, Vice President, TWA

Frank E. Loy, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Transportation and Telecommunications, E

I had attempted to reach Mr. Wiser, TWA’s President, to get a firsthand report of his trip to Damascus. Mr. Wiser is on his way back to the US and was not available. Consequently, I spoke in separate conversation, to Mr. Tillinghast who had had a long conversation with Mr. Wiser, and to Mr. Huntington, in Paris, who had accompanied Mr. Wiser. The following emerged:

The ranking person to whom Messrs. Wiser and Huntington spoke was General Akil who is Syria’s Vice Minister of Defense and Director General of Civil Aviation, and the Chairman of the Syrian Arab Airline. It was their impression that Akil was both very well informed on the matter and very influential in the Syrian Government on this issue. The next level up would be the Premier.

The Syrians believe that they have acted both rather responsibly and humanely by letting the four Israeli women depart. They intend to hold the two Israeli men for a trade for the two Syrian military pilots that landed in Israel by mistake. They recognize, and are concerned about adverse international public opinion in this regard, but they think they can do no other. They point out that while the two Syrian pilots were military they were not on a military mission but rather some sort of training mission. Mr. Wiser did not believe any step was at present being considered by the Syrians, other than the trade.

The two hijackers were in jail, under military custody. The TWA officers doubted that they would either be tried publicly or released. They assumed that the hijackers would simply fade from view. This was more speculation, rather than a view based on any special information.

Akil said that neither the hijackers nor the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine would get anything out of this. In fact, the latter organization had asked the Syrians to get some of their members released from Israel, but the Syrians had said no.

Dr. Romano, the Italian Charge in Damascus, had acted very well, but he was near collapse and was basically not nearly so strong or forceful as the Italian Ambassador. TWA was very glad to see the latter return.

Romano said at one point that it was too bad the former Soviet Ambassador to Damascus (who is at present the Ambassador to Chad) was no longer there. If he had been, Romano thought all six Israelis would have been released promptly.

The two Israeli male passengers were in jail under Army custody. Their case, it was said, was under investigation. Mr. Huntington said he hoped he would press either the Italians or the International Red Cross to visit these two. There is a great deal of concern in Israel about Syrian prison conditions and Mr. Huntington said he had heard from several quarters that there is nothing worse than a Syrian prison. In the past prisoners who had been there for two months or so had emerged somewhat mentally deranged.

In this connection, Mr. Huntington said that in Rome Israeli Charge Yosha had asked Mr. Wiser to tell the TWA Captain to try to see the prisoners. Mr. Wiser said he would take this under consideration. Wells Stabler apparently said it might be better not to do so if we could arrange to have the Italians or the Red Cross take on this job.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Loy. The conversation was held in Paris.

17. Letter from Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Eban to Secretary of State Rogers 17. Letter from Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Eban to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 3, 1969.

The Charge d’Affaires of Israel ad interim presents his compliments to the Honorable the Secretary of State and has the honor to transmit to him the following communication from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Abba Eban:- “My dear Mr. Secretary:

My Govermment has accepted with gratification your statement following the hijacking of the TWA plane to Damascus concerning the urgent necessity to ensure the safe release of the two Israelis incarcerated in Damascus. We deeply appreciate the various steps which your Government has already taken to that end. I am also certain that you realize the seriousness as well as the urgency of this matter. However, every day that passes without their release exacerbates the problem both from a humanitarian and political standpoint. It is the growing feeling in Israel that the Syrian behaviour in this matter is fast becoming an insufferable provocation.

“I deeply request that you spare no efforts to liberate the kidnapped Israelis and that you make us fully privy to the steps that your Government is undertaking. I am most grateful to you for all your efforts to date and express the fervent hope that we shall achieve the solution of this most urgent problem.

“Sincerely yours,

Abba Eban

Minister for Foreign Affairs”

The Charge d’Affaires of Israel (a.i.) avails himself of this opportunity of renewing to the Honorable Secretary of State the assurances of his highest consideration.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. No classification marking.

18. Information Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers 18. Information Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 5, 1969.

SUBJECT:

TWA Hijacking: Status Report-INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

1. Over the last few days we have continued our intensive efforts to secure the release of the two Israelis held by the Syrians in Damascus. These efforts have resulted in the following developments: a. The ICAO Committee for Unlawful Interference in International Aviation yesterday dispatched a message to the Syrian Government requesting further information and implicitly seeking Syrian agreement to the release of the two Israeli passengers.

b. The NATO Advisory Committee met yesterday to discuss what measures NATO members might take and has urged that everything possible be done.

c. Through our United States Mission in Geneva we have contacted the International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) to determine what if anything that organization-which presently has two representatives in Damascus-can do.

d. Since one of the Israeli passengers being held was returning from a World Health Organization meeting and is working on a WHO project, we have sought WHO intervention, bearing in mind that WHO has been active in Syria.

e. We have continued to be in close touch with TWA, which informs us that TWA President Wiser has obtained the impression after his visit to Damascus a couple of days ago that the Syrian Government intends to hold the Israeli passengers as a trade-off for two Syrian pilots held by the Israelis.

f. We have continued to urge the Israelis to exercise restraint and to allow time for our current efforts to be played out.

g. We have followed up our earlier demarche with the Soviets, who passed along to us yesterday a Syrian message apropos our representations to the effect that the “question” is “not closed”.

h. We continue to be in touch with the Italians in Rome, who tell us that they have instructed their Charge to call on the Syrian Foreign Minister, who has just returned to Damascus from the Arab Foreign Ministers’ Conference.

2. Although we are running out of meaningful, practical steps which might be taken, we are contemplating certain additional actions. The Israelis have expressed deep appreciation for what we have done and have expressed an understanding regarding the limits under which we are operating. Nevertheless, they are rapidly losing patience over the continued detention of two of their nationals. We continue to believe that the principal focus should be quiet initiatives undertaken mainly by the Italians and by the Soviets.

3. Following are additional measures which we are launching today: a. We are instructing Ambassador Yost in New York to ask U Thant to do everything possible to assist in efforts to release the passengers.

b. We are approaching governments whose airlines land in Syria or who offer landing rights to the Syrian airlines informing them that we are considering proposing that they initiate a boycott. We are inviting their views regarding this course of action, noting at the same time that we wish to avoid any pressures which might be counterproductive.

c. On a highly confidential and closely-held basis we are today proposing to the Israelis that they give consideration to releasing quietly in Italy the two Syrian MIG pilots which they hold. We are proposing this course of action because: (1) it offers the best hope of securing the release of the Israeli passengers; (2) it gets around the Israeli objection to making an overt trade for the two Israeli passengers being held by the Syrians; and (3) it offers the Syrian pilots a freedom of choice as to whether they wish to return to Syria at this juncture or not.

d. We are today following up with those governments whom we earlier requested to intercede with the Syrians and have not reported back.

4. We have the following three additional actions up our sleeve: a. The first is to urge the governments who have been invited to send representatives to the inauguration of the new Damascus International Airport later this month to refrain from doing so in protest against the Syrian action. We are withholding this action pending the obtention of further information concerning this inauguration ceremony.

b. The second contingency action is to go to the Security Council. At this juncture we oppose such a measure as being counterproductive.

c. Another possibility is an attempt to block Syria’s candidacy for a seat on the Security Council. We could argue that Syria has not demonstrated that it is a responsible member of the international community and therefore should not have the seat.

5. Incidentally, it should be kept in mind that one of the Israelis held by the Syrians, Saleh Moualem, occupation unknown, has served in the Israeli Intelligence Service. This is being closely held but relates to what we are doing.

The second, Prof. Shlomo Samueloff, Lecturer in medicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, has no other connection to our knowledge. You may be aware that you have received numerous telegrams on his behalf from American Jewish organizations, and individuals in academic circles.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Seelye and cleared by Davies and Loy. A copy was sent to Johnson.

19. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 19. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 10, 1969.

Subject:

Follow-up Report on the TWA Incident

As you know, our efforts continue to obtain the release of the two Israeli passengers hijacked from the TWA aircraft on August 29. On September 2 we apprised the President of initial actions being taken with regard to this incident. In view of developments since then, we believe that a further brief status report to the White House would be helpful.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Enclosure

FOLLOW-UP REPORT ON HIJACKED TWA AIRCRAFT

Since our last report to the President of September 2 on the TWA plane hijacking incidents we have continued our intensive efforts to obtain the release of the two remaining Israeli passengers held by the Syrian Government (SARG) by: A. Maintaining close contacts with the Italians who represent our interests in Syria;

B. Transmitting messages to the Soviet Union requesting its assistance;

C. Convening several emergency sessions of the Special Committee of ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) as well as speaking to the Director General of IATA (International Air Transport Association), Knut Hammerskjold;

D. Informing the North Atlantic Council of the facts in the case and urging that NATO countries do everything possible to support our efforts;

E. Contacting the International Committee of the Red Cross as well as the World Health Organization for which one of the Israeli detainees reportedly was working, and which is active in Syria;

F. Working closely with TWA;

G. Advising Israelis to exercise restraint and allow time for current efforts to be played out, which they have thus far agreed to do;

H. Instructing Ambassador Yost to ask U Thant for his assistance;

I. Soundings of third countries about the possibility of an aviation boycott against Syria.

To date the following results have been obtained: 1. The Italian Ambassador met with the Syrian Foreign Minister on September 6 and is hopeful as a result of his talk that the two Israelis will be released soon if a suitable psychological climate can be established.

2. The Soviets have relayed word from the Syrians that the matter of the passenger release is not “closed”.

3. The Syrian Government has replied to an ICAO message of September 5 and stated that Article 11 of the Tokyo convention has been implemented in connection with the TWA hijacking.* Because of the unsatisfactory Syrian reply, another emergency meeting of the Committee was convened on September 8. A majority of the Committee members declined, however, to approve a follow-up to the Syrian message because they felt that this was becoming a “political” issue. At the strong urging of the U.S., the head of the ICAO has now agreed to send a follow-up message on his own.

4. An international Red Cross representative reported on September 9 that he had seen the Israeli men, who were well and being detained in what appeared to be a military medical installation. He did not believe the men would be released, however, without some quid pro quo from the Israelis.

5. U Thant has met with international pilots representatives and following this meeting stated that he had appealed to the Syrians.

6. At our urging the Director General of the IATA has accepted a Syrian suggestion that he might wish to visit Damascus and has proposed a visit later this week.

7. Initial soundings with a number of concerned countries regarding the possibility of boycotting Syrian airlines and its airport have evoked lukewarm responses.

8. Pursuant to an Italian suggestion, we have urged that, if it is feasible, Pan American should inform the Syrians of its willingness to move toward final negotiations on overflight and landing rights-indicating, however, that prior release of the two passengers would be essential.

In the meantime, we are still weighing the possibility of requesting governments which have been invited to attend inauguration ceremonies of Damascus airport on September 15 not to accept these invitations. Because of the risks that this course of action would be counterproductive, we have held it in abeyance. Instead, we have suggested to the French Government, which has easy access to the Syrian regime, to consider sending word to Damascus that its attendance at the inauguration would be facilitated if the two Israeli passengers were released in advance.

Finally, we still continue to have available a contingency plan to move into the United Nations Security Council if all else fails. We are still most reluctant, however, to resort to this measure before exhausting all of the above courses of action.

The current belief by several experienced observers, including the Italian Ambassador in Damascus, is that the Syrians are aware of their international image and desire to abide by international aviation standards. While the regime wishes to move in the right direction, it apparently needs the right psychological climate. This means, among other things, dampening international furor over “Syrian piracy”. Keeping the above in mind, therefore, we intend to move deliberately but persistently to obtain the release of these two men.

In this regard, it increasingly appears that the Syrians may be prepared to exchange the two Israelis for two Syrian pilots now held by Israel after the latter had landed by mistake in Israel. Thus far, the Israelis have vehemently opposed any suggestions of a deal. We have nevertheless informally broached to the Israelis the possibility of their quietly releasing the Syrians in Europe without tying it to the hijacked Israelis. In this informal way, Syria would almost certainly respond by releasing the two passengers. The Israelis have not yet reacted to our idea.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Thomas J. Scotes (NEA/ARN) on September 9 and cleared by Sisco, Seelye, Loy, and in substance with Johnson.

* Article 11 of the 1963 Tokyo Convention requires the immediate release by member states of hijacked aircraft, crews and passengers landing on their territory. The U.S. has ratified this convention which comes into effect on December 4. 1969. Syria has not yet done so. [Footnote is in the original.]

20. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 20. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 17, 1969.

Subject:

Aircraft Hijacking

There are a number of steps which this Department and others are taking or considering to try to stop aircraft hijacking. In some cases we will not want to initiate these steps until the two remaining TWA passengers held by the Syrians are released (or possibly until it may become evident our present efforts will not succeed), because we obviously do not want to prejudice these present efforts.

Our two main goals are (1) to gain wide international acceptance of the concepts, that the plane, crew, and passengers must always be returned and that the hijacker must be punished for the crime, and (2) to find ways to bring effective international pressure on countries which do not abide by these norms.

To this end, the following steps are already in progress: 1. Various efforts to obtain widespread adherence to the Tokyo Convention, which requires the return of plane, crew and passengers. The Convention will come into force on December 4, but only among the 13 or so States which have so far ratified it. Among other things, we are seeking the agreement of the other countries which have ratified the Convention to a joint approach urging all others to become parties to the Convention promptly.

2. Adoption of a supplementary convention requiring that the hijacker be returned or prosecuted in the country where the aircraft lands. A committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is holding its second meeting on this beginning September 23 and we are pressing for an international conference on the supplementary convention in the fall of 1970, which is probably the earliest date this could be done. In addition to this multilateral effort, we are including provisions making hijacking an extraditable offense in bilateral extradition treaties which we are negotiating or amending.

3. Continuing and stepped-up efforts to return to the United States for prosecution various hijackers in Cuba or third countries. There is some evidence that Cuba is quietly sending a few selected hijackers to third countries or encouraging them to leave, and we are taking advantage of all means we have to get them back to this country.

4. The FAA is working on a system for detecting and apprehending possible hijackers. This involves identifying suspicious individuals by certain characteristics and then running these persons by a detection machine. There are both legal and technical problems still to be resolved.

5. We are informing interested delegations to the UN in New York that we are prepared, at some stage, to support a Security Council resolution along the lines of one the Finns have informally proposed, which urges all States to take measures internationally and domestically to prevent unlawful interference with civil aviation. We are keeping in close touch with the Finns regarding the possible timing of Security Council consideration of the matter, since we want to bear in mind the status of the efforts we and others are making to secure the release of the two Israeli passengers being held by Syria. Our tentative judgment is that Security Council consideration of this matter would be more effective if it were approached not from the point of view of any specific case which would likely become highly polemical and contentious, but rather from the point of view of getting Security Council endorsement for certain general principles addressed to the hijacking problem. In particular, we feel that affirmative Security Council action could help mobilize opinion in support of our efforts to achieve a multilateral convention requiring that the hijacker be returned or prosecuted in the country where the aircraft lands.

Other steps under active consideration, some of which should await resolution of the Syrian problem, are: 1. Expanding the terms of reference of the ICAO hijacking committee to permit it to seek invitations to send fact-finding teams to countries which have not returned the plane, crew and all passengers. Although this would be done under the guise of fact-finding, the real purpose would be to exert international pressure. For the latter reason, other members of ICAO may not agree to such a proposal.

2. In a related area, we are considering whether to propose that the ICAO hijacking committee seek an invitation for a fact-finding team to visit Cuba for the purpose of finding out whether Cuba would be receptive to some “neutral” way to dispose of the problem of hijackers still in Cuba, such as by sending them to third countries which would be willing to return them to the country of the airline hijacked for prosecution.

3. Hijacking is a danger to air safety in all cases, but it can also lead to international political incidents and pose a threat to peace and security when it is politically motivated and when the country receiving the aircraft does not act promptly to return the plane, crew and passengers and when it does not take effective action against the hijackers. To deal with this growing problem, we are now considering asking for an unpublicized meeting with major aviation countries to propose a joint announcement that, when a country does not act responsibly in a political hijacking incident, such countries will suspend all air services to and from that country. There are some pitfalls in this idea and it must be considered very carefully, but in principle we think it has merit.

We would not favor at this time private boycotts such as the strike proposed by the International Airline Pilots Association, IFALPA. We believe that it is the Government and not private organizations which should act on this problem.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential. Drafted by Styles on September 16. Kissinger summarized and sent this memorandum to the President, stating that it “represented a reasonable package at the present time.” (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 131, Hijackings II)

21. Telegram 159327 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel 21. Telegram 159327 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, September 19, 1969, 0004Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

1. Israeli Embassy Counselor Raviv called at Department September 18 to learn of latest developments in connection with TWA hijacking. We brought him up to date re latest initiatives, including recent visit to Damascus by IATA President Hammarskjold and Italian Ambassador’s call on Syrian Foreign Minister over weekend. We indicated that we raising matter again with Soviets today. We mentioned likelihood that general issue of hijacking would be discussed shortly in UN forum.

2. Department officer expressed personal view that we have virtually exhausted our numerous efforts through third parties to secure passengers’ release and it becoming increasingly clear that Syrians will not rpt not agree to their release without face-saving quid pro quo. While Syrian Government has not rpt not so indicated in their talks with various intermediaries, this is distinct impression which Syrians have created. We recalled having broached with Israeli officials idea of an exchange for Syrian pilots and that Israeli position had been negative. We inquired whether there might be some other quid pro quo acceptable to Israelis.

3. Raviv said that GOI could not rpt not agree to any kind of trade-off, contending that this would only encourage further hijacking. We noted that most effective deterrent to future hijackings would seem to be to punish hijackers. It our understanding that hijackers being held in Syrian jail and are to be prosecuted.

4. Raviv said that his government at this juncture would presumably have to consider what measures GOI might have to take. Department officer replied that if by this he meant some Israeli military action against Syria, he assumed Israelis understood that such action would risk lives of two passengers being held. He wonder whether country such as Israel would be prepared forfeit lives of two human beings in this way. Raviv made no comment.

Acting
Richardson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Repeated to Beirut, Rome, and USUN. Drafted by Thomas J. Scotes (NEA/ARN) on September 9 and cleared by Sisco, Seelye, Loy, and in substance with Johnson.

22. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 22. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 19, 1969.

Subject:

Up-dated Report on Hijacked TWA Aircraft

The fedayeen hijackers are still in prison and are expected to be brought to trial by the Syrian Government. They have not been allowed to communicate with the leaders of their fedayeen organization, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The International Red Cross assures us that the two Israeli passengers are being well treated. The Captain of the TWA aircraft remains in Damascus and we understand that TWA is contemplating sending in technicians to repair the damaged Boeing.

The Syrian Government continues to maintain that it is observing international practice. It has reiterated to the President of IATA that it considers that it is abiding by Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention. At the same time the Syrians contend that the Fourth Geneva Convention of August 1949 permits them to retain citizens of a country with which they are in a state of war. Actually, Article 42 of this Convention permits a country to retain such persons only if their activities are detrimental to the security of that country. This is not the case in this instance. It seems clear that the Syrians are still looking for a face-saving way out of their dilemma and are fearful of adverse internal reactions if they do not extract a quid pro quo.

During the past week we have continued our efforts through third countries and international organizations. At our request the Italian Ambassador in Damascus called on the Syrian Foreign Ministry over the weekend to make another demarche. Our Ambassador in Moscow again requested a reading from the Soviets, who replied that the Syrians still had the matter “under investigation”. At the same time the, Soviets noted that the Syrians were having “political” problems.

The ICAO President sent a follow-up message to the Syrians several days ago, and on Friday the President of IATA arrived in Damascus. The latter has informed us that following high-level review the Syrian Government told him the passengers could not be released into his custody.

Our ploy with Pan American also had no positive effect. Over the weekend Pan American communicated to the Syrian Government its willingness to move toward final negotiations on landing and overflight rights once the passengers were released. But while Pan American made clear that this was intended as a forthcoming gesture, one Syrian official chose to interpret the initiative as a backing off from negotiations. No Pan American representative attended the Damascus Airport inauguration ceremony on September 15, nor did representatives from most of the other major European airlines.

The Italians seem to feel that they have reached an impasse in their efforts and continue to believe that the Syrians would view with favor a trade-off for the two Syrian pilots being held in Israel. We understand that the Syrians will not initiate any such exchange but would probably be responsive to such an arrangement. A friendly Syrian official has confided to us that if the Israelis would release the two Syrian pilots, the Syrian Government would probably reciprocate with the release of the two Israeli passengers. We have again broached the idea of an exchange to the Israelis but they have reacted negatively.

Meanwhile, the Israelis are becoming more impatient and are hinting that they may have to take some action of their own. We have urged that they continue to exercise restraint and have cautioned them that any possible Israeli military action against Syria would endanger the lives of the two Israeli passengers. We have informed the Israelis that on September 18 we again approached the Soviets and that we are moving toward raising the general issue of hijacking before the UN General Assembly.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Seelye. Gleysteen signed for Eliot.

23. Telegram 3119 From the U.S. Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 23. Telegram 3119 From the U.S. Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 20, 1969, 1902Z.

TWA hijacking

I broached TWA hijacking briefly with Syrian PermRep Tomeh in GA corridors and urged SARG take earliest action to release two Israelis.

Tomeh said his govt is taking “positive attitude” and urged that we continue “quiet diplomacy”. He argued that public references to this affair as well as placing hijacking problem on SC or GA agenda while this affair unresolved, would make its solution much more difficult.

While emphasizing that he was placing no link between two cases and speaking only personally, he said it obvious that release two Syrian pilots, who had strayed over Israel and been held so long, would be helpful. He compared SARG concern re pilots with US concern for release helicopter crew in Korea.

When I pointed out legitimate Israeli anxiety that release pilots under these circumstances would merely encourage further hijackings, Tomeh said he understood but that pilots might perhaps be released two weeks or so after release of the Israelis. He was unwilling and presumably unauthorized to pursue matter further.

Yost

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv, Beirut, and Rome.

24. Telegram 160323 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel 24. Telegram 160323 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, September 20, 1969, 1646Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

Ref:

A.Tel Aviv 3588 B. State 159327

1. We share Embassy Tel Aviv’s concern that Israeli patience with our efforts to obtain release of two Israeli passengers may be running out (Ref A). Dept. officer received same impression from Israeli Counselor Raviv in September 18 conversation (para 4, Ref. B). Following is recapitulation our thinking.

2. We share Israeli outrage at continued illegal detention of two passengers. GOI has been fully informed of various measures we have employed in effort obtain their release. In employing these measures we have sought to avoid any appearance of coercion since it our considered opinion that this would be counterproductive. Syrian regime cannot afford publicly to appear to be submitting to American or Israeli pressures.

3. In any case, USG has little leverage at its disposal for use against Syrians. We do not rpt not know what Embassy has in mind when it advocates “hardhitting campaign” and “strong action against Syria in every way possible regardless of consequences”. Even if such action were feasible, we question whether it would have desired results.

4. Proposal we do something prevent Syrian election to Security Council is non-starter. Given fact that elections to SC are by secret ballot, that UN membership normally accepts regional choice, that Syria has Asian group endorsement, and that there are no rival candidates for seat Syria seeks, we see no way to prevent Syria’s election or to use Syrian candidacy as bargaining counter in connection release of TWA passengers.

5. We understand that Syrians are embarrassed by presence of Israelis who thrust on them by PFLP and disapprove of hijacking. But Syrian regime is shaky aid evidently fears domestic—particularly Palestinian—repercussions if it relinquishes passengers without face-saving quid pro quo.

6. With above in mind, we have come to reluctant conclusion that the most promising method of getting the two passengers released would be via an Israeli offer of some quid pro quo. Experienced observers such as ICRC reps and Italian and other third party diplomats—all of whom have been in close touch with responsible Syrian officials—concur this assessment. FYI. IATA DirGen also concurs. End FYI. We trust Israelis will give further thought to this possibility.

7. Meanwhile, we are continuing our efforts. We have again broached matter to Soviets, and we are considering a quiet but direct initiative with Syrian representative in New York next week. Precipitate Israeli action would almost certainly damage prospects for success.

Acting
Richardson

1 National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Seelye and April Glaspie (NEA/ARN) on September 19; cleared by Jones, Wahl, Loy, Davies and Lloyd; and approved by Sisco.

25. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 25. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 21, 1969.

SUBJECT:

TWA Hijacking

Attached is a cable from American Embassy Tel Aviv which provides an excellent assessment of continuing Israeli concern about the TWA hijacking. In summary, the following points are made: -There is little discernible forward motion towards obtaining release of the two Israeli passengers still held by Syria.

-A violent Israeli public reaction with dangerous repercussions for TWA and the US could occur if the TWA pilot departed from Damascus.

-It will become increasingly difficult to convince Israel that relying on the US is the best way to gain release of the two prisoners.

-Israel may attack a prominent target like the Damascus airport if it concludes that the two Israelis will never be released.

The Ambassador warns, and I concur, that we must intensify efforts to gain the release of the two prisoners, preferably prior to the visit of Prime Minister Meir next Thursday. He recommends specifically that we: -prevent the election of Syria to the Security Council.

-warn other governments (especially the Soviets) and international organizations that we are losing patience and are seriously considering strong diplomatic sanctions against Syria.

Attachment

Message from American Embassy Tel Aviv (no. 3588) dated September 18, 1969

[September 18, 1969]

SUBJECT:

TWA Hijacking: Three Weeks Later

1. After the initial success in obtaining the release of the first of the non-Israelis, and then of Israeli women, the problem of the two Israeli men detained in Damascus has remained, with little if any forward motion discernible. After a strong protest from the United States Government, the Israeli public and governmental outcry was moderated, but deep concern for the two Israelis still remains immediately below the surface and could break out at any time into violent public problem again. Departure of the TWA Captain without the release of the passengers would, we believe, cause another outbreak of outrage against the “abandonment” of the passengers by the airline which had, in return for the fare, undertaken responsibilities towards them. TWA should not be under any misapprehension that the situation has quieted down to the point where the Captain could leave Damascus without adverse reaction. We continue to hear bitter comments from Israelis about the departure of the rest of the crew, and the departure of the Captain would have repercussions on TWA (and also on the US Government) beyond any disadvantages or inconveniences involved in the Captain’s remaining in Damascus.

2. The Secretary’s letter to Eban was delivered on September 14 in time for Eban to use it in his Cabinet discussion on the morning of September 15 before his departure for the United Nations General Assembly. We believe the letter was useful to Eban in gaining Cabinet agreement to continue the Government of Israel’s policy of relying on the US Government to get the men out. The time is approaching, however, when we will need something more substantial if we are to persuade the Israelis that the present course of action is the one best calculated to obtain the men’s release. Every indication (although this not necessarily is to be accepted as final, of course) has been that the Government of Israel will not entertain the idea of an exchange of the Syrian pilots for the Israeli passengers. In the Algerian case, an exchange was made because the Government of Israel saw no other way out. Many have feared this set precedent, and are determined the precedent will not be reinforced. If and when the time comes that Israel concludes the US Government has given up on the passengers or that the US Government efforts will not work, we must not rule out the possibility of Israel resorting to violent action. It is true that some Israelis have come, with hindsight, to view the Beirut airport raid as a possible mistake or at least excessive. These feelings are not based, however, on a lack of appreciation for the operation itself, but more on the relatively mild attitude of Lebanon in the Arab-Israel controversy and the relatively tenuous connection between Beirut and Athens airport murder. These factors will not operate in the case of Syria. Once they have concluded that the Israelis will not be released anyway, the Government of Israel may opt for a military attack on the new Damascus airport or some other prominent objective. If and when such a time comes, it will be because the Israelis have despaired of any other means and nothing the US Government says at that time would be likely to dissuade them.

3. We therefore urge immediate attention to a new hard-hitting campaign aimed at getting the Israelis out of Damascus by some specific date, such as September 24 arrival of Prime Minister Meir in the United States. To accomplish this would make for a less troubled and distracting atmosphere during Mrs. Meir’s visit. Otherwise, this problem, still hanging over our heads at that time, may put us in a defensive position on a matter of great public interest in Israel and cloud what we hope will be a great positive contribution to US-Israeli relations.

4. Other than doing something to prevent a Syrian election to the Security Council, we do not have any specific steps to recommend. It would appear desirable, however, to go again to the Soviets and other governments as well as international organizations which may have influence in Syria and make it clear that the US is at the end of its patience and will be bound to take strong action against Syria in every way possible, regardless of consequences to things like overflight rights and air service to Syria, in order to protect the principle that the US Government will not stand for kidnapping and illegal detention of passengers on US flag aircraft.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Secret. Nixon wrote “I agree” in the margin next to the last two recommendations and instructed Kissinger to “follow through.”

26. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of State Rogers and Israeli Foreign Minister Eban 26. Memorandum of Conversation Between Secretary of State Rogers and Israeli Foreign Minister Eban1

New York, September 23, 1969, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT:

Syrian Detention of Israeli TWA Passengers

PARTICIPANTS:

U.S.:

The Secretary

Ambassador Charles W. Yost

Ambassador William B. Buffum

Mr. Richard F. Pedersen

Mr. Joseph J. Sisco

Mr. Alfred L. Atherton, Jr.

FOREIGN:

Foreign Minister Abbas Eban

Ambassador Yitzhak Rabin

Ambassador Shabtai Rosenne (UN)

Minister Shlomo Argov

Mr. Ben Yahaman

The Secretary inquired whether there was any recent information about the two Israeli passengers of the highjacked TWA plane who were still being held by the Syrians. Mr. Sisco noted that he had raised this question with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin and that the latest comment from Moscow was that the matter was not closed. We were awaiting a further reply through the Soviets; perhaps the Secretary could bring this up when he saw Gromyko.

Ambassador Yost reported that he had seen Ambassador Tomeh, the Syrian Permanent UN Representative, who had said that the door was not closed. Syria was still considering the matter and meanwhile urged that there be no public agitation. Tomeh had said it was difficult to see how Syria could release the two Israelis without some corresponding action by Israel. When Ambassador Yost had pointed out that this would encourage further highjacking, Tomeh had said that the linkage of the Israeli and-Syria actions could be obscured by having Israel wait two weeks or so before carrying out its part of the arrangement.

Foreign Minister Eban said the idea of linking the release of the two Israelis with Israel’s release of the two Syrian pilots in its custody was intolerable. Each time Israel captured a Syrian prisoner of war Syria would simply highjack an Israeli plane. Eban suggested three steps for the USG to consider: 1) An approach directly to President Atassi through the Italians; 2) Continued efforts to mobilize the international aviation community, inter alia, by urging Mr. Hammarskjold of IATA not to relax his efforts; and 3) Mobilizing resistance to Syria’s candidacy for a Security Council seat.

Ambassador Yost said that, while we were not particularly enthusiastic about the Syrian candidacy, Syria was the choice of the Asian bloc. Eban commented that perhaps some Asian countries-for example Thailand and the Philippines-might be willing to withdraw their support.

The Secretary said that we would try out the first two ideas. Mr. Eban had suggested and explore the possibility of the third.

Mr. Eban said that fortunately some of the public pressure in Israel on this question had been relieved since the report of the Red Cross, which had been permitted to visit the two Israelis, that they were physically all right.

The Secretary described the highjacking incident and Syria’s detention of the two Israeli passengers as indefensible. The U.S. had done all it could to secure their release. It had not been possible, as some had suggested, for us to keep the other passengers in Syria until the Israelis were allowed to leave. We hoped, the Secretary added, that Israel was not contemplating any action against Syria as a result of this situation. Eban replied that Israel’s interest was in getting the two Israelis out; Israel would cooperate with all international efforts. In his view it would be useful for the Secretary to speak to Gromyko. The Secretary said he would do so and asked Mr. Eban to give us any other ideas which might occur to Israel.

Mr. Eban commended the Italian efforts with the Syrians. As for Secretary General U Thant, Eban doubted that anything more could be done on his part. Mr. Sisco noted that the Secretary General had raised with the Israelis the question of the two Syrian pilots detained in Israel. Eban replied that the present situation made it more difficult to discuss this matter. The Secretary said he tended to agree with the Israeli view that the two cases could not be equated; one involved passengers of a commercial aircraft while the other involved two military pilots.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Atherton on September 23, and approved by Brown on September 27.

27. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Davies) to Secretary of State Rogers 27. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Davies) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 25, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Message to Syrian President Regarding TWA Incident - ACTION MEMORANDUM

Background:

In the course of your conversation with Israeli Foreign Minister Eban, Eban suggested that a message to Syrian President Nureddin al-Atassi might be useful in securing the release of the two detained Israeli passengers. As I understand you wished, we have prepared the attached oral message from you to the Syrian President.

Recommendation:

That you approve the attached telegram conveying your request that the Syrian Government promptly release the two Israeli passengers.

Attachment

SUBJECT TWA Hijacking

1. Although we have sought to avoid statements and actions that might serve to make Syrians more obdurate, prolonged detention of two Israeli passengers will increasingly generate pressures for retaliatory actions. Department is in process of replying to letter from Senator Cranston signed by 41 members of the Congress urging that a case against Syria be made in the Security Council. Embassy will have noted also militant statements by Israeli Minister of Trans-port Carmel and Foreign Affairs Undersecretary Rafael (Tel Aviv 3629).

2. Inasmuch as Italian approaches to SARG have been through the Foreign Ministry, Embassy requested to raise with Italians the possibility of Ambassador Riccardi delivering or transmitting to President Atassi an oral message from the Secretary.

3. If no objection is perceived, you should request that Italian Embassy Damascus deliver to President Atassi the following oral message from Secretary Rogers:

4. QUOTE Mr. President: The United States Government remains profoundly concerned over the continued detention by your government of two passengers from the Trans-World Airlines aircraft that was hijacked to Damascus on August 29. Although aware of the underlying issue of the Arab-Israel conflict, our concern stems not from the nationality of the passengers involved, but from the obligation the United States Government feels for passengers choosing to fly on a United States flag aircraft. This consideration is fundamental and should also be a matter of very great concern to the Syrian Government, which itself operates an international airline.

5. I believe continued detention of the passengers will tend to encourage hijacking and other unlawful interference with international civil aviation. This clearly puts the safety of civil aviation in grave jeopardy. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as a member of the International Civil Aviation Organization, is certainly aware of its international obligations in this respect, and I am sure it is also aware that its failure to meet these obligations will have an adverse effect on world opinion.

6. In conclusion, despite the absence of relations between our two countries but in view of our common interest in the safety of international civil aviation, I urge that your government urgently release the two remaining passengers from the hijacked aircraft. Sincerely, William P. Rogers. UNQUOTE

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret. Drafted by Baas and Davies and cleared by Seelye. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the attached draft telegram was drafted by Baas and Davies on September 24, cleared by Seelye, Wahl, Beaudry, and Loy, and approved by Rogers, and was sent to the Embassy in Rome.

28. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 28. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 28, 1969.

Subject:

Up-dated Report on Hijacked TWA Aircraft

There is no change in the status of the hijackers. Our information is that they are still in jail in Damascus. The captain of the TWA aircraft is in Damascus, but TWA has announced that he will be replaced by two company officials. TWA has reported that the Syrian Government was most cooperative with them in reaching an agreement on the repair of the aircraft. The company expects to send as many as 60 technicians into Damascus to effect the repairs, and there are hopes that the work may be completed by December 1. In this connection, the Italian Embassy in Damascus has expressed its deep concern over the possibility of Israeli retaliatory acts while the American technicians are in Damascus, fearing that such actions would jeopardize the safety of the Americans.

The Syrian Government has shown no willingness whatsoever to release the remaining passengers. Italian Ambassador to Damascus Riccardi called on Ambassador Porter in Beirut on September 25 to review the situation. Riccardi reported that the Syrians were originally embarrassed by the hijacking. However, the situation has now developed to the stage where they are no longer embarrassed nor do they have any fear of Israeli reprisals on any scale. Ambassador Riccardi was highly critical of the “chess game” being played by the Israeli Government and has expressed the view that the Israelis and their maneuverings are seriously jeopardizing the two Israeli passengers. In brief, Riccardi sees only long, careful negotiations with the Syrians if release of the passengers is to be realized.

Our latest move in our continuing efforts to secure the release of the passengers was a message from Secretary Rogers to Syrian President Nureddin al-Atassi. The message expresses our concern, reminds Syria of its international obligations and urges prompt release of the passengers. Assistant Secretary Sisco on September 22 in New York met with the Syrian Permanent Representative to the United Nations. The Syrian was unable to reply to Mr. Sisco’s strong representations over the detention of the passengers, but said he would promptly report them to his government.

The Germans have reported that, pursuant to our request, they made a démarche on September 19 to the Syrians through the French who represent them in Damascus. On September 24 our Chargé in Moscow followed up with the Soviets, but there were no new developments to report.

The Director General of the International Air Transport Association on September 16 addressed a message to member airlines. He asked them to urge their governments to support action in the Security Council and General Assembly of the United Nations to curb hijacking and other armed interference with international civil aviation. This was timely in view of the President’s address to the General Assembly in which he deplored hijacking and urged the United Nations to give high priority to the matter.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by Baas on September 26, and cleared by Seelye and Davies. Gleysteen signed for Eliot.

29. Telegram 662 From the Consulate in Jerusalem to the Department of State 29. Telegram 662 From the Consulate in Jerusalem to the Department of State1

Jerusalem, October 2, 1969, 1318Z.

TWA Hijacking

From Zurhellen

Ref:

Jerusalem 661

1. I am reporting results of demarche regarding swap of pilots for Israeli passengers from Jerusalem because I will not be back in Tel Aviv until tomorrow.

2. After telling me he was sure GOI reply on swap would be flat “no” Rafael went on in personal vein. He said that “as I knew” GOI had suggested to USG that message be sent from President Nixon To Atassi. Speaking entirely for himself, and saying he would have to deny having made statement if taxed with it, he thought USG should consider message from President to Atassi asking Syrians to release passengers. When Syrians reply that they have interest in MIG pilots, USG should say that it has certain influence in Israel and would use that influence to try to obtain release of MIG pilots once Syrians had released passengers. If Syrians would let passengers go on this basis, Rafael said, then USG could turn to GOI and he felt our influence would be effective.

3. I said that suppose Syrians simply answered USG to effect that as soon as USG gave assurance that GOI would release pilots, then SARG would release passengers, and USG then came to GOI, what would GOI say then? Rafael was categoric in saying that GOI would have to say no there would be no advance deal. Passengers and pilot cases could not be linked.

4. I am not sure that this is final answer of GOI, especially since we have not yet dealt with Mrs. Meir or exerted USG pressure. Neither am I sure, however, that such pressure would work. On other hand, it would seem highly probable that scheme suggested by Rafael (which we have previously suggested ourselves) would produce pilots in due course if Syrians would go along with our assurances that we would use our influence on Israel.

5. I did not tell Rafael that Secretary has sent letter to Attassi.

Wheelock

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Tel Aviv.

30. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson) to President Nixon 30. Memorandum From the Acting Secretary of State (Richardson) to President Nixon1

Washington, October 2, 1969.

Subject:

Aircraft Hijacking

There are a number of steps which this Department and others are taking or considering to try to stop aircraft hijacking. In some cases we will not want to initiate these steps until the two remaining TWA passengers held by the Syrians are released (or possibly until it may become evident our present efforts will not succeed), because we obviously do not want to prejudice these present efforts.

Our two main goals are (1) to gain wide international acceptance of the concepts that the plane, crew, and passengers must always be returned and that the hijacker must be punished for the crime, and (2) to find ways to bring effective international pressure on countries which do not abide by these norms.

To this end, the following steps are already in progress: 1. Various efforts to obtain widespread adherence to the Tokyo Convention, which requires the return of plane, crew and passengers. The Convention will come into force on December 4, but only among the 13 or so States which have so far ratified it. Among other things, we are seeking the agreement of the other countries which have ratified the Convention to a joint approach urging all others to become parties to the Convention promptly.

2. Adoption of a supplementary convention requiring that the hijacker be returned or prosecuted in the country where the aircraft lands. A committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) began its second meeting on this on September 23 and we are pressing for an international conference on the supplementary convention in the fall of 1970, which is probably the earliest date this could be done. In addition to this multilateral effort, we are including provisions making hijacking an extraditable offense in bilateral extradition treaties which we are negotiating or amending.

3. Continuing our stepped-up efforts to return to the United States for prosecution various hijackers in Cuba or third countries. There has been some evidence that Cuba is quietly sending a few selected hijackers to third countries or encouraging them to leave. Five such hijackers of US aircraft have so far returned and been arrested. On September 13, Cuba announced a hijacking decree which may provide a basis for the direct return of hijackers, except for Cuban nationals and political asylum cases. The decree calls for reciprocal agreements and also covers persons diverting ships, as well as aircraft. The quid pro quo which Castro presumably intends to exact is not clear and may give us trouble. However, we believe the Cuban decree could represent a significant step and are considering how best to respond to it. Meanwhile, we are emphasizing Castro’s apparent intent to prosecute hijackers in order to maximize the deterrent effect on potential hijackers.

4. The FAA is working on a system for detecting and apprehending possible hijackers. This involves identifying suspicious individuals by certain characteristics and then running these persons by a detection machine. There are both legal and technical problems still to be resolved.

5. We are consulting with the Finnish, Dutch and other interested UN delegations in New York regarding a possible UN General Assembly resolution urging States to take measures internationally and domestically to curb hijacking and similar acts against civil aviation. The Soviets have reacted negatively to an informal Finnish suggestion that the Security Council take up the question. As a result the Finnish Representative is now disinclined to press his suggestion. The Dutch are however, anxious to cooperate in a General Assembly initiative and have given us for consideration a draft resolution which is drawn in large part from ideas we passed to them some days ago. In our view, the Assembly provides a better opportunity than the Council to engage a large number of countries in consideration of a problem with which many are directly concerned, with greater prospects for a widespread effect. We believe that affirmative action by the General Assembly could encourage further accessions to the Tokyo Convention and help mobilize support for our efforts to achieve a multilateral convention requiring that a hijacker be returned to the country of the aircraft’s registry, or prosecuted in the country where the aircraft lands.

Other steps under active consideration are: 1. Expanding the terms of reference of the ICAO hijacking committee to permit it to seek invitations to send fact-finding teams to countries which have not returned the plane, crew and all passengers. Although this would be done under the guise of fact-finding, the real purpose would be to exert international pressure. For the latter reason, other members of ICAO may not agree to such a proposal.

2. In a related area, we are considering whether to propose that the ICAO Committee on Unlawful Interference seek an invitation for a fact-finding team to visit Cuba. The main purpose would be to find out whether Cuba would be receptive to some “neutral” way to dispose of the problem of hijackers still in Cuba, such as by sending them to third countries which would be willing to return them to the country of the airline hijacked for prosecution. In light of the new Cuban hijacking decree, stating a definite preference for bilateral solutions, we are holding this proposal temporarily in abeyance until we see whether the new Cuban decree can be exploited to achieve the direct return of hijackers.

3. Hijacking is a danger to air safety in all cases, but it can also lead to international political incidents and pose a threat to peace and security when it is politically motivated and when the country receiving the aircraft does not act promptly to return the plane, crew and passengers and when it does not take effective action against the hijackers. To deal with this growing problem, we are now considering asking for an unpublicized meeting with major aviation countries to propose a joint announcement that, when a country does not act responsibly in a political hijacking incident, such countries will suspend all air services to and from that country. There are some pitfalls in this idea and it must be considered very carefully, but in principle we think it has merit.

We would not favor at this time private boycotts such as the strike proposed by the International Airline Pilots Association, IFALPA. We believe that it is the governments and not private organizations which should act on this problem.

Richardson
Acting Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Confidential. Kissinger sent the memorandum to Nixon on October 15 under a covering note summarizing the memorandum.

31. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 31. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 21, 1969.

Subject:

Status Report on Hijacked TWA Aircraft

In spite of continuous pressure from a number of sources, the Syrian Government still persists in holding the two Israeli passengers of the TWA aircraft. We understand that the passengers have been visited by ICRC representatives who report they are well. Also, Washington Post correspondent Jesse Lewis, who interviewed the passengers on October 1, has reported to our Embassy in Beirut that the Syrian Government seemed to be anxious that his interview with the detainees be as free as possible. Lewis’ impression was that the Syrians were anxious to find a face-saving means of divesting themselves of the two passengers.

The Italian Embassy in Damascus has reported that it delivered the Secretary’s message to Syrian President Atassi to the Secretary General of the Syrian Foreign Ministry, who in turn undertook to deliver it to Atassi upon the latter’s return from North Korea. Although Atassi has returned from North Korea, we have not yet received a reply to the Secretary’s letter.

The wives of the two detained Israelis have come to the United States to press their appeal for action to secure the release of their husbands. They went first to New Orleans and then to Washington where they called on Deputy Assistant Secretary Davies on October 16. They were informed of actions we have taken to date, and they were assured that we will continue our efforts until the release of the two men is secured.

The Secretary General of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) sent a follow-up message to the Syrian Government regarding the two passengers. The Syrian reply was unsatisfactory, inasmuch as it did not address itself to the question of the two passengers. Our representative in ICAO is taking the matter up with the ICAO Council again very soon.

We have learned that the Syrian Government has been most cooperative with TWA in preparations for the repair and repatriation of the aircraft. TWA plans to send about 45 technicians to Damascus on October 26 with a new nose section for the aircraft. The repair period is estimated at from five to six weeks.

We have confirmed reports that the Syrian Government has indeed released the two hijackers, and they are apparently now in Jordan. The Italian Embassy in Damascus is of the view that they were released in response to critical propaganda from Iraq. In any event, we find it deplorable that the Syrian Government would release them rather than bring them to trial, and have so stated publicly.

Our Embassy in Beirut was informed on October 15 that the Director of Syrian Arab Airlines told the TWA representative in Damascus that outside mediation is needed to bring about the release of the two passengers. The Director suggested three possible mediators: IATA, UN and the United States Government. The Director recognized that the two Israelis should be released, but he said there was strong political opposition to releasing them. In this connection, an official of the Italian Embassy has reported that Syrian Government efforts to resolve their internal differences over releasing the two Israelis have become deadlocked.

Israeli Permanent Representative to the UN Tekoah informed our UN Mission on October 15 that he had discussed the situation with U Thant. U Thant told Tekoah that he was continuing his efforts but refused to disclose details for fear of a leak. U Thant was mildly optimistic.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Baas and cleared by Seelye, Davies, Sisco, and Joan S. Gravatt (E/OA/AVP).

32. Telegram 4196 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State 32. Telegram 4196 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Tel Aviv, November 6, 1969, 1320Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

1. DirGen MFA Rafael called in DCM morning Nov 6 to provide info to USG that GOI has decided to go along with a three-cornered scheme involving UAR to bring about release of Israeli TWA passengers detained in Damascus.

2. Rafael said that GOI has for some time been discussing POW exchange with UAR through ICRC. Some time ago, ICRC approached GOI on behalf UAR with statement UAR would release one Israeli pilot then held if Israel would release UAR pilot held here plus group of seventeen or so Egyptians leftover in Israeli hands since 1967 war. Israel agreed, but Nasser illness and changes in UAR High Command intervened and there was no action on UAR side. In meantime, UAR had captured a second Israeli pilot.

3. Three or four days ago, ICRC Rep in UAR Boissart had come to Israelis in Geneva with new Egyptian proposal approved at quote highest level unquote. UAR would return two Israeli pilots if Israel would hand over to UAR the Egyptian pilot, seventeen POWs from Six Day War, crews of two fishing vessels recently captured in Israeli territorial waters, eleven Egyptian civilians recently brought back from raid on UAR, and, as condition sine qua non, the two Syrian pilots. Package would thus total fifty-nine enemy for two Israeli pilots. ICRC Rep added in his own name that he assumed, of course, that inclusion of two Syrian pilots in package would mean that two Israeli TWA passengers would have to be released in advance as a unilateral gesture without any connection with POW exchange, and POW exchange would then take place afterward.

4. Rafael said USG knew how extensive GOI efforts had been to gain release of Israelis from Damascus. So far there had been no results. GOI would still be delighted if USG could say that they will be unconditionally released, but understood USG efforts had not produced such assurance. No results from UN approaches. Meantime, ICRC reports one Israeli pilot in serious condition. In view importance Israelis accord humanitarian aspects of such cases, GOI has decided to take a positive attitude towards proposal made through ICRC Geneva and has so informed ICRC.

5. Rafael said package as required by UAR will be delivered by Israel, tout compris, but Israel will require prior unilateral release of Israelis by Damascus and exchange of all three Israelis in UAR hands.

6. Rafael went on to say GOI still greatly disappointed that efforts of US, UN, etc. had not brought about release of detained Israelis. Although he was sure that Syria had prompted UAR to include two Syrian pilots in UAR list, there was as yet no clear statement that Syrians were prepared to release Israelis, this being only assumption of ICRC man. GOI would appreciate all possible efforts by USG now to assist in bringing quote whole sordid affair unquote to conclusion. He hoped Washington quote would roll up sleeves unquote and use its influence to get proposal agreed all around. Said GOI had talked with no one other than ICRC, since quote Italy is operating on US behalf, not GOI behalf unquote. Rafael indicated GOI was ready to move at moment’s notice. If word received that two Israelis had gotten out to Greece or Cyprus, for instance, exchange with Egyptians could take place within twenty-four hours.

7. DCM told Rafael he was sure Washington would agree that GOI was doing right thing in accepting deal for release of Israeli TWA passengers. Asked, however, why GOI had been willing to go into this large package deal through UAR when it had been so adamant against a simple two-for-two swap directly with Syrians. Rafael replied GOI was still firm against any direct swap of Syrian POWs for innocent civilians. Fact that Syrian pilots would on face be exchaged for Israeli military being held by UAR, plus addition to package of number of Egyptian civilians held by Israel, would allow GOI To agree to package deal without feeling that its basic principle was being violated.

8. In conclusion, Rafael stressed need for absolute secrecy to avoid any public debate in Israel in advance of exchange and to avoid any possibility of deal falling through.

Barbour

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

33. Telegram 4348 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State 33. Telegram 4348 From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Tel Aviv, November 20, 1969, 1302Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

1. DirGen Rafael November 20 called in DCM and told him three-cornered plan to obtain release of Damascus detainees appeared to have fallen apart. Said FonMin Eban desired information to be brought to attention of Secretary Rogers.

2. As we knew, Rafael said, ICRC had submitted to GOI on behalf of UAR proposal for exchange to include two Syrian pilots. This had been accepted by GOI. Although there had been no movement since, there was all reason to believe GOI was on right track. Its decision was influenced by humanitarian considerations concerning Israel pilot in Egypt and TWA passengers in Damascus. Last week GOI had been informed by USG of TWA efforts in Damascus which were appreciated and regarded as important. At USG suggestion, GOI had requested ICRC to convey to SARG on its own proposal that detainees be allowed to depart Damascus on two plane when it leaves. ICRC had done this.

3. In response to ICRC proposal, SARG had yesterday replied to ICRC Representative Damascus, without any reference to UAR proposed three-cornered exchange, that Israel should give assurances it would bring two Syrian pilots, as well as additional Syrians detained in Israel, to ceasefire line in exchange for departure of detainees. Rafael repeated Syrians made no reference whatsoever to UAR proposal. GOI reaction to SARG demand is flat refusal.

4. Rafael, with considerable emphasis, said that Israel, by having gotten ICRC to make proposal to SARG which it had been thought would support the UAR exchange deal, had made a mess of whole thing. Situation was now split wide open. Israel had not intention to effect exchange with syria. Had never had this in mind. Had been motivated to accept ICRC proposal because Egypt had said inclusion of two Syrians was sine qua non and because it had been understood proposal had been coordinated at highest level between Syria and Egypt.

5. While Israel was waiting for outcome of ICRC initiative, Rafael continued, it had ceased all other actions on this subject. Had Israel known in advance this would be outcome, it would not have committed itself and would have been pursuing other actions, political and perhaps otherwise. GOI had no complaint against USG for having advanced idea, but result is that baby which was not Israel’s has been passed into Israel’s hands. Eban asks that Secretary Rogers be reminded of his letter to Eban delivered September 14, which expressed profound concern of USG regarding detention of passengers, assured GOI that every possible course of action to secure their release was being explored, and promised that USG would not relax its efforts until they are released and repatriated. Israel feels it should not have been left alone in this matter. GOI desires to return to position that it is responsibility of US flag carrier to bring passengers to destination, as would be case for any airliner involved in mishap. GOI again requests US to quote reactivate itself unquote within framework of information available to it.

6. Rafael said strict word has been given ICRC in Geneva and Israel that GOI will not repeat not accept any solution other than that negotiated and agreed upon concerning exchange as proposed by UAR, and will not budge from that position or enter into bargaining with Syria.

7. Rafael continued that USG has full right ask release of detainees and it is high time SARG is brought to its senses. Hoped USG would impress on SARG that time for dallying is over. GOI has two specific things to ask: (1) GOI firmly hopes TWA plane will not leave Damascus without passengers, both for leverage this will give for exchange operation and for quote good name unquote of TWA; (2) USG had intimated some time ago American official might visit Damascus. GOI suggests that someone from USG go there who can quote talk sense to those people unquote.

8. Rafael went on that he did not want to give somber warnings to SARG, but Israel will have to act in accordance with its own interests. Someone must make clear to Syria that Israel’s patience is now all exhausted. Its disappointment after its hopes had been raised is all the deeper. Rafael did not know what counsels would prevail in GOI. He believes a major and massive effort should be made. He felt there was no need to mention GOI’s willingness to make contribution to solution, which has already been demonstrated, but Israel can do nothing more.

9. In closing, Rafael said FonOff Legal Advisor Meron, who has been handling talks with ICRC in Geneva, has been instructed to pack and come home.

10. DCM expressed regret matters had not yet worked out as hoped for. USG and TWA, just as had GOI, had been looking forward eagerly to moment when detainees would be released from Damascus. Pointed out USG suggestion that GOI ask ICRC to go to SARG had been made after Rafael had asked USG to assist in any possible way. Re GOI request that USG official go to Damascus to talk sense into Syrians, noted previous idea had only been for possible working level visit by middle grade Embassy officer, not visit by policy level official. Noted USG has little if any leverage to use with SARG. Nevertheless agreed to inform Department fully at once on Rafael’s demarche.

1. Comment: As one step, recommend the Department ask US Mission Geneva to make strong pitch to ICRC to get original UAR three-corned proposal back on tracks. In addition, since Italians already apprised by ICRC of three-cornered proposal might be useful ask them to impress upon Syrians that UAR proposal had strong advantages of allowing SARG to release passengers and thus fulfill international obligations while at same time getting own two pilots back, decision which GOI had previously adamantly refused. We strongly endorse idea that plane should not leave Damascus without passengers, at least at this stage, since this likely to re-arouse stormy israeli public recriminations.

Barbour

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

34. Telegram 195790 From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva, Switzerland, and the Embassy in Israel 34. Telegram 195790 From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva, Switzerland, and the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, November 21, 1969, 0107Z.

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

Ref:

Tel Aviv 4348

Deliver to action officer opening of business.

1. For Geneva: As recommended by Tel Aviv in reftel, you should approach ICRC ASAP and make strong pitch to get original three-cornered proposal back on tracks. In so doing you should acknowledge that we aware of Syrian counterproposal. You should also inform ICRC in strictest confidence that Israeli Government reaction to Syrian tactics is strong enough that it may call off whole deal. If Syrians can be persuaded permit release two Israeli passengers, there chance Israel can be persuaded go through with original deal and Syrian pilots will be released. ICRC may wish remind Syrians that this was original Syrian proposal and SARG’s reneging brings Syrian good faith into question. Impress upon ICRC fact that three-cornered deal presents best opportunity to date to secure release two passengers and bring an end to whole affair.

2. For Tel Aviv: Inform Rafael soonest that we approaching ICRC and asking that they attempt persuade SARG to release two Israelis forthwith. Tell Rafael we fully appreciate his exasperation and that of GOI. Syrians have clearly changed rules in middle of game and their action inexcusable. Nevertheless, with three-cornered exchange proposal there exists excellent framework within which immediate objectives of all concerned can be accomplished. Therefore, we ask that Israel’s’ anger at Syrians not lead them to close the door to chance of carrying through deal as originally proposed. Noting that Israeli decisions influenced by humanitarian considerations (para 2 reftel), you should emphasize to Rafael that failure take advantage of opportunity at hand could result in indefinite detention Israelis in both Syria and UAR. You may also tell Rafael that we urging SARG use its influence with Damascus (Beirut 9635) since exchange as proposed will result in repatriation large numbers UAR personnel.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Beirut. Drafted by Baas on November 20; cleared by Sisco, Davies, and Seelye; and approved by Johnson.

35. Telegram 7660 from the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 35. Telegram 7660 from the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State1

Rome, November 26, 1969, 1740Z.

Dept pass Tel Aviv Beirut, US Int Cairo

Subject: Three-Way Swap and TWA.

Ref:

Rome 7571

1. Foreign Ministry has given us substance two telegrams from Italian Ambassador Damascus which indicate three-way swap of assorted Egyptian, Syrian, Israeli captives and hijack passengers is back on track.

2. Foreign Ministry informs us that ICRC Representative Renard is in close touch with Ambassador Riccardi in Damascus. With respect to reftel suggestion that Italians might wish to press Syrians to move ahead on transaction, Renard believed he should continue to act alone. Riccaroi comments however that if TWA Vice President Wilson believes time has come to set final departure time for aircraft, then Riccardi believes it might be helpful for him to take action along lines of reftel suggestion.

3. In later message Riccardi reports Renard has told him in strictest confidence that Israelis have accepted SARG request and will release total of 13 Syrians including two MIG pilots on condition that two Israeli detainees are released in advance and turned over to Israeli Embassy in third country capital, probably Athens. Israeli advance release requirement is for flying time from Damascus to Athens.

4. Riccardi comment is that if SARG again tries to up price and insists on simultaneous release, then in his opinion, he should and would make representation to SARG to avoid such price increase. Riccardi believes in that case it would be extremely helpful if Cairo and Moscow would also weigh in.

Note: Not passed above by OCT.

Martin

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis

36. Telegram 203374 From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rogers in Bonn 36. Telegram 203374 From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rogers in Bonn1

Washington, December 5, 1969, 2331Z.

Tosec 75

Subject:

TWA Hijacking

1. Syrian Government on morning December 5 permitted departure from Damascus of hijacked TWA aircraft as well as two Israeli passengers who had been detained since hijacking took place on August 29. TWA aircraft and passengers arrived Athens at 1532 hours local time and passengers departed half hour later on regular TWA flight to Tel Aviv.

2. Release of passengers and aircraft was pursuant to three-cornered agreement worked out through ICRC under which (1) Israeli passengers released from Damascus; (2) simultaneously, thirteen Syrians, including two Syrian MIG pilots, turned over to Syrian authorities in Golan Heights; and (3) approximately 24 hours later, about 50 UAR nationals to be handed over to UARG in exchange for two Israeli Air Force pilots downed in action over Egypt.

Acting
Richardson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Baas, cleared by Davies, Seelye, and Brown, and approved by Sisco.

Policy Towards Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad, April 1970-April 1971Policy Towards Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad, April 1970-April 1971

37. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security (Gentile) to Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber)

Washington, April 2, 1970.

Department of State officials recommended programs for protecting diplomatic personnel overseas.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch. Macomber approved the recommendations

38. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, April 2, 1970.

Macomber discussed policy options available to reduce politically motivated kidnapping of U.S. officials abroad.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch and Frederic L. Chapin (ARA/LA/MGT), cleared in draft in L, INR, and O/SY, and approved in ARA. Macomber did not initial the memorandum, and there is no indication that Johnson approved or disapproved of the recommendations.

39. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, April 3, 1970.

Macomber addressed how the Department of State could reduce the political benefits derived by politically motivated kidnappers who attack U.S. officials.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch, Chapin, Mark B. Feldman, and William C. Lieblich (L/ARA) and cleared in draft or substance in L, EUR, IO, and H. Macomber did not initial the memorandum, and there is no evidence that Johnson approved or disapproved of the recommendations.

40. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 15, 1970.

Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration Macomber and Secretary of State Rogers discussed the problem of kidnapping. The Secretary decided that for the present the Department of State should follow an ad hoc policy on kidnappings and should collaborate with other international organizations to devise additional methods to improve security capabilities.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Confidential. The memorandum, drafted by J. Stewart Cottman, Special Assistant to Macomber, is incomplete. No complete version was found.

41. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 24, 1970.

The Department of State updated, at Kissinger’s request, its action on a terrorism and kidnapping agenda item at the Organization of American States.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, OAS 3. Confidential. Drafted by Richard A. Poole (ARA/USOAS/EO), cleared by Pedersen, OAS Ambassador Jova, Meyer, and Feldman. Melvyn Lwitsky signed for Eliot.

42. Organization of American States Resolution

Washington, June 30, 1970.

Adopted resolution of the OAS with regard to Acts of Terrorism and the Kidnapping of Persons and Extortion in Connection with that Crime.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking.

43. Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, December 31, 1970.

The position paper was written for the special Organization of American States meeting on kidnapping and other criminal acts against diplomats and officials abroad.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Attached but not published were Tabs A and B.

44. Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brewster) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, April 14, 1971.

The Department of State sent Kissinger a copy of the OAS Convention to Prevent and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and Related Extortion That are of International Significance. The report was attached but not published.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by William V. Whittington (L/T) on April 6, and cleared by Crimmins (ARA) and Jova.

37. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security (Gentile) to Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) 37. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Security (Gentile) to Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber)1

Washington, April 2, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad

I. We believe that the present program of protecting our personnel abroad can be improved by (a) a better alert and control system and (b) the creation of a mobile reserve of equipment (communications, armored cars, etc.) that can be utilized when the kidnapping risk is deemed high in a given area.

II. Alert and Control:

1. We believe that the present arrangements for alert and control can be improved. The weaknesses of the present system are: (a) the degree of danger is not linked to the level of protection required; the Ambassador is not explicitly required to make a determination as to the degree of danger and to invoke commensurate protection; and the Department does not know at any given time in any given country what the degree of danger of kidnapping is and what measures the Ambassador has invoked. The Department is therefore unable to plan intelligently how it can best support the Embassy.

2. To correct these weaknesses, we propose the following plan: a. SY would formulate a standard phased plan, tailored later by the Embassy to suit its peculiar circumstances, which describes the program of actions the Embassy would take at different levels of danger. For example, in politically quiet countries with a low crime (robbery, terrorism) rate, probably no measures would be required; in politically quiet countries with high crime rates, specific measures would be taken (phase 1); in politically unstable countries especially with activist left extremists, other (probably additional) measures would be invoked (phase 2) etc.

b. Upon institution of the plan, the Ambassador would be required to keep his personnel and the Department informed of the phase the Embassy was in.

c. Both the Embassy and the Department would monitor the measures that had been determined to be appropriate for the announced level of danger.

3. Under this proposal, the SY booklet “A Guidance Document on the Protection of U.S. Personnel and Installations Against Attack” of recommended practices, augmented by SY to include “compounds”, “concentration of personnel”, “reduction of functions”, “evacuation”, “request increase police protection”, “follow-on cars” and whatever other ideas exist, would be reorganized by SY into standard sample phases. The Embassy would choose those that seemed most appropriate to the circumstances of the host country and submit its final phased plan to the Department for approval.

4. Under this proposal, the intelligence agencies would be required by the USIB to place a high priority on the acquisition of intelligence relating to plans, targets, etc. of potential kidnappers in an area from which we receive danger signals.

5. We see as the advantages of this proposed system: a. Protective measures would be realistically linked to the political/criminal situation.

b. The Ambassador would be forced to make a conscious determination as to the level of danger.

c. The Department would be forced to focus on these situations through the process of approving the Embassy’s plans and in responding to the Ambassador’s signals as to the level of danger.

Other than the work involved in devising the plans (which we do not consider to be onerous) we perceive no serious disadvantages.

6. Recommendation:

That you approve the above described alert and control system.

APPROVE________

DISAPPROVE________

III. Mobile Reserve

1. In addition to formulating the standard alert and control of plan, SY would be responsible for the Department’s technical backstopping of the various phases. It is neither feasible nor necessary to take special measures to protect all of our people abroad at all times, everywhere. We believe that the more prominent members of our missions abroad are the most likely targets and that we should be ready to offer them special protection when the Ambassador and the Department determine that the phase of danger to them is such as to warrant special measures. The special measures that would be taken include (1) the temporary assignment of additional U.S. security personnel to the post (from nearby posts where the danger is reported as less); and (2) the temporary (for the duration of the emergency) loan of equipment such as communications gear, armored cars, etc. SY would formulate a complete catalog which would constitute a mobile service of proportions reasonably based upon our experience as to the frequency and variety of the danger.

2. Recommendation:

That you approve the concept of a mobile reserve.

APPROVE_______

DISAPPROVE_______

3. Specifically in ARA there is believed to be requirements for the following deployment of security personnel and equipment:

A. That ARA be authorized to fund as a one-time cost the installation of bullet proof glass and windshields on the four partially armored vehicles presently assigned to Guatemala from funds available to the Bureau in FY 70.

APPROVE_______

DISAPPROVE________

B. That the Department authorize and obtain funds for the procurement of armored vehicles for Rio de Janeiro, Caracas, Santo Domingo, La Paz and Lima.

APPROVE_______

DISAPPROVE________

C. That the vehicle ceiling limitation for the Latin American area be increased by 10 to provide follow cars for protective services to key officials in instances where such cannot be provided by the host country or by the Embassy, without adversely affecting its transportation services.

APPROVE______

DISAPPROVE______

D. That the Latin American Bureau personnel ceiling be increased to cover requirements for additional security personnel positions where such additional positions are determined to be necessary by the Bureau and 0/SY. (additional positions required to date include a Security Officer in Guatemala and an Assistant Security Officer in Brazil).

APPROVE_______

DISAPPROVE______

E. That funds be provided to the Latin American Bureau to cover continuing costs for increased protective services which presently total $134,626 on an annual basis. We can anticipate that there will be additional requirements for protective services which are as yet unknown.

APPROVE______

DISAPPROVE_______

IV. The analysis and justification for the detailed recommendations in 3A through E have been previously submitted to A/BF, Mr. Donelan.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch. Macomber approved the recommendations

38. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 38. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, April 2, 1970.

SUBJECT:

U.S. Policy Toward Politically Motivated Kidnapping of U.S. Officials Abroad-ACTION MEMORANDUM

DISCUSSION:

This paper addresses the question of policy options open to the U.S. with respect to politically motivated kidnapping of U.S. officials abroad, the category in which all of the recent kidnappings involving U.S. citizens fall. The isolated non-politically motivated kidnapping by criminals is not considered, for it is virtually impossible to guard against such an event. This paper does not address incidents involving private U.S. citizens, who would continue to receive normal consular protection. The questions of improved security for our personnel abroad and of political measures we could undertake to inhibit kidnapping are addressed in other papers.

With the exception of the abortive kidnapping attempt of Soviet officials in Argentina, all of the kidnappings involving foreign officials (including U.S.) have been carried out by left extremist dissident groups. They appear in all instances to have been motivated by the three-fold desires to (1) obtain the release of political prisoners (often their comrades); (2) publicize and gain sympathy for their cause; and (3) embarrass their government. Politically-motivated kidnapping of U.S. officials could occur in virtually any Latin American country where there are extremist groups with the above-described political motives. Conditions are propitious under the following circumstances: (a) in countries where kidnappings have recently taken place: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Uruguay.

(b) in other countries that hold political prisoners and in which there are organized extremist groups: Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama and Venezuela.

(c) Additionally, kidnappings may be expected in some of the above-mentioned countries as the result of political violence in connection with elections this year: Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and Mexico.

Given the probable triple motivations of these dissident groups, the categories their prospective victims might come from may perhaps be roughly delimited. In Latin America, politics is a man’s game. A successful daring act against a political opponent, actual or symbolic, is an accepted, if not applauded, manifestation of virility. The more prominent the individual the more attractive the target, provided that that individual were not a popular figure, whose kidnapping would arouse sympathy for him and commensurate opprobrium for the kidnappers and their cause. The following inferences from the dissidents’ political motivations may therefore be drawn: (a) Women and children will probably not be their targets.

(b) Tourists will probably not be their targets.

(c) Low-level businessmen will probably not be their target.

(d) Prominent businessmen will probably be somewhat vulnerable, for they would be regarded by these dissidents as allied with the “oppressive” host government.

(e) Officials will probably be a main target, with the more prominent the more vulnerable.

The capabilities of the dissident groups vary considerably from country to country as do the political situations of each of the host governments at any given time. It is therefore extremely difficult to predict how the host government might react to the conditions set by the kidnappers for freeing a U.S. official captured, and it is equally difficult to predict how insistent the kidnappers would be in the face of resistance by the host government to accepting the terms of freedom. Much would also depend upon the nature of the terms themselves.

With prominent officials the most likely target, and the reactions of host governments to kidnappers’ demands unpredictable, the generally accepted principles of international law and practice concerning the inviolability of the person of a diplomatic agent and his dependents become particularly significant. The most recent authoritative statement of these principles is found in the Vienna Convention of 1961, which the U.S. has signed but not ratified. Article 29 of the Convention states: “The person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable. He shall not be liable to any form of arrest or detention. The receiving State shall treat him with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on the person, freedom or dignity.”

In those countries where the risk of kidnapping is considerable, we should express unequivocally to the host government our expectation that the sense of Article 29 will be met in full measure.

Any specific U.S. reaction to a future kidnapping should be preceded by general statements at appropriate levels of the U.S. Government deploring kidnapping of public officials or private citizens as a crime and decrying the use of such methods as a political weapon. The possibility of OAS or UN resolutions condemning kidnapping of officials for political purposes as near term objectives and of OAS or UN conventions establishing such kidnappings as crimes under international law as longer term objectives are discussed in a separate paper. The public announcement of the initiation of international consultations or negotiations toward these ends or even the announcement of the U.S. intention to pursue these objectives would help build a general climate of opinion which would diminish the advantages kidnappers would expect to derive.

Options for U.S. Policy and Action

If a U.S. diplomat or a dependent were kidnapped (our improved system of alert and control with respect to our personnel overseas, our campaign to inhibit kidnapping by decreasing its potential political benefits, and the host government’s efforts to prevent it notwithstanding), the U.S. would be faced with essentially three options for action: (a) apply pressure to the extent necessary to persuade the host government to comply fully with the kidnapper’s terms;

(b) express our expectation that the host government will do everything reasonable to obtain the freedom of the kidnapped official, recognizing, however, that the determination of what is reasonable would be made by the host government; and

(c) urge the host government to refuse publicly the kidnappers’ demands.

Apply Pressure to the Extent Necessary to Persuade the Host Government to Comply Fully with the Kidnappers Terms.

This option has the advantage of maximizing the chances of recovering a U.S. official or his dependent whose life is in immediate danger.

A disadvantage of this course of action is that the kidnappers would have gained their ends. Also, they or others would become encouraged to repeat the performance. A further disadvantage would be that we could be making compliance with the kidnappers’ terms a major issue in our relations with the host country. Finally, the “open endedness” of this course could encounter considerable public and Congressional concern as to where and when the line would finally be drawn.

Express in most categorical terms our expectation that host governments will take all reasonable and practicable action in advance to protect our personnel in their country in order to deter kidnap attempts. Note, however, that when the host government has, in the opinion of the U.S. Government, taken all appropriate preventive action and a kidnapping still takes place the U.S. Government will expect the host government to do everything reasonable and practicable to obtain the freedom of kidnapped officials or their dependents. It will leave to the host government the ultimate decisions as to what measures are reasonable and practicable and the host government’s decision in this regard will not lead to recriminations by the U.S. Government.

The advantages to this course would be: (a) We would have acknowledged the importance of the life at stake and avoided the possibility of the problem becoming a major issue in our relations.

(b) Since each case might be decided differently by the host government, the resultant uncertainty as to the outcome of their demands could deter some potential kidnappers.

(c) Since it is possible that the U.S. might be faced with the reverse situation, this course of action would create a reciprocal basis for the U.S. President to decide in a given case that may occur in the U.S.

The main disadvantage would be that failure on our part to insist upon full compliance with the kidnappers’ terms would quite probably result in the eventual torture and/or death of a U.S. official or dependent. Another disadvantage would be Congressional and public criticism from some quarters.

A subsidiary disadvantage would be that hazardous pay may have to be paid to U.S. personnel serving in areas where substantial danger of kidnapping existed.

Urge the Host Government to Refuse Publicly the Kidnappers’ Demands.

If we were to adopt this course, we should probably announce it immediately and publicly for its deterrent potential-its main advantage.

Its disadvantage lies in the near certainty that one or more U.S. officials or their dependents would suffer torture and/or death as the kidnappers tested our will.

Based upon its experience to date, ARA would be least uncomfortable operating within the second option.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

A. Since kidnapping as a political weapon could occur in any area of the world and could involve the officials of any overseas U.S. agency, I recommend that the Under Secretaries Committee be tasked with reaching a government-wide recommendation, based upon the foregoing analysis, for the President’s decision as to U.S. policy toward politically-motivated kidnapping of U.S. officials or their dependents abroad.

Approve_________

Disapprove__________

B. I recommend that the second option above be followed as U.S. policy in the event a kidnapping should take place before the ultimate policy decision is reached by the President.

Approve________

Disapprove_________

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch and Frederic L. Chapin (ARA/LA/MGT), cleared in draft in L, INR, and O/SY, and approved in ARA. Macomber did not initial the memorandum, and there is no indication that Johnson approved or disapproved of the recommendations.

39. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 39. Action Memorandum From Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, April 3, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Political Program Designed to Inhibit Kidnapping-ACTION MEMORANDUM

DISCUSSION:

This paper addresses the question of how we can reduce the political benefits that politically-motivated kidnappers believe they derive from kidnapping U.S. officials abroad. It supplements the technical program we envisage for making such kidnappings more difficult. An analysis of the political motivations of these kidnappers and a catalog of their likely and unlikely targets are contained in the paper submitted to you earlier on the basic policy.

If we are correct in our analysis of the political motivations of these dissident groups, then some aspects of our experience with hijacking are pertinent. There are indications that Cuba is experiencing political embarrassment as a result of hijacking, for hijacking as an undesirable event is associated in the minds of many Latin Americans as Cuban-inspired. Since some of the hijackers belong to left-extremist groups (as do the kidnappers), there is some reason to believe that their activities are an embarrassment to the Communist cause and therefore the USSR as well. According to a secret intelligence report, the USSR is polling local Communist parties as to whether they think hijacking is detrimental to the Communist cause.

This experience and the fact that the USSR has undertaken a program to expand its representation in the hemisphere and to appear respectable suggest that kidnapping, if properly publicized, could also cause the USSR and Cuba to consider it a net political handicap for their cause. The Soviets may therefore seek to discourage the left-extremist groups in the hemisphere from kidnapping just as we have reason to believe that the Soviets have, for the same reasons, influenced the Cubans to soft pedal their subversive activities. Through an orchestrated diplomatic and propaganda effort, we may raise the political costs of kidnapping. We see no serious disadvantages to this proposed course of action and some possibility of diminishing the frequency of kidnappings, although we recognize that many leftist groups in Latin America are nationalist and not subject to control by either Cuba or the Soviet Union.

Whether or not we are able to influence Cuba and the Soviet Union to exercise a restraining influence on potential kidnappers, we believe that a program should be undertaken to deprive the kidnappers of the public sympathy and support for their political aims which they seek to foster by their actions. This program would include an appeal to (1) the widespread belief in the sanctity of human life and repugnance at the use of terror to achieve political aims, and (2) the accepted principle that the inviolability of diplomats is essential to international peace and order.

We should take advantage of available international forums in order, in the short run, to mobilize opinion against kidnapping and, in the longer run, to develop legal means to deter it. Initially, we could sponsor or support resolutions in the OAS and/or UN condemning politically-motivated kidnapping and directing appropriate bodies to draft international conventions to deal with the problem.

A more expeditious channel would be the OAS, either through the Permanent Council or the Meeting of Consultation of Foreign Ministers (represented by Special Delegates); an ad hoc committee could be directed by either of those bodies to draft a convention. (While the Inter-American Juridical Committee would in theory be the appropriate organ to prepare a convention, we do not believe that it could, as presently constituted, give the problem the attention it deserves.)

We have in mind two general concepts for a convention directed at politically-motivated kidnapping of diplomatic and consular officials.

One would be to establish kidnapping of diplomatic personnel as an international crime to be prosecuted by any state, drawing on “piracy” and “war crimes” as general precedents. (In 1937 following a series of political assassinations, the League of Nations drafted a convention requiring that acts of terrorism be made extraditable criminal offenses in each contracting state. but this convention never entered into force.)

The second concept would be to establish that kidnapping of diplomatic and consular officers is not to be exempt from extradition as a political crime and that the kidnappers would not be granted political asylum. (Press reports indicate that the Argentine Government intends to propose that the OAS adopt an agreement declaring that persons would not be granted asylum by any member state.) Such a convention might not be effective, however. States like Cuba would withhold their cooperation, and other states like the UK might be unwilling to compromise the principle of political asylum. Nevertheless, the concept should be explored.

There might be a better prospect of success if the convention were limited to kidnapping which resulted in torture, injury or loss of life. This last approach also would be consistent with current U. S. policy toward kidnapping, giving priority to the protection of the life of the kidnapped person.

There already exists a basic and relevant international agreement—the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, Article 29 of which provides that “The person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable. He should not be liable to any form of arrest or detention. The receiving State shall treat him with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to prevent any attack on his person, freedom, or dignity.” The U.S. complies fully with this article as a matter of customary international law, but, although the Senate gave its advice and consent to the Convention in 1965, we have not deposited our ratification because necessary complementing legislation has not yet been adopted. We should take immediate steps to make known to Congress the urgency of passing complementing legislation so that we can deposit our ratification. Once this is done we will be able to argue that the kidnapping conventions we envisage are a logical and necessary outgrowth of the obligations assumed by states in the Vienna Convention. Unless this is done, we could be embarrassed in our efforts to develop new conventions, particularly in the UN, by charges from states unfriendly to the exercise that we are acting hypocritically and politically since we have not ratified the basic document in the field.

Other actions we could take to implement this policy are: (1) insinuations in conversations by U.S. diplomatic officers that the Cubans (and Russians) are behind the kidnappings; (2) planted articles in the press throughout Latin America with same theme.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

That we seek to mobilize worldwide sentiment by the following actions:

(1) Issue public statements at appropriate levels of this Government deploring kidnapping of diplomatic and consular officers as inhumanitarian and inconsistent with international peace and order.

Approve_______

Disapprove_______

(2) Use other media in the Western Hemisphere and elsewhere to arouse repugnance against kidnapping of diplomatic and consular officers and criticism of its use as a political weapon.

Approve________

Disapprove_________

(3) Propose or cause to be proposed an OAS resolution condemning kidnapping of diplomatic and consular officers for political purposes, as an immediate step to deal with a problem which has developed in this hemisphere, and submit to an OAS committee for prompt study further action that might be taken through the OAS.

Approve______

Disapprove________

(4) Depending upon the outcome of OAS action, consult with other nations about introducing a resolution in the next UN General Assembly, which starts in September, or other UN action.

Approve_______

Disapprove_______

(5) Develop international conventions which would establish kidnapping of foreign diplomatic and consular officials and members of their families as a crime in international law, possibly establish penalties for persons who harm, torture, or kill such persons, and deny the perpetrators of one or more of these crimes Political asylum in third countries.

Approve________

Disapprove_________

(6) That L and H take steps to make known to Congress the need, in the context of our efforts to protect our diplomatic personnel, to proceed rapidly with complementing legislation that will permit us to deposit our ratification of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

Approve_______

Disapprove_________

(7) In conversations and planted articles show close association between the Soviets, Cubans, and far left kidnapper groups (e.g., in AALAPSO and LASO), noting also Castro’s welcoming remarks to Brazilians released for Ambassador Elbrick.

Approve________

Disapprove_________

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Secret. Drafted by Hurwitch, Chapin, Mark B. Feldman, and William C. Lieblich (L/ARA) and cleared in draft or substance in L, EUR, IO, and H. Macomber did not initial the memorandum, and there is no evidence that Johnson approved or disapproved of the recommendations.

40. Memorandum for the Record 40. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, April 15, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Kidnapping of U.S. Officials/Dependents

Mr. Macomber said that he had talked with the Secretary on April 13 about the problem of kidnapping. The Secretary seemed convinced that for the present we should follow an ad hoc policy on kidnappings. He mentioned that Willy Brandt had suggested the, desirability of our Ambassadors consulting with their colleagues at post. The Secretary added that he agreed that we should proceed to explore the possibilities of action in the international organizations, OAS or UNGA, and agreed further that we should continue to sharpen and improve our own security capability.

Mr. Hurwitch said that ARA was exploring the possibilities of giving more or better assistance to local police forces in various Latin American countries. He noted that we had made several overtures to selected OAS Ambassadors and that EUR was planning to talk with the Soviets about the possibility of their dissuading the Cubans from encouraging kidnapping. Mr. Hurwitch also said that he had discussed with Ambassador Java the possibility of taking up with certain of his OAS colleagues the proposition that it would be better to exile rather than imprison “political prisoners.”

Mr. Macomber said that he planned to sign off on an airgram to selected posts abroad outlining a four-phase alert plan with graduated protective responses. The addressees were being asked for comments. Meanwhile, Mr. Gentile was to be working on a “mobile reserve” project that would include the people and equipment available here in Washington for dispatch to troubled areas when the need arose. In connection with this project SY was asked to indicate what resources were already on hand at Washington and at post and what we should have in the future. The range of equipment would be rather broad and would include armor plate, improved radio facilities, bullet-proof vests, tear gas and other protective or deterrent devices.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 17 US. Confidential. The memorandum, drafted by J. Stewart Cottman, Special Assistant to Macomber, is incomplete. No complete version was found.

41. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 41. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 24, 1970.

Subject: OAS General Assembly Agenda Item on Terrorism and Kidnapping

In response to Mrs. Davis’ request of June 22, I enclose a copy of the Issues Paper for the Secretary of State prepared on this subject. The question continues to be under informal discussion among certain OAS Representatives in Washington as well as with Foreign Ministries, but a consensus has yet to develop on the content of a resolution to be adopted by the General Assembly.

In addition to the Argentine draft and the U.S. suggestions summarized in the attached memorandum, the Mexican Representative late last week gave us what he termed a “skeleton” draft. This, in effect, does little more than the Permanent Council resolution, in that its operative paragraphs simply (1) reaffirm human rights principles; (2) condemn acts of violence, including acts of terrorism, especially kidnapping and extortion; and (3) recommend that the Inter-American Juridical Committee and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights submit recommendations to the next session of the General Assembly on the aspects of the problem that can be subject to international action. Additionally, however, the Mexican Representative-expressed general agreement with our proposal on the preparation of an international instrument recognizing terrorist acts against representatives of foreign states as international crimes. There are several aspects of the Argentine draft that Mexico cannot accept, including the identification of terrorist acts as common crimes and the mention of asylum and extradition.

We have just received a copy of a Brazilian draft resolution, whose operative paragraphs: (1) recommend that member states take adequate domestic measures with respect to crimes of terrorism and kidnapping, including appropriate definition under their penal laws; (2) urge member governments bilaterally and multilaterally to exchange information and coordinate action; (3) request the Inter-American Juridical Committee (IAJC) to commence within 30 days and complete in 60 days thereafter a draft international instrument dealing with the objective of this resolution; (4) recommend that the IAJC in its proposal take account of the need to adjust the practice of asylum and extradition so as not to benefit the perpetrators of such crimes, which should be characterized as international crimes and crimes against humanity; (5) recommend that the Permanent Council urgently convoke a special session of the OAS General Assembly to examine and approve the IAJC proposal as soon as it is completed. (The draft resolution does not specifically mention terrorist crimes against representatives of foreign states, which, of course, is an important point as far as we are concerned.)

We have a number of returns from our circular telegram explaining the Argentine proposal and our suggestions. These preliminary reactions indicate that: Uruguay reacts favorably to our suggestions for strengthening the Argentine draft; Venezuela is inclined to support the Argentine draft but agrees with us that the international aspects of the problem should be strengthened; Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Paraguay are in general agreement that the Argentine draft needs strengthening; Colombia in principle supports the Argentine draft but will study other suggestions, including ours; Mexico will study our suggestions, and is grateful of our desire to avoid any adverse reflection on Mexico’s actions in receiving “ransomees”; Barbados agrees “something must be done” collectively; Guatemala tends to favor concentrating on moral condemnation, but will defer to others to take the initiative, as will Jamaica for different reasons; Bolivia, Peru and Chile are so far non-committal but will study our suggestions.

There seems to be some difference of opinion between those who advocate unanimity even at the sacrifice of a strong resolution, and those who advocate the reverse.

In our case, we are prepared to make some adjustments in our own proposals as we learn more of the positions of other members. So far, in our conversations, we have found considerable agreement with our desire not to limit the options available in seeking the release of kidnapped diplomats (or other persons).

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Enclosure

Issues Paper

OAS POLICY AND ACTION ON TERRORISM AND KIDNAPPING

(Agenda Item 13)

Summary of U.S. Position

The U.S. supports the Argentine initiative in raising this matter as well as the Argentine draft resolution which is now under informal discussion among OAS members. However, since the Argentine resolution is addressed primarily to the problems of terrorism and kidnapping in general, regardless of the victim (with only passing mention of such crimes committed against representatives of foreign states), the U.S. is endeavoring through the present consultation process to strengthen the draft by adding greater emphasis to the international aspects of the problem, including: (a) a specific condemnation of terrorist acts (including kidnapping) against representatives of foreign states; (b) a recommendation that member states facilitate the extradition of terrorists; (c) a provision setting in motion the preparation of an international instrument declaring terrorists acts against representatives of foreign states to be international crimes; (d) a call on world opinion and particularly on countries and organizations that maintain ties with terrorist movements. This last suggestion might serve as a springboard for future consideration by the UN General Assembly.

We are seeking to avoid any steps in the OAS that might limit the options available to governments in securing the release of kidnapped diplomats, including the release of prisoners (who might themselves be terrorists) into asylum as ransom, when agreed to by the governments concerned.

Discussion

Argentina took the original initiative in April 1970 in placing this matter before the OAS Permanent Council, and Uruguay added the proposal that it go from there to the General Assembly. On May 15 the Permanent Council adopted a resolution that: (1) reaffirmed human rights principles; (2) condemned terrorist acts as crimes against humanity; and (3) recommended the inclusion of this item on the General Assembly agenda, namely “The general action and policy of the Organization regarding acts of terrorism and particularly the kidnapping of persons and extortion connected with that crime”.

Argentina continues to take the principal initiative and has circulated to members a draft General Assembly resolution, whose operative paragraphs would: (1) reaffirm human rights principles; (2) condemn terrorism, kidnapping and extortion; (3) declare that, despite any ideological significance, such acts are common crimes; (4) recommend that member states take measures domestically to put an end to such crimes, define them under their penal laws, and establish suitable penalties; (5) urge member governments bilaterally and multilaterally to exchange information and coordinate action with respect to such crimes; (6) request the Inter-American Juridical Committee to study the status and responsibility of the perpetrators of such crimes, which affect not only internal peace but also, in the case of the kidnapping of representatives of foreign states, disturb the normal functioning of international relations-with the stipulation this study consider especially (the question of) the application in such cases of the right of asylum whose purpose is to protect human rights.

Paragraphs 3 and 6 above are connected, as they relate to the principle that common criminals are not entitled to the right of asylum (nor to exemption from extradition). The Argentines explain that paragraph 3 is designed to provide a helpful basis for governments that wish to apply this principle to terrorists, including kidnappers, while the results of paragraph 6 would hopefully go a step further by providing a firmer juridical basis and definition for such application perhaps through international commitments.

While in general agreement with the Argentine proposal; we have suggested that it be strengthened by including provisions that would: (1) add to paragraph 2 a specific condemnation of terrorist acts directed against representatives of foreign states as violations of not only human rights but also of principles governing the conduct of relations between states; (2) sharpen the wording of paragraphs 3 and 6 to avoid any implication that terrorists are entitled to asylum under present law; (3) add to paragraph 4 a recommendation that member states facilitate the extradition of terrorists; (4) add a new paragraph requesting the Permanent Council, in consultation with the Inter-American Juridical Committee and with the assistance of the General Secretariat, to prepare for submission to a specialized Inter-American Conference an appropriate international instrument recognizing terrorists acts, including kidnapping, directed against representatives of foreign states as international crimes and stipulating measures to deter and punish such crimes; (5) add a new paragraph calling on world opinion, and particularly on those countries and organizations that maintain ties with movements that perpetrate these crimes, to use their influence to help bring an end to such acts.

In making suggestion (1) above we have pointed out that it was the kidnapping of diplomats that brought the matter to OAS and world attention and hence should be added to the condemnation, and that we are not thinking of diplomats as specially privileged persons (a point that concerned some of our colleagues) but as agents conducting relations between states. The measures contemplated in suggestion (4) could include, among others, the prosecution by any state of terrorist crimes against foreign representatives (as in the case of piracy), a commitment to extradite such criminals, and/or extended statute of limitations for such crimes. In suggestion (5) we are thinking of a springboard for possible consideration in the UN General Assembly and of bringing some focus to bear on the indirect responsibility of those countries and organizations that advocate armed struggle and terrorism (e.g. the Havana-based Latin American Solidarity Organization and the Tricontinental Organization that recently published a manual on terrorism). Some members have problems with this suggestion, which they consider an indirect accusation against Cuba and other communist countries.

In connection with our desire to avoid limiting the options available in securing the release of kidnapped diplomats (see summary), we believe it is essential to maintain a clear distinction between the traditional right of asylum as a humanitarian principle for the benefit of the asylee, on the one hand, and the recent granting of asylum to prisoners at the request of the governments concerned as a humanitarian expedient for the benefit of a kidnapped person. In our view, a limitation on the right of asylum would affect the former but not the latter. By making this distinction clear, we hope both to keep the options open and to set to rest Mexico’s misgivings that the proposed resolution might reflect adversely on recent actions by the Mexican Government in granting asylum to “ransomees”.

Note: A revised Argentine draft has just been received and will be appended when translated, together with a text of the U.S. suggestions. Since both will be under continuing discussion, and since hopefully many of our suggestions will be incorporated in the Argentine draft, there will doubtless be changes in the days ahead.

Enclosure

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

WASHINGTON. D.C. 20506

June 22, 1970

MEMORANDUM FORMr. Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.

Executive Secretary

Department of State

SUBJECT:Information Memorandum on the June 25 Meeting of the OAS General Assembly

We would appreciate receiving by the close of business June 24 an information memorandum for Dr. Kissinger on the terrorism and kidnapping item on the agenda for the Special Session of the Organization of American States (OAS) General Assembly scheduled to begin meeting in Washington on June 25. This memorandum should cover the issues raised by the agenda item, the U.S. position. and the anticipated positions of the other OAS countries.

Jeanne W. Davis

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, OAS 3. Confidential. Drafted by Richard A. Poole (ARA/USOAS/EO), cleared by Pedersen, OAS Ambassador Jova, Meyer, and Feldman. Melvyn Lwitsky signed for Eliot.

42. Organization of American States Resolution 42. Organization of American States Resolution1

Washington, June 30, 1970.

GENERAL ACTION AND POLICY OF THE ORGANIZATION WITH REGARD TO ACTS OF TERRORISM AND, ESPECIALLY, THE KIDNAPPING OF PERSONS AND EXTORTION IN CONNECTION WITH THAT CRIME

(Resolution adopted at the sixth plenary session, held on June 30, 1970, and reviewed by the Style Committee)

WHEREAS:

Acts of terrorism, and especially kidnapping of persons and extortion connected with that crime, are occurring with increasing frequency and seriousness in this hemisphere;

Such acts have been characterized by the Permanent Council of the Organization, in its resolution of May 15, 1970, as such cruel and irrational crimes that they attack the very spirit of mercy of the American peoples and constitute common crimes, whose seriousness makes them crimes against humanity;

The governments of the member states of the Organization unanimously repudiate such acts, which constitute serious violations of the fundamental rights and freedoms of man; and those governments are firmly determined to prevent the repetition of such acts;

The political and ideological pretexts utilized as justification for these crimes in no way mitigate their cruelty and irrationality or the ignoble nature of the means employed, and in no way remove their character as acts in violation of essential human rights.

The member states of the Organization, in the exercise of their sovereignty and their territorial jurisdiction, have invariably reaffirmed the rights of the individual and the principles of universal morality;

The process of economic development and the social progress of the hemisphere, in which our governments are engaged not only directly but also through inter-American cooperation, are disturbed by the crimes in question;

Kidnapping and extortion connected with that crime, as well as offenses against the lives of representatives of foreign states and of other persons, are heinous crimes that have aroused world opinion and that shatter the very bases of friendly national and international relations; and

The proliferation of such crimes in the hemisphere creates a situation that requires prompt and effective measures on the part of the. Organization and of its member states,

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

RESOLVES:

1. To condemn strongly, as crimes against humanity, acts of terrorism and especially the kidnapping of persons and extortion in connection with that crime.

2. Also to condemn such acts, when perpetrated against representatives of foreign states, as violations not only of human rights but also of the norms that govern international relations.

3. To declare that these acts constitute serious common crimes characterized by flagrant violation of the most elemental principles of the security of the individual and community as well as offenses against the freedom and dignity of the individual, the safeguarding of which should be a guiding criterion of every society.

4. To recommend to the member states that have not yet done so that they adopt such measures as they may deem suitable, in the exercise of their sovereignty, to prevent and when appropriate to punish crimes of this kind, defining them in their legislation.

5. To request the governments of the member states to facilitate, in accordance with their laws, the exchange of information that will help in the prevention and punishment of crimes of this kind.

6. To charge the Inter-American Juridical Committee with preparing an opinion on the procedures and measures necessary to make effective the purposes of this resolution. To this end, the Committee shall conclude the work entrusted to it within sixty days of the closing date of this session of the General Assembly. The Committee shall conclude the work entrusted to it within sixty days of the date on which it meets for that purpose.

7. Also to charge the Inter-American Juridical Committee with preparing, within the period set in the preceding paragraph, one or more draft inter-American instruments on kidnapping, extortion, and assaults against persons, in cases in which these acts may have repercussions on international relations.

8. To request the Inter-American Juridical Committee to report on its work to the Permanent Council of the Organization, which may, on an urgent basis, convoke a special session of the General Assembly or order the holding of an inter-American specialized conference to consider the opinion and the draft or drafts prepared by that Committee.

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

EXPRESSES its adherence to the principles set forth in the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man and in the economic and social standards of the Charter of the Organization of American States.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking.

43. Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State 43. Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, December 31, 1970.

SUBJECT:Inter-American Convention on Terrorism and Kidnapping

SUMMARY

The United States has become deeply concerned about kidnapping and other criminal acts against diplomats and other officials abroad. With perhaps the largest official overseas representation of any Government have a strong interest in discouraging attacks against foreign officials and maximizing international cooperation for their protection.

A special session of the OAS General Assembly will meet in Washington on January 25 to consider a draft convention on kidnapping and other acts of terrorism prepared by the Inter-American Juridicial Committee at the request of the OAS General Assembly. When the matter was first brought before the OASGA last June at the initiative of Argentina and Uruguay, the Secretary urged the Assembly to address itself particularly to terrorism directed against representatives of foreign states and suggested an international agreement defining these acts as international crimes and establishing appropriate measures to deal with them.

The United States continues to favor an effective convention limited to crimes against foreign officials and international extortion. Such a convention would classify such acts, including kidnapping, as “common crimes"’ for purposes of extradition and asylum. It would include an obligation to seek out, to detain, and to extradite or prosecute persons guilty of such crimes. It would also include other practical measures of cooperation such as the exchange of relevant information. It is important that such a convention be open to accession by states not members of the OAS and that its provisions be generally acceptable in the international community.

We have no illusions that an international convention of this character will provide a panacea for the problem of terrorism directed against foreign officials, as in many cases the offender will not be known or will remain in the country in which. the crime was committed. However, such a convention would clarify international law on this subject and would help to mobilize international opinion against the perpetrators of these acts by branding them as common criminals. All nations including Communist states have a common interest in the protection of their officials abroad. Therefore, it is not unreasonable to hope that an Inter-American Convention carefully limited to crimes against foreign officials might help to bring about an eventual international consensus that the perpetrators of these crimes must be brought to Justice. Such a consensus could have a deterrent effect on the terrorist group carrying out these acts.

BACKGROUND

As a result of Argentine and Uruguayan initiatives, the OAS Permanent Council on May 15, 1970 unanimously adopted a resolution which reaffirmed enunciated principles of human rights; condemned acts of terrorism and especially kidnapping and extortion connected therewith as crimes against humanity; and recommended that the OAS General Assembly (OASGA) scheduled for June 28, 1970 take up the general action and policy of the OAS with respect to such crimes.

This item became the subject of high-level interests in the OASGA with most of the Foreign Ministers participating in the discussions. The Secretary gave his strong support to a new international agreement dealing with acts of terrorism against representation of foreign states. The result was an OASGA Resolution, adopted unanimously on June 30, which: (1) strongly condemned terrorism, kidnapping and extortion connected therewith, and specifically condemned such acts against representatives of foreign states. (2) declared such acts to be common crimes; (3) recommended that member states adopt preventive and punitive measures and exchange information; (4) instructed the Inter-American Juridical Committee (IAJC), an organ of the OAS., to prepare (a) an opinion on ways of implementing-the resolution and (b) one or more draft inter-American instruments on such crimes when they affect international relations, and (5) expressed its adherence to enunciated human rights principles.

The IAJC met in Rio de Janeiro from August to October and adopted an “opinion” and draft convention by vote of seven (U.S. with reservations)-two (Chile, Peru)-two (Colombia, Mexico). This Convention was submitted to the Permanent Council which has convoked a special session of the General Assembly to consider the IAJC documents. The Council has submitted “observations” of its own together with the IAJC proposals for the Assembly’s examination. The Council avoided, however, attempting to iron out among its members the differing viewpoint on the draft. The search for agreement on an acceptable version of the document thus remains the task of the General Assembly delegations.

THE IAJC DRAFT CONVENTION

The Inter-American Juridical Committee drafted a rather broad convention which seeks to combine measures aimed specifically at kidnapping of foreign officials, with more general provisions applicable to all crimes of terrorism in the context of extradition and asylum. (Text of IAJC draft, Tab A.) The principal features are as follows: (1) The IAJC draft defines “acts of terrorism” to include (a) kidnapping or other crimes against the life, person or freedom of a limited class of foreign officials (mainly diplomatic or consular agents) or, in a broader alternative version, against all persons enjoying special protection under international law; (b) acts defined as terrorism under the laws of the state in which the acts were committed and the state in whose territory the offender is located; and (c) acts which produce terror or create a common threat to persons by means of methods which can cause great damage or public disturbances, or by taking over or wrecking a public conveyance.

(2) Terrorist acts are excluded from the category of political offenses for which asylum is traditionally granted, and extradition refused.

(3) Contracting states agree to deny diplomatic or territorial asylum to persons who take part in terrorist acts, and to extradite or to prosecute persons found within their territories who are charged with such acts. The state to whom a request for extradition is made retains the authority to determine whether extradition should be granted.

(4) Procedures are established for strengthening cooperation among contracting states in preventing and punishing acts of terrorism and in processing extradition requests.

(5) Notwithstanding the above, discretion is afforded a contracting state “in exceptional circumstances” to expel an alleged offender without either prosecuting or extraditing him, implicitly as ransom for the release of a kidnap victim.

THE U.S. PROPOSALS

The United States favors a narrower, yet tighter and more precise convention than the one proposed by the IAJC, which we consider too broad in its definition of terrorism. The U.S. delegation has circulated a set of proposals which would narrow the scope of the convention essentially to crimes against foreign officials, and extortion. (Text of U.S. proposals, Tab B). The principal features are as follows: (1) The convention would apply to kidnapping, murder and other crimes of violence against a broad class of foreign officials. We have further proposed in an alternative text that crimes against any foreign national involving extortion of a government be included.

(2) Because of the narrow scope of this convention, it would not be necessary to have any general definition of “terrorism”.

(3) The treaty crimes would be classified as common crimes rather than political offenses for purposes of extradition and asylum irrespective of the motive for which they were committed.

(4) The parties would accept the obligation to seek out, to detain, and to extradite or prosecute persons accused or convicted of such crimes.

(5) The crimes covered by the convention would be automatically included as extraditable offenses under existing extradition treaties between the parties.

(6) Extradition would be permitted to the state of nationality of the victim as well as to the state in which the offense took place.

(7) The agreement would include other practical measures of cooperation, based upon Article 8 of the IAJC draft, including the exchange of information.

DISCUSSION

Discussions of the IAJC draft by a working group of the Permanent Council’s general committee revealed that differences over the draft among the delegations were in fact considerable. Brazil, supported by Argentina and some others has insisted upon a broad convention as proposed by the IAJC, one which would apply to all crimes of terror including internal acts not involving foreign nationals. A number of others, including the United States, Mexico, Venezuela, and Colombia, favor a strong but narrow convention focused on crimes against diplomats and other foreign officials. Some countries would prefer to see no convention at this time, notably Chile.

The US favors a narrower, more precise convention for both legal and political reasons. As the Secretary indicated in his speech to the GA. last June, we understand the sensitivity of some member countries to the distinction which the IAJC draft attempts to draw between criminal acts of terrorism and legitimate expressions of discontent. Moreover, we are aware that some countries feel that terrorism, where it involves no interference in the conduct of international relations, is a matter to be dealt with internally rather than through international agreements. In eliminating the political offense exception to extradition for such a wide range of vaguely defined offenses, we would risk infringement on our traditional policy of political asylum.

Under US constitutional law, it would be difficult to establish jurisdiction over offenses committed outside the United States by non-US citizens unless the connection between the crime and international relations makes it a crime under the law of nations and thus a sufficient basis for universal jurisdiction. Establishment of the jurisdiction required if a prosecution alternative appears in a convention would be further complicated by the difficulty of defining “terrorism” with sufficient precision. The only possibility for meaningful action by the General Assembly would appear to lie in the direction of a narrow convention. A broad convention of the sort proposed by the IAJC could be passed only if the enforcement measures were considerably weakened-a glorified resolution in convention form adding nothing to the action taken by the OASGA in June. A broad instrument, moreover, even if it obtained majority support in the General Assembly, would be ratified only by a limited number of states and would have little appeal to non-OAS members who have expressed interest in joining in a convention narrower in scope and tightly drawn. To be at all effective in dealing with the problem at hand, however, the convention should be one enjoying the widest possible support and acceptance, dramatizing the universal opprobrium in which such terrorist acts are held.

Submerging crimes against diplomats and foreign officials in a general convention would deprive the OAS of the opportunity to make a lasting contribution to international law. A broad convention on terrorism would have no impact on the thinking of the Eastern Bloc and would be controversial in Europe and the third world. Since at the moment the OAS may be the only effective forum for the articulation of a firm convention could ruin a valuable opportunity to organize international public opinion that could eventually have an effect on terrorist activity.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Attached but not published were Tabs A and B.

44. Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brewster) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 44. Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Brewster) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, April 14, 1971.

Subject:

Transmission to Senate of February 2, 1971 Convention to prevent and punish acts of terrorism, etc.

The underlying Report of the Acting Secretary of State to the President and the Message from the President to the Senate are for the purpose of transmitting to the Senate for advice and consent to ratification the Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and Related Extortion That Are of International Significance, signed at Washington on February 2, 1971 by plenipotentiaries of the United States and 12 other member states of the OAS.

This Convention is designed to deal with the, problem of kidnapping and other crimes against foreign officials. The OAS General Assembly met in Washington in January 1971 for the specific purpose of formulating a convention that would express condemnation of such acts of terrorism and would establish a mechanism for cooperation among the governments for dealing effectively with the perpetrators of such acts. Under the terms of the Convention, it remains open indefinitely for signature by OAS member states and by any other state that is a member of the United Nations or its specialized agencies or a party to the Statute of the International Court of Justice. Other states may be invited by the OAS General Assembly to sign.

As of April 6, 1971 Mexico, Nicaragua, Colombia, Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay had indicated plans to submit the OAS Convention to their respective senates within the next few months or upon the convening of the next regular legislative session. An early favorable decision by the President on the matter would put the United States, with Costa Rica and Uruguay, among the first states to seek Senate ratification.

The representative of Panama at the General Assembly felt it necessary to include with the Convention text a statement concerning the effect of the Convention on the right of asylum in the Canal Zone. At the time the U.S. delegate stated orally that it agreed with the representative of Panama that the Convention had no effect on the question of asylum in the Canal Zone, and noted that the United States and Panama have differing views regarding refugees in the Canal Zone under existing treaties. This statement is part of the minutes of the meeting. The U.S. delegation did not seek inclusion of the statement with the Convention text because (1) asylum in the Canal Zone is not affected by the Convention, and (2) the OAS General Assembly did not seem a proper forum for discussion of one of the principal matters to be treated during the renegotiation of the Canal treaties.

Robert C. Brewster
Acting Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by William V. Whittington (L/T) on April 6, and cleared by Crimmins (ARA) and Jova.

U.S. Response to Hijackings by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Additional Anti-Hijacking Measures, September 1970-June 1972U.S. Response to Hijackings by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Additional Anti-Hijacking Measures, September 1970-June 1972

45. Telegram 10203 From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of State

Bonn, September 6, 1970, 1628Z.

The Embassy reported that TWA Flight 741, Swissair Flight 100, and PanAm Clipper 93 had been hijacked, and that Pan Am Clipper 03 was presumed hijacked. An El Al flight had landed in London with three dead passengers and another three taken hostage by hijackers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Immediate; Limited Official Use. Repeated to Athens, Beirut, Belgrade, Zagreb, Bern, Tel Aviv, London, the consulates at Frankfurt and Zurich, USINT Cairo, USINT Damascus, USINT Baghdad, and CINCUSAFE.

46. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, September 7, 1970.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret.

47. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon

Washington, September 7, 1970.

Haig provided the President with a status report on diplomatic efforts to deal with the demands of the hijackers.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.

48. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 8, 1970.

Rogers told Nixon that he had made a humanitarian appeal to the Arab chiefs of mission for the safety of the hijacking hostages held in Jordan by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret.

49. Telegram 147006 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 8, 1970, 2336Z.

The Department of State communicated to the Embassy that it would be desirable for the Jordanian forces to warn the PFLP that if it blew up the aircraft and killed the passengers, Jordanian forces would assure that no PFLP members would survive.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, and cleared by Sisco and Eliot.

50. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 8, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with a situation report on the hijackings and noted that he had met with Secretary of State Rogers, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson, Assistant Secretary of State for Near East and South Asian Affairs Sisco, Secretary of Defense Laird, and Director of Central Intelligence Helms that morning to discuss possible actions related to the hijackings.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Material, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive

51. Telegram 147018 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 9, 1970, 0126Z.

The Department instructed Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Transportation and Telecommunications Rein to discuss at the Regional Civil Air Attachi meeting the question of international sanctions against nations assisting hijackers.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Franklin K. Willis (L/E) and approved by David B. Ortman (E/OA/AVP).

52. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 9, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with a midday situation report on the hijacked airliners and events in Amman.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. The record of the WSAG meeting of September 9 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XXIV, Arabian Peninsula; Middle East Region, 1969-1972; Jordan 1970.

53. Telegram 4495 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 9, 1970.

The Charge in Amman recommended against asking Jordanian King Hussein to issue a warning to the PFLP at this time.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Flash; Nodis.

54. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 9, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with a status report on the hijacked airliners, attendant diplomatic negotiations, and possible contingency actions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

55. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 9, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with an evening status report on the hijacking situation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. Haig signed for Kissinger.

56. Memorandum For the President

Washington, September 10, 1970.

A proposal for the President’s approval for a program to deter future hijacking of U.S. aircraft approved by the FAA, the airline industry, the appropriate departments and agencies including State and domestic and international airline organizations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for action. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. There is no indication that the President saw it, but on September 14, Laird wrote to Kissinger “pursuant to the decision of the President that we should provide military personnel on U.S. Flag air carriers, we propose to detail the necessary military personnel to the Department of Transportation.” Tab B was attached and is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1970, pp. 742-743.

57. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 10, 1970.

Kissinger reported that the hijackers’ deadline had been extended by 72 hours and the situation in Amman was becoming very tense.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.

58. Telegram 1857 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 10, 1970, 0014Z.

The telegram transmitted the text of a UN Security Council resolution that expressed grave concern about the hijackings.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified. Repeated to Algiers, Beirut, Bern, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Tel Aviv, USINT Cairo, the U.S. mission to Geneva, and the consulate in Jerusalem.

59. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 10, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with a midday report on the hijacking/hostage situation, noting that the PFLP was provisionally prepared to release women, children, and the sick in return for fedayeen in British, German, and Swiss custody.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

60. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 10, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with an evening report on the hijacking situation and provided an analysis of the PFLP’s proposal.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

61. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 11, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with a midday report on the hijacking situation suggesting that the negotiations reached a critical stage, and “fantastic tension” existed within the PFLP.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. The memorandum is an unsigned copy.

62. Telegram 4591 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Embassy in Switzerland

Amman, September 11, 1970, 1315Z.

Chargi O Dell saw no point in approaching Jordanian authorities or Arab League officials for assistance because governments could only minimally influence the hijackers. He recommended against any military action.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated immediate to Rogers.

63. Information Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, September 12, 1970.

The memorandum provided a summary of international U.S. anti-hijacking efforts.

Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stevenson and Malmborg.

64. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 12, 1970.

Kissinger provided the President with an update on the hijackers’ demands. He noted that the three hijacked aircraft had been blown up after the removal of all passengers. The hijackers announced that all but 40 hostages had been released and were free to leave Jordan. Kissinger also mentioned that the ICRC was withdrawing from its role as negotiator.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

65. Telegram 149944 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, Jordan, Lebanon, and Israel, and the Consulate in Geneva

Washington, September 13, 1970, 1908Z.

The Department encouraged stocktaking of the hijacking situation and provided advice to all recipient posts to continue the “cool, prudent approach” in maintaining the unity of the group negotiating with the PFLP.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Sisco and Beaudry, and approved by Sisco.

66. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 13, 1970.

Kissinger reported to the President that 350 passengers had been removed from Jordan, but that more than 50 hostages, mostly Americans, remained in PFLP hands.

67. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger)

Washington, September 13, 1970.

Saunders reported that the NSC was expecting new information on the hijacking situation since an ICRC representative would soon be meeting with the Bern Group.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret.

68. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 14, 1970.

Kissinger reported on the results of the Bern Group meeting with the ICRC.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan and Switzerland

Washington, September 14, 1970, 1658Z.

The Department agreed with the view that the Jordanian Government should assume a greater role in the hostage crisis.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Scotes, cleared by Seelye, Davis, and Beaudry, and approved by Sisco. Repeated to Bonn, London, Tel Aviv, and USUN New York.

70. Memorandum From the Legal Advisor (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 15, 1970.

Stevenson briefed Rogers on three anti-hijacking initiatives to be discussed at the ICAO meeting in Montreal on September 18.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Rhinelander. Copies were sent to Sisco and Meadows. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

71. Telegram 153122 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon and Other Posts

Washington, September 17, 1970, 2232Z.

The telegram consists of excerpts from Secretary of Transportation Volpe’s statement that was to be delivered before the ICAO council.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Priority; Limited Official Use. Drafted by Gravatt and approved by Meadows (E/OA).

72. Telegram From the Department of State to the U.S. Mission to NATO

Washington, September 17, 1970, 0152Z.

The Department outlined a major presentation on anti-hijacking measures scheduled to be presented at the CCMS meeting in October.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals. Drafted by H. C. Blaney; cleared by Moynihan and Stevenson and DOT/FAA, OST, SCI, EUR, E/AV, and Behr in substance; and approved by Springsteen (EUR).

73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, and Israel

Washington, September 19, 1970, 0311Z.

The telegram contained excerpts from Secretary Rogers’ discussion with Israeli Prime Minister Meir on the hijacking and hostage problem in Amman.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by H. H. Stackhouse (NEA/IAI) on September 18, cleared by Atherton and Seeley, and approved by Sisco.

74. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig)

Washington, September 18, 1970.

Moynihan had told interested agencies that the President wanted to use CCMS as a forum to deal with the hijacking problem.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A was attached but not published.

75. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts except Gaborone, Maseru, Mbabane, and Moscow

Washington, September 21, 1970, 2244Z.

The Department transmitted information on the special ICAO Council meeting held to consider U.S. proposals on hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Repeated to the Consulate in Montreal for US ICAO. Drafted by Meadows and Gravatt, cleared in IO and L, and approved by Meadows.

76. Briefing Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin

Washington, September 28, 1970.

Stevenson prepared the briefing memorandum and the attached talking points in advance of Irwin’s meeting with the French and German Ambassadors to discuss the hijacking proposals made in the ICAO Council.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Meadows and cleared by Rhinelander and Hillenbrand. Attached but not published at Tab B was a proposed note.

77. Telegram 5465 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 30, 1970, 1210Z.

At the request of the PFLP, the United Arab Republic provided a list of names of the detained fedayeen to be released in exchange for the remaining hostages.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Flash. Repeated to Tel Aviv, Bern, Bonn, London, and Geneva.

78. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Rhinelander) and Deputy Assistant for Transportation and Telecommunications (Rein) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)

Washington, October 9, 1970.

Rhinelander and Rein communicated to Flanigan the measures proposed by the Department of State to maintain international momentum after adoption of the ICAO resolution.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Joseph A. Silberstein (E/AO/AVP) and Rein and cleared by Rhinelander. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

79. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)

Washington, October 31, 1970.

Kissinger provided the ideas his staff had generated for leveling possible sanctions on countries that were uncooperative in combating hijacking.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials. NSC Files, Box 331, Subject Files, Hijackings II. Secret.

80. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee

Washington, October 31, 1970.

Kissinger asked the committee to prepare a list of countries that were expected to be uncooperative during hijackings, as well as a list of possible sanctions that could be used against them.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. No classification marking.

81. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ethiopia and 38 Other Posts

Washington, November 2, 1970.

Posts were asked to invite host governments to attend the Washington Conference on International Air Transportation Security scheduled for January 1971.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Brasilia, Melbourne, Montreal for U.S. ICAO representative, Karachi, and NATO. Drafted by Gravatt (E/OA/AVP) and R. P. Boyle (FAA), cleared in ARA, EA, EUR, NEA, OIC, AFI, and by Silberstein.

82. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon

Washington, December 7, 1970.

In response to Kissinger’s request, the committee transmitted a list of possible actions against countries that were uncooperative on hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret.

83. Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of State

The Hague, December 16, 1970, 1330Z.

The telegram communicated the final text of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft agreed upon at the Hague.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified; Immediate. Repeated to USUN and the Consulate at Montreal with a request that the Department pass to FAA, DOT, CAB, and Justice.

84. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 24, 1971.

The Department of State sent to the President, for submission to the Senate, the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Aircraft.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Sylvia Nilsen.

85. Letter From Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of Transportation Volpe

Washington, July 23, 1971.

The Departments of State and Transportation agreed upon closer coordination of action in response to hijackings of international commercial aircraft.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the letter.

86. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to the Associate Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Carlucci)

Washington, June 10, 1972.

Macomber outlined an international action program to deal with failure to punish hijackers or return aircraft, crews, passengers, or property; upgrading the safety of international aviation; and specifically bringing pressure on Algeria to resolve the Western Airlines hijacking. Two Americans had hijacked a Western Airlines aircraft to Algeria with $500,000 in ransom money.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Secret. Johnson’s telegram to the Algerian chargi is attached but not published.

87. Memorandum From Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 13, 1972.

Levine updated Kissinger on recent activities generated by new acts of air piracy.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. Secret. Sent for information.

88. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, June 15, 1972.

Rogers reported that the Department of State had introduced a resolution in the ICAO calling for a resumption of work on an international convention to provide sanctions against governments that aided hijackers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164.

89. Airgram A-6325 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Missions

Washington, June 23, 1972.

The Department of State provided the text of the resolution on aircraft hijacking and violence against civil aviation adopted by the ICAO Council and the text of a statement incorporating the UN Security Council’s consensus on hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Drafted by Gravatt on June 21, cleared by Joseph N. Greene, Jr. (IO/UNP), and approved by Silberstein.

45. Telegram 10203 From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of State 45. Telegram 10203 From the Embassy in the Federal Republic of Germany to the Department of State1

Bonn, September 6, 1970, 1628Z.

Subj Multiple Hijackings of Aircraft

1. According to USAFE, TWA, AND FonOff sources, TWA Flight 741, scheduled to fly Frankfurt to New York, was hijacked with 142 passengers aboard around noon today (Frankfurt time) by a woman who forced the pilot to change the flight call sign from TWA 741 to “Gaza-Strip.” USAFE source tells US that aircraft passed over Damascus about 1625 hours (Frankfurt time) heading east.

2. USAFE and SwissAir sources inform us that SwissAir Flight 100, scheduled to fly Zurich-New York, was hijacked with 150 passengers aboard about 1255 hours (Zurich time) by unidentified persons(s) who implied connection with Palestine Commando Front, and who forced pilot to change flight call sign from SwissAir 100 to “Haifi.” SwissAir source said plane expected to pass over island of Rhodes about 1530 hours (Zurich time) and was expected to continue in direction of Amman, Beirut, Damascus or Baghdad. SwissAir source estimated sixty percent (60 percent) of passengers US citizens, and thought some Israelis also aboard. SwissAir promised to cable manifest to Embassy Berne.

3. USAFE informs us that an El Al flight departing from Tel Aviv landed at London (Heathrow) about 1545 hours (Frankfurt time) with three (3) confirmed dead and three more (one woman and two men) still being held by the hijacker(s).

4. USAFE advises that pilot of a PanAm clipper 93 (a 747 jumbo jet) advised Frankfurt ATC center about 1630 hours (Frankfurt time) that his aircraft was hijacked and was passing over Spangdahlem, Germany with a “190 heading” (south).

5. USAFE advises that a PanAm clipper 03 departing from Southend, England is speculated to be hijacked and headed toward beirut.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Immediate; Limited Official Use. Repeated to Athens, Beirut, Belgrade, Zagreb, Bern, Tel Aviv, London, the consulates at Frankfurt and Zurich, USINT Cairo, USINT Damascus, USINT Baghdad, and CINCUSAFE.

46. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency 46. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, September 7, 1970.

[2 pages not declassified.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret.

47. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon 47. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 7, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Middle East Hijacking Status Report

Secretary Rogers has met with the Ambassadors of Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and Switzerland. All have agreed to release prisoners they hold. These include: Switzerland, three Fedayeen; Federal Republic of Germany, three Fedayeen; United Kingdom, the girl hijacker captured yesterday.

State now hopes to announce through the Red Cross a concerted four power offer to the Fedayeen to the effect that the four powers will be willing to make this exchange if all prisoners and both aircraft are turned over to the International Red Cross. This varies from what the Fedayeen have demanded. The Fedayeen demand provides that only non Israeli nationals and non dual passport personnel will be released in return for the foregoing exchange. They would continue to hold Israeli prisoners and dual passport prisoners. (We believe there are ten U.S. personnel holding dual passports in this group.) These would only be released in return for all Fedayeen held by the Israelis.

If the Fedayeen holds to its original demand we could be placed in the untenable position of being isolated with Israel in negotiating the release of Israeli and dual-citizenship personnel. State will attempt to avoid this predicament through the proposal cited above. State has adopted this proposal because they feel that since the Swiss have already agreed to ransom their nationals and aircraft, it will be difficult if not impossible to hold them in line except by such an offer.

I believe if we do make this proposal it will likely be rejected. Then we will be faced with the same problem of holding the other three nations in line-a rather dim prospect. If we do not make this proposal we will probably lose the other powers and find ourselves isolated in either event. In going this route we should decide to remain firm in this position for as long as we can even if the other nations collapse. We are thus in effect buying time and providing a vehicle for the Red Cross to begin negotiating. In the past the Red Cross has been the only successful route for gaining the release of hijacked prisoners or other hostages.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.

48. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 48. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 8, 1970.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT-Evening Report

1. Mid-East Hijacking-I called in all Arab Chiefs-of-Mission in Washington this afternoon to make a humanitarian appeal concerning the safety of the passengers now being held by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) in Jordan. I emphasized that we do not hold any of the Arab governments responsible for this inhumane act but expressed my hope that these governments might be able to convey to the hijackers our desire that they release these innocent air passengers unharmed and at once.

I also stressed that the U.S. Government does not in any way relate my humanitarian appeal to the implementation of our Mid-East peace initiative.

Speaking on behalf of the Arab Ambassadors, Kuwaiti Ambassador Ghoussein assured me that their respective governments share our concern and would do all in their power to convey our humanitarian appeal. He noted, however, that the PFLP is not beholden to any Arab government or to the more moderate Palestinians. Jordanian Ambassador Sharaf said that his government is doing everything in its power to obtain an early and safe release of the passengers.

[Omitted here is a paragraph unrelated to Global Issues]

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret.

49. Telegram 147006 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 49. Telegram 147006 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 8, 1970, 2336Z.

Although it is impossible now to foresee the course of events with respect to the hijacked aircraft during the next 36 hours, and although given their fanatical attitudes it may have none or minimal deterrent effect, it seems to us here that there might be some value, if the King is willing, for the commander of the Jordanian forces surrounding the site of the aircraft to get across to the PFLP personnel at the aircraft a warning that if they carry out their threat to destroy the aircraft and passengers, the Jordanian forces will do their utmost to assure that none of the PFLP personnel escape from the scene alive. We would hope that if matters do come to such a tragic pass the Jordanian forces would in fact implement such a threat for whatever value it may have in deterring future such tragedies.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, and cleared by Sisco and Eliot.

50. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 50. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Your 4:30 Meeting on the Hijackings

At your call, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Attorney General, the Director of the FBI, and I will meet in your office at 4:30 p.m. to discuss the hijacking situation. Secretary Rogers will bring Assistant Secretary Joe Sisco to the meeting.

The latest report on the hijacking situation is as follows: -Embassy Amman now accounts for 137 persons from the TWA plane; of these, 37 have been released and 100 are presumably on the plane. The Embassy accounts for 136 persons on SwissAir, of which 86 have been released and 50 are presumably on the plane. These figures are not firm.

-According to Embassy Berne, the British Government is prepared to coordinate in Berne to work through the International Red Cross (ICRC) and to release the female hijacker and the body of her companion hijacker.

-Embassy Amman reports that the TWA plane is capable of take-off with the possible exception of the need for a battery change.

-The deadline for expiration of the 72-hour limit set by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) for meeting its demands for release of the hijacked planes and passengers is 10:00 p.m. EDT, September 9.

-The International Red Cross envoy who worked effectively during the Jordanian crisis last spring arrived in Amman today to contact the PFLP and the Jordanian authorities in an effort to arrange for a departure of the two planes and the passengers.

-Damascus Radio announced at 3:45 that the PFLP stated in Amman today that the Front has accepted the Swiss Government’s decision to release the Front’s three Fedayeen now in Swiss prisons. It added that the Swiss plane and its passengers will be released as soon as the three Fedayeen arrive at a place to be determined by the Front under guarantees to be agreed on with the International Red Cross. All women, children and men, other than Israeli, American, British, Swiss and West German Nations have already been released according to the spokesman. The Front will continue to detain the other passengers and provide them with all care until the governments concerned respond to the Front’s ultimatum. The spokesman also said that the German passengers will continue to be detained until the West German Government reports officially through the Red Cross that it has released the Fedayeen detained in German prisons. He added that investigations of the U.S. Nationals are being conducted to determine who among them holds dual citizenship.

At a meeting held in the Secretary of State’s office today at 11:00 a.m. possible actions related to the hijacking situation were held. In attendance were Secretary Rogers, Under Secretary Johnson, Assistant Secretary Sisco, Secretary Laird, Director Helms and myself. You may wish to call on Secretary Rogers at today’s meeting to summarize the results of this discussion.

In addition to the specific situation surrounding the Middle East Fedayeen hijackings, an effort under the aegis of the Secretary of Transportation has been under way since February 27 to investigate sophisticated surveillance equipment which might be used to detect explosives and other materials which could be used by airplane saboteurs. The Secretary’s most recent report dated July 21 suggested that it would probably be impossible to develop any system that would give 100% certainty against conceivable sabotage.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Material, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive

51. Telegram 147018 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 51. Telegram 147018 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, September 9, 1970, 0126Z.

Deliver at opening of business September 9th

For Deputy Assistant Secretary Rein.

Subject:CIVAIR: RCAA Meeting

1. Suggest discussion of following at regional Civil Air Attache meeting and report reaction Department.

2. As a result of hijackings over Labor Day weekend Department is considering whether an attempt should be made again to get international consideration of sanctions issue. Sanctions might involve boycott of air services to a country failing to punish hijackers or failing to observe Article 11 Tokyo Convention. At same time carriers of that country would not be allowed to land elsewhere. To be effective sanctions would have to be applied by all or virtually all major aviation countries at same point in time. This would involve a convention with “triggering mechanism” applicable to all contracting parties, and with convention entry into force only after all major aviation countries become parties.

3. Sanctions question got no support at December meeting on hijacking in Washington D.C. involving 12 European countries. At Seventeenth Assembly it also was avoided as highly complex political issue, although proposal in general terms (for study of question) was made by Lebanon, Israel, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, and Ifalpa. Recent events indicate hijacking becoming a much more severe problem than in past, and number of countries adversely affected rapidly expanding. Consequently, we feel sanctions issue may get more sympathetic hearing than in past.

4. Merits of government action on sanctions issue should be contrasted with unilateral Ifalpa boycott, an increasing possibility if governments do not deal with sanctions issue. In discussion, should be noted some segments U.S. public, new media (New York Times), and Congress are calling for government sanctions.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Franklin K. Willis (L/E) and approved by David B. Ortman (E/OA/AVP).

52. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 52. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 9, 1970.

SUBJECT:Mid-Day Situation Report on Hijacking Situation

Below are described the main developments since my memorandum to you this morning.

The Situation

1. Red Cross representative Rochat has told us that the time limit on the guerrillas’ ultimatum has been extended but that it is indefinite how long it has been extended. At the same time, he stated that he is fearful that we are approaching a very serious night but he wanted to reassure us that the Red Cross is exerting every effort to move as rapidly as possible in negotiations with the PFLP.

2. A Red Cross medical team and personnel are now with the hijacked planes on a continuing basis.

3. The British Overseas Airways Corporation flight that was hijacked at Bahrain enroute from Bombay to London stopped in Beirut and flew on to the same airfield in Jordan where the other two hijacked planes are being held. It landed there at 11:05 a.m. EDT. Reportedly there are only a small number of Americans aboard.

4. The situation in Amman has deteriorated seriously. Fedayeen communications reported artillery and rocket fire coming from the royal palace, Jordanian headquarters and official buildings. King Hussein, in an apparent effort to get a grip on the situation has issued an order entrusting to the army Chief of Staff “all authority of the armed forces” to restore the peace. The army, however, according to the most recent reports has still not entered Amman to drive out the Fedayeen. The Jordanians have to consider the possibility that the hostage passengers will be used to restrain their actions as well. The guard around the Intercontinental Hotel where the passengers in Amman are being held has been increased, and the passengers there are in the basement shelter area. The British Foreign office reported this morning that it lost contact with its embassy in Amman. We have had no such problem. The British have alerted their evacuation machinery.

5. The Swiss have followed up the U.S. approach in Bonn with a strong demarche to the West Germans to hold firm and not agree to release their prisoners unilaterally. A late report from Bonn indicates that Chancellor Brandt and other concerned ministers have decided to continue “for the time being” their concerted approach through the Red Cross and therefore to refrain at present from isolated actions to reclaim the German passengers. The Germans, however, have reserved the right to make a new decision if imminent new danger arises-presumably a reference to breakdown of control in Amman itself.

6. We understand indirectly through Red Cross sources that PFLP representatives have given Rochat a list of 300 Fedayeen held by the Israelis who must be released as a precondition to release of the prisoners still in F and PFLP hands.

7. Heikal, Nasser’s Minister of Information and close confidant, told Minister Bergus in Cairo that he had personally conveyed to Fatah-the main middle-of-the-road Palestinian organization-an ultimatum that unless it publicly denounced the hijacking operations of the radical Palestinians, as the UAR had done, the UAR would consider Fatah in the same category as the radicals and act accordingly.

8. The Red Cross in Geneva has formally conveyed a note to the U.S., Swiss, German and British representatives there of the beginning of Rochat’s mission in Amman. It specifically stated: “In case of a non-coordinated liberation of Palestinians, the Committee would be obliged to renounce the mandate which has been confided to it.”

9. The UN Security Council has been convened at 3 p.m. today to consider the hijacking problem. This issue was debated in the General Assembly last year but this is the first time it will be placed formally before the Security Council.

Further U.S. Planning

At the WSAG meeting this morning we reviewed contingency plans designed to (a) extricate the hostage personnel, (b) evacuate American citizens from Jordan if the situation there deteriorates further, and (c) intervene to support King Hussein if he requests us to do so.

-Plans are complete for military evacuation of U.S. citizens in situations where we are either unopposed or opposed. The operation could commence within 48 hours using forces from Europe if these forces were not already on alert. The JCS is looking now at ways in which forces could be put in alert status with a cover which would avoid risk of disclosure. From full alert the operation could commence within 6 to 8 hours. Because forces from the U.S. would require considerably longer, we would plan to use forces from Europe.

-These same plans can be used to evacuate the hostages from the Fedayeen-held airfield. No one, however, favors initiating such a step except in the extreme case in which there is conclusive evidence that the hostages would otherwise be killed. If it comes to this, however, and the Jordanian forces cannot or will not do the job, it would be preferable to use U.S. rather than Israeli forces-an Israeli operation would likely trigger a major conflagration.

-Plans also are ready for intervention to support Hussein if he asks us to do so. There are two principal problems:

-How long would we have to sustain this operation? The forces available are limited to the brigade in Europe and the 82nd Airborne Division in the U.S. Our strategic reserve thus would be committed and long-term support of an operation, which might escalate to include the involvement of Iraqi and Syrian forces, would be increasingly difficult given the need for total resupply by air. The JCS are looking hard at the implications.

-What should be the King’s position after we left. An illustration in that case would be Israeli forces. The King already has asked that the Israelis help him if he needs it-we think it preferable that the Israelis do so in these circumstances rather than the U.S. But this would take more help from us behind the Israelis (a) to keep the Russians out and (b) to give the military equipment support they would need. Lebanon also would have its troubles with the Fedayeen in these circumstances and they, too, would need equipment support from us.

-Equipment packages for the support of an Israeli intervention and for the support of Lebanese resistance to the Fedayeen are being drafted now. The JCS also are looking at what it will take in U.S. posture to hold the ring against the Russians if the Israelis move to support Hussein at his request.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. The record of the WSAG meeting of September 9 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, volume XXIV, Arabian Peninsula; Middle East Region, 1969-1972; Jordan 1970.

53. Telegram 4495 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 53. Telegram 4495 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 9, 1970.

Subj Hijacking

Ref State 147006

1. In my judgment Embassy should not rpt not recommend to King Hussein that he issue at this time warning to PFLP along lines suggested reftel.

2. Position on the ground is quite clear. A relatively few PFLP fedayeen are holding the airplanes, and JAA has established perimeter around the area. PFLP men are now quite exposed, in desert, contrary to situation in Amman where JAA is reluctant to fire because of danger to population.

3. If PFLP destroys planes and kills hostages, I think JAA will act without urging USG. DATT shares this view.

4. If we urge King Hussein to threaten PFLP at this point, it might prompt PFLP to do something out of desperation. Recommend therefore that we not rpt not press King Hussein on this.

Odell

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Flash; Nodis.

54. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 54. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 9, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking Status

Where the Passengers Are

No confirmed list of the hostages is available. A few more than 300 passengers have been involved altogether. Over half are U.S. citizens. Israelis and dual nationals have been estimated at 30-50. About 125 of these passengers, mostly women and children, have been brought to the Hotel Intercontinental in Amman. However, the Red Cross representative, after talking to Palestinian leaders, says these passengers are not free to leave Amman, even though the hotel itself is surrounded by Jordanian government forces. He reports that the hostages are being well treated.

The Diplomatic Situation

You will recall that Monday night, the U.S. agreed to participate in a concerted U.S.-U.K.-Swiss-West German effort through the Red Cross. At a meeting Tuesday in Bern, the British, Swiss and West German representatives confirmed their governments’ agreement that the Red Cross might offer release of the seven fedayeen prisoners they hold if the guerrillas turned over all passengers and the two planes to the Red Cross. Meanwhile, Red Cross representatives had arrived in Amman. Following are the main developments since the foregoing:

1. Below are the main points made by Red Cross representative Andre Rochat in a report to British, West German, Swiss representatives in Amman following his first round of talks (two meetings with Jordanian Prime Minister Rifai and a long discussion with the Palestinians): -The situation is “extremely serious”. He is “not at all convinced it will end successfully …. We may face a tragedy …. There is perhaps one chance in two we will get everyone out.”

-He intends to be “extremely firm” in sticking to the terms of his mandate. He warned that if any attempt is made to move away from the multi-national approach as outlined in that mandate, the Red Cross representatives “will withdraw completely and leave the place.”

-He concludes that the Jordanian Government fully supports the Red Cross position. As for the Palestinians, “The first meeting seems to be the beginning of something positive.” Rochat planned further meetings today, including meeting with the hostages.

-The guerrillas’ position on release of guerrilla prisoners in Israeli hands is that “not one person will leave the planes if the Palestinians are not satisfied” on this point. [Comment: The meaning of this point is not clear since the official Palestinian demands stated that all but the Israeli and dual national passengers would be released in return for the seven fedayeen prisoners in Europe.]

-The Red Cross has a plane (capacity 90) at its disposal for as many trips as necessary for as long as necessary to evacuate released hostages. “We do not need help in this regard.”

-He is “100 percent sure that the deadline will be postponed for at least 72 hours” after initial expiration. He later said he did not have assurances to this effect and revised his statement to say he is positive that “no one will be killed tomorrow afternoon unless by accident.”

-He does not want yet to deal separately with the hostages already released from the planes, but he conceded this might be brought up again if the internal security deteriorates seriously.

2. Secretary Rogers yesterday called in all Arab Chiefs-of-Mission in Washington to make an appeal solely on humanitarian grounds for safety of the passengers. He emphasized that, while we do not hold Arab governments responsible, public outrage around the world would be great if innocent passengers were harmed.

3. Under Secretary Johnson last night sent a message to the U.S. Charge in Amman saying “it seems to us here that there might be some value, if King Hussein is willing, for the commander of the Jordanian troops surrounding the site of the aircraft to get across to the PFLP personnel at the aircraft a warning that if they carry out their threat to destroy the aircraft and passengers, the Jordanian forces will do their utmost to assure that none of the PFLP personnel escape from the scene alive.

4. An approach has been made in Bonn urging the West German government not to release their fedayeen prisoners unilaterally. They appear, as do the Swiss, to have received separate approaches from the fedayeen setting a separate deadline for exchange of their prisoners for their passengers. The West Germans appear to be increasingly nervous over the approaching deadline, and the Cabinet is meeting this morning. They have been informed of Rochat’s insistence that the multi-national approach be maintained.

5. According to Jerusalem radio this morning, Israel intends to ask the British government today to detain the woman hijacker in its hands until Israel can submit a request for her extradition. The British informed us yesterday that they are willing to release her as part of the U.S.-U.K.-German-Swiss response to the fedayeen demands. Israel continues to insist that nothing be done that will result in partial release of those detained-leaving only the Israelis (and presumably American Jews) in fedayeen hands. There is no indication Israel may be willing to release any fedayeen in its hands.

6. The British have proposed to the U.S., Swiss and Germans a UN Security Council meeting to consider the hijacking problem. We and the Swiss have reacted favorably.

U.S. Military Actions

I have arranged for the following actions by U.S. military forces: --Six C-130 aircraft are being moved to Incirlik, Turkey to be available for evacuation purposes. They will be one hour and 30 minutes flying time from the field in Jordan where the hijacked aircraft are being held. (See attached map.) They are expected to be in place by 11:30 a.m. EDT.

-The attack aircraft carrier Independence, accompanied by four destroyers and an oiler, is southeast of Crete and steaming toward the Lebanon-Israel coast. It will reach a position 100 miles off the coast by shortly after midnight tonight. This force will be joined by two additional destroyers. (See attached map.)

--The battle staff of the U.S. Strike Command at McDill Air Force Base in Florida has been activated to monitor the situation.

--Appropriate contingency plans for Europe and the Middle East are currently being reviewed.

--I am convening a senior WSAG meeting at 11:30 this morning to complete alternative politico-military contingency scenarios for the crises.

How Events May Evolve

1. A major factor will be whether Rochat has indeed succeeded in slipping the deadline.

2. Whatever the timing, it seems likely that Rochat in his negotiations will be confronted with a Fedayeen demand that Israel release some of the Fedayeen prisoners it holds. At that point pressures will develop in two directions: -There will be pressure on the British, Swiss and Germans to break the multi-national front and bargain for the release of their passengers. The U.S. would be under pressure not to jeopardize the lives of some passengers for the sake of others.

-There will be pressure on Israel (to some degree from the three European governments and presumably from the U.S.). Rochat may be able to suggest to Israel some broadening of the exchange. [You will recall that this was the eventual solution in the TWA hijacking case a year ago.]

Attachment

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

55. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 55. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 9, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Evening Report on the Hijacking Situation

Below are described the main developments since my mid-day memorandum to you on the aircraft hijacking situation.

Passengers, Aircraft and Negotiations

Red Cross representative Rochat reports that: --The deadline on the ultimatum has now been “postponed” with no specific expiration. The negotiations are now considered to be open as far as time is concerned and he anticipates a very long negotiating process.

--The situation is “extremely serious.” He hopes that a clear position will emerge from the PFLP side by tomorrow morning, although he considers their demands to remain “extremely tough.” He will meet with them again “very early” tomorrow morning.

--The passengers on all three aircraft are safe and the Red Cross has a medical team permanently on the site. A second Red Cross plane with unspecified supplies has been requested.

--He may have reason to call on the U.S. for unspecified support on short notice.

Our embassy reports that things are now relatively quiet at the hotel where the passengers removed from the aircraft are staying. Morale seems to be reasonably good given the strain of the situation. Earlier in the day they had to take shelter in the basement when heavy fighting broke out in the vicinity.

With the addition of the hijacked BOAC aircraft today, there are now some 300 hostages at the airstrip where the planes are being held. The BOAC plane has some 105 passengers including 3 U.S. citizens and 24 unattached children.

Situation in Amman

The fighting in Amman seems to have died down this afternoon after the more moderate fedayeen leaders responded favorably to a call by Army Chief of Staff Haditha for all sides to observe a cease-fire. It seems quite possible, however, that this is only another overnight lull.

The embassy reports that so far there have been no injuries among local American residents. Three embassy personnel, however, are missing and presumably being held by the guerrillas.

U.S. Actions

The UN Security Council is expected now to meet this evening. It was originally scheduled–at our request–to meet this afternoon but the pre-meeting consultations have dragged on longer than expected. We are working for a resolution calling for the immediate release of the passengers and crews and urging that all possible measures be taken to insure against further hijacking or interference with international aviation.

We are still working with the Swiss, Germans and British to maintain a common front against the fedayeen demands and efforts to split us. We have also informed the Israelis that we find the message they asked us to forward to King Hussein to be unnecessarily threatening (it held his government fully responsible) and suggest they use their own direct channels to the Jordanians.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. Haig signed for Kissinger.

56. Memorandum For the President 56. Memorandum For the President1

Washington, September 10, 1970.

Attached at Tab A is an outline of the program which can be announced by you to deter future hijacking of U.S. aircraft.

Attached at Tab B is a draft of a Presidential Statement on this program.

(This program was developed at a series of September 9 meetings of all relevant agencies in the White House and was approved by all participants at a September 9 meeting of industry representatives at the FAA. The program has specifically been approved by the Departments of State, Defense, Treasury and Transportation, the FAA, the CAB, the Airline Pilots Association of America, the Air Transport Association (made up of domestic airlines), the Deputy Director of IATA (made up of international airlines) and TWA and Pan American. The International Federation of Airline Pilots Associations has opposed guards on airplanes on the basis of which Attorney General Mitchell has indicated reservations.)

The four major problems relating to the program are: (1) how extensive will be the use of armed guards,

(2) who will pay the costs,

(3) what will be the timing and the detail of the announcement, and

(4) what potential liability will the Federal Government incur.

(1) The U.S. airlines employ 2300 crews to service international flights (excluding Canada). To put guards on all these flights, assuming an average of 2 1/2 per plane, would require 7,750 men. A substantially larger number of crews man domestic flights which are capable of being hijacked, as proven by the domestic TWA flight hijacked to Italy. The FAA is designing a distribution pattern for guard use, which will be relatively heavy for flights susceptible to hijacking and light for non-susceptible flights.

(2) Fares on international flights are set by IATA, and no tax is charged on these fares. If the U.S. international airlines are able to get IATA approval for a fare increase to cover the cost of guards, they will be charging a rate higher than their competitors. Because the U.S. is a prime target of Arab hijackers due to its support of Israel, Pan Am and TWA believe they will lose a substantial portion of their international traffic in any event. Both airlines are currently operating at a loss, and are in no position to carry the cost of guards or to unilaterally increase the cost of service.

Secretary Laird is of the opinion that the Congress will not allow this cost to be borne by the general revenues, in that it is for the benefit of the minority who travel by air. Bryce Harlow, while skeptical about the program, disagrees with Laird’s conclusions but recommends that Congressional leaders be checked with on this point.

(3) TWA and Pan Am strongly urge that no Presidential announcement be made until the deterrent system is in place. They fear that the hijack teams, if alerted that guards are going to be put on planes in the near future, will attempt additional hijackings immediately. The airlines will need only one day to indoctrinate the 125 available trained agents, and the agents can be on international flights by the weekend. A Presidential announcement Friday afternoon should meet the airlines’ requirement.

Because the initial guard contingent will be relatively small, because all flights will never be covered, because we may wish to phase the program out quietly, and because its effectiveness depends on secrecy, no details on the guard program should ever be made public beyond your initial announcement.

(4) The U.S. Government may be liable for substantial claims as a result of the guard program. If a guard injures a, passenger, or a plane is lost, suits will be brought against the Federal Government. The Justice Department is currently considering the extent of this possible liability and ways to limit it.

I recommend that you:

Authorize Congressional contacts regarding financing of armed guards.

Approve _________ Disapprove ___________ Other _____________

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for action. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. There is no indication that the President saw it, but on September 14, Laird wrote to Kissinger “pursuant to the decision of the President that we should provide military personnel on U.S. Flag air carriers, we propose to detail the necessary military personnel to the Department of Transportation.” Tab B was attached and is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1970, pp. 742-743.

57. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 57. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Morning Report on Hijacking Situation

Below are described the main developments since yesterday evening on the hijacking situation.

Passengers, Aircraft and Negotiations

Red Cross representative Rochat reports that: --The deadline on the ultimatum has been extended by the PFLP for an additional 72 hours. Presumably it would now expire at 10 p.m. EDT on Saturday.

--The number of Palestinians in Israeli hands whose release is being demanded by the PFLP is “very high indeed.”

--He anticipates negotiations that may carry on for “several weeks.”

--He is “most interested” in what the U.S. action might be in a “final crash.”

For the first time, in a series of discussions with Rochat, an Embassy officer detected a note of real pessimism creeping into his attitude.

Although the deadline has been extended the lives of the passengers are still very much in danger. The fedayeen, apparently nervous over the possibility of outside intervention, have told Rochat that if there is any foreign military action in Jordan the three planes and all their occupants will be blown up. An attack on the hotel in Amman where some of the passengers are staying is also possible. Heavy fighting broke out in the vicinity of the hotel last night and the building took several direct hits, although apparently none of the guests were injured. Our Embassy in Amman also points out that the status of the passengers is shifting from that of pawns in a terrorist publicity game to that of instruments being used by the fedayeen in a political struggle with the Jordanian Government.

Situation in Amman

A pooled dispatch by several U.S. correspondents reflects continued fighting in Amman during the early morning hours. Guerrilla and the security forces were trading shots and fighting was going on in several areas of the city, including at the airport. Many houses are said to have been destroyed.

The Embassy reports that King Hussein still appears unwilling to take the final military confrontation with the fedayeen. They continue to believe, however, that the army would come out on top, even if the Iraqis joined the fedayeen.

Diplomatic Situation

The UN Security Council met for a short session last evening to approve, by consensus, a resolution expressing grave concern at the hijackings, and calling for the release of the passengers. The resolution also called for all possible legal steps to be taken to ensure against further hijackings and other interference with international travel. Ambassador Yost notes that the resolution puts both the Soviets and the Syrians squarely and unequivocally behind the appeal for the release of the hostages.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Top Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.

58. Telegram 1857 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 58. Telegram 1857 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 10, 1970, 0014Z.

Subj: Hijacking

1. Text of consensus Res as adopted unanimously:

“The Security Council,

“Gravely concerned at the threat to innocent civilian lives from the hijacking of aircraft and any other interference in international travel.

“Appeals to all parties concerned for the immediate release of all passengers and crews without exception, held as a result of hijackings and other interference in international travel.

“Calls on states to take all possible legal steps to prevent further hijackings or any other interference with international civil air travel.”

2. Text of statement to press by Amb Yost on SC action:

“The United States called for an urgent meeting of the Security Council to deal with the recent hijackings in the Middle East because we were determined to take every possible step to protect the lives of the innocent victims and because we felt that the Council had a responsibility to act when faced with this aggravation of the already serious situation in the Middle East.

As President Nixon stated in his address to the last General Assembly security the safety of air travel is an issue regarding which “there should be no national differences.”

“It was in that spirit that the Council acted today. We are deeply gratified that the Council decided to call for the immediate release of all passengers and crews without exception held as a result of hijackings. We trust that those to whom this appeal is addressed will pay heed to the unanimous voice of the principal organ of the United Nations, speaking I am sure for the whole community of nations.”

Yost

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified. Repeated to Algiers, Beirut, Bern, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Tel Aviv, USINT Cairo, the U.S. mission to Geneva, and the consulate in Jerusalem.

59. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 59. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Mid-Day Report on the Hijacking Situation

The following are the major developments since my memorandum to you this morning on the hijacking situation.

Negotiations

The PFLP has conveyed a provisional counter proposal to Rochat. You will recall that, with our encouragement, the British, Germans and Swiss all agreed to hand over the fedayeen in their custody only if all the passengers were released. The PFLP now proposes to permit the immediate evacuation of all the women, children and sick from the three aircraft (one report also says from the hotel) in return for the release of the fedayeen held by the British, Germans and Swiss (7 persons plus one corpse). The remaining male hostages would be released only in exchange for a yet unspecified number of fedayeen held by the Israelis. This counter proposal is to be confirmed this afternoon after clearance by the PFLP with all the splinter groups of the fedayeen. The PFLP now confirms that the deadline on its ultimatum is 6:30 p. m. EDT Saturday.

Rochat thinks that such an initial evacuation would be a positive step and would perhaps even assist in the negotiations for the men. He points out, however, that this would mean that the remaining male hostages would be used to exact from the Israelis the release of probably about 600 Palestinians. Our embassy in Tel Aviv comments that the Israelis will not necessarily oppose the proposal because of its humanitarian aspect and lack of discrimination by nationality or religion. The most important factor, however, may be the precise commitment required by Israel in releasing the fedayeen prisoners.

The ambassadors of western states involved, including the U.S., are meeting in Bern this afternoon to consider the counter-proposal.

Condition of Passengers

The condition of the hostages at the site of the aircraft has improved somewhat from yesterday with the arrival of further provisions and sanitation facilities. Health conditions are expected to improve further with the transport to the landing strip later today of additional Red Cross medical supplies and equipment. We are assured by the Red Cross that those passengers still on board the aircraft are physically well, although showing signs of strain and tension.

As for the passengers now in the hotel in Amman, their supply of comestibles is supposedly adequate for 10 more days and the utilities are still in operation. An earlier report that the hotel had fallen into the hands of the fedayeen has fortunately proved incorrect, although, of course, the fedayeen are still treating them as hostages for bargaining purposes. Some passengers from the BOAC plane that was hijacked yesterday have begun to arrive at the hotel.

Situation in Amman

Amman was reported by the embassy to be quiet and subdued this morning. Experience, however, has shown that if there is to be shooting it does not usually begin until middle or late afternoon. There was only the sparse and occasional shooting in Amman this morning.

Two embassy officers are still missing and presumably in the hands of the fedayeen. A third officer, earlier reported missing, has turned up unharmed and was only unable to contact the embassy yesterday rather than having been picked up by the fedayeen.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

60. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 60. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Evening Report on Hijacking Situation

The Negotiations

As you are aware from my mid-day report, the Palestinians have made a counter proposal to the Red Cross representative stating that they are willing to release the women, children and sick passengers in return for the release of the seven fedayeen held prisoners by the British, Germans and Swiss. The remaining male hostages, according to this offer, would be released in exchange for an as yet unspecified number of fedayeen held by the Israelis.

The purpose of this counter-offer was apparently to get the UK, Switzerland, West Germany and U.S. off the hook of discriminating against Israelis. It would also make non-Israeli nationals hostages for the Israeli-held fedayeen for the first time, thereby maximizing pressure on Israel.

Before that counter-proposal was discussed at a meeting of the five governments involved with the Red Cross this afternoon in Bern, Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Eban sent a private message to Foreign Minister Home to the effect that if the Americans, Swiss, British and Germans would continue to act together holding out for the release of all passengers, Israel would reconsider its position on release of some of its fedayeen prisoners. This is in sharp contrast to the hard line the Israelis are taking in public. Mrs. Meir may, however, have been paving the way for a change in the Israeli position when she said the situation had deteriorated to the point where the world could only “pay ransom and liberate criminals.”

At the meeting in Bern this afternoon, the Red Cross representative opened with a hard position against the Palestinian offer, terming it discriminatory. The U.K., Swiss and West German representatives then followed suit. Then the British representative turned to the Israeli and said that it is now time to know the Israeli position on the principal of exchanging fedayeen prisoners for the passengers. The Israeli representative said he was without instructions; he was requested to get instructions and return to another meeting of the group at 6 p. m. EDT this evening. The British will also request discussion this evening of a proposal to put a. UN force in the area near Amman where the hijacked planes are located.

Situation in Amman

The Jordanian government and the fedayeen central committee have arranged another cease-fire—the fourth this week. It seems to have held up fairly well throughout the afternoon and there have been no reports of heavy fighting. This could be a critical turning point since, [less than 1 line not declassified] this is the last agreement King Hussein intends to make. He reportedly believes that if this cease-fire agreement breaks down there would be no point in any further attempts to negotiate.

Another one of our missing embassy officers has turned up safe. He was returned to the embassy after being detained by the fedayeen. This means that only one U.S. official is still in the hands of the fedayeen.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

61. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon 61. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 11, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Mid-Day Report on Hijacking Situation

The following are the major developments since my memorandum to you this morning on the hijacking situation:

Negotiations and Passengers

The negotiations for the release of the hostages seem to have reached a critical stage. The fedayeen leaders apparently began to panic when the rumors of military intervention reached them this morning and began taking a series of uncoordinated decisions. There is considerable confusion in Amman and the situation appears extremely fluid, but here is the latest report from Red Cross representative Rochat: --“Fantastic tension” reigns at the PFLP headquarters and “we are seeing these people as they really are— angry and desperate.” He is trying to calm them and has made an appeal to reestablish the previous negotiating position and avoid reacting to rumors.

--He fully anticipates that the PFLP will take some action to demonstrate the seriousness of their intent. The PFLP will give him certain “warning measures” this afternoon.

--The three aircraft have been wired for bombing, but the passengers have been removed from them. The passengers are still, however, at the landing strip. Rochat is “nearly convinced” that they will not come to immediate harm and hopes to learn more about what can be done this afternoon.

--The PFLP has sanctioned the evacuation from Jordan of the passengers presently at the hotel in Amman with “no conditions” attached. A first group of 66 has already been evacuated by air from Jordan and are headed for Cyprus.

--The deadline on the ultimatum has been cancelled and no new deadline has been announced.

The Germans are again showing some indications of breaking away from the multinational approach. A high official of Chancellor Brandt’s SPD is reportedly to be sent to Amman to make contact with the PFLP. We are making a forceful representation direct to Chancellor Brandt, if possible, urging the Germans to desist from making any special deal and to recall his emissary or at least instruct him to deal only with Red Cross representative Rochat.

An earlier report of a further hijacking has proved false.

Situation in Amman

The cease-fire reached yesterday appears to be holding up fairly well so far. The situation is still very tense, however, and new fighting could break out at any time.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information. The memorandum is an unsigned copy.

62. Telegram 4591 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Embassy in Switzerland 62. Telegram 4591 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Embassy in Switzerland1

Amman, September 11, 1970, 1315Z.

Please pass Federal Political Department Bern

1. Your message received through Beirut could only be remitted to me in full yesterday due to heavy fighting in Amman ta Wednesday. Taking into consideration explosive political situation here and the fact that extremist Palestinian organization which holds planes and passengers or can only be minimally influenced by any government including Arab governments, I consider it useless at time being to contact Jordanian authorities or Arab League mission if still in Amman. As I suppose you have been informed by ICRC and other interested governments of present situation and conditions put by PFLP to Rochat, I consider essential to avoid further endangering lives of [garble] that there be abstention on any counter measures, military or others. According to Rochat’s opinion and to his latest discussions with PFLP leaders it is doubtful that the latter will accept compromise other than delivery in Amman of seven fedayeen plus body of killed man before evacuation of all women, children, and sick men from Jordan for which PFLP seems ready to give a written engagement

conditions for release of remaining being discussed at later date. It appears that in case of worsening situation in Amman such a solution would permit to evacuate this group on pure humanitarian reasons without discrimination of origin or religion. According to ICRC doctor, his medical team was ordered to leave immediately airfield during the night and supplies being brought this morning on trucks from second balair plane had to be returned to Amman. Moreover, according to information received by Rochat a short time ago, Palestinian Red Crescent Society has been ordered by PFLP to evacuate from this airfield to hotels in Amman all remaining passengers and crews. One can conclude that PFLP intends to blow up the three planes, starting with TWA plane. This transfer will create accommodation difficulties as hotels are already full. Although partial evacuation as described above against previous return of seven fedayeen may seem at a distance as giving up too easily to PFLP demands. I think that taking into consideration present conditions of passengers and local political situation which could worsen at any moment, this solution based uniquely on humanitarian grounds would avoid a much harder position of PFLP if not accepted. According to ICRC teams who have visited planes in last few days remaining passengers in SwissAir plane are reported well, taking into consideration conditions in which they have had to live. As nothing special reported on Caritas President, I suppose he is well. Shall report any further developments. Dubois sends.

Odell

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated immediate to Rogers.

63. Information Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State 63. Information Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, September 12, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Status of International Action Re Hijacking

At present there are United States initiatives in the following areas, in addition to attempts to free the hostages in Jordan and the Security Council action on hijacking taken this week: (i) Tokyo Convention. This convention provides interalia for the prompt return of the hijacked aircraft, passengers and crew. The ICAO Assembly and UNGA have passed resolutions urging States to become parties. ICAO Assemblies have also called upon States to put this provision of the Convention into effect even before becoming parties. The United States and 28 other countries are parties to the Tokyo Convention now. Argentina has just ratified but not deposited its instrument of ratification.

(ii) Hijacking Convention. A conference of governments is scheduled to begin December 1 at The Hague to consider the Legal Committee draft convention on unlawful seizure which provides for the extradition or punishment of hijackers. As drafted, it should have widespread acceptance. The June ICAO Assembly recommended the addition of an article providing for reports to the ICAO Council on seizure incidents, including disposition of the offender. In addition, in view of recent events some further strengthening may be possible, e.g., priority in extradition to the State of registration, presumption that hijacking is a common crime, clearer obligation to prosecute.

(iii) Other Acts Convention. The ICAO Legal Committee meets in London beginning September 29 to prepare a convention to punish acts of violence other than hijacking against civil aircraft. It looks like this convention will be largely patterned on the Hijacking Convention (in order to expedite action) but one open question is the kinds of acts, in addition to sabotage of aircraft which should be covered—for example, acts directed against airports serving international civil aviation.

(iv) ICAO Council Special Meeting. Upon release of the President’s message on September 11, we called for a special meeting of the ICAO Council for September 18. Preliminary discussion of an agenda identified the following items and U.S. positions; (a) Concerted action to terminate air services with countries that refuse to extradite or punish hijackers whose acts constitute international blackmail by (1) Council resolution and/or (2) new conventions to be examined at Legal Committee meeting. Enlargement of the agenda of the Legal Committee meeting in London to include matters in addition to the “other acts” convention, e.g., strengthening of the hijacking convention, sanctions, etc.

(b) Acceleration of State’s implementation of the security recommendations of the 1970 Extraordinary Assembly.

(c) Strengthening means for exchanging information and cooperation on surveillance techniques.

(d) Acceleration of the conference of governments merits on the hijacking convention.

(v) OAS Kidnapping Convention. Reports from the U.S. Representative at the Commission of Jurists indicate some sentiment by Latin countries to include hijacking In the acts of terrorism to be covered by the convention being drafted there. The effect of OAS action on the ICAO Convention and vice versa (inconsistencies) should be considered.

1 Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stevenson and Malmborg.

64. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon 64. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 12, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Afternoon Report on the Hijacking Situation

The following are the major developments on the hijacking situation since I informed you of the destruction of the aircraft this morning.

The Passengers

Our embassy in Amman is able to confirm that all of the passengers were off the hijacked aircraft when they were blown up and that none were apparently injured by the explosions. The PFLP has announced that all except forty of the passengers, have been released and are free to leave Jordan. The remaining forty hostages are identified in press reports as 23 Israelis or dual Israeli/U.S. nationals, including five Israeli women; 6 Swiss; 6 West Germans and 5 British nationals.

We do not know where the PFLP is holding the forty remaining hostages, although according to some reports they have been taken into the desert outside of Amman. The embassy, however, is able to confirm that the other passengers have arrived in Amman and plans are being made to evacuate them from the country as soon as possible. We have no reports of any additional evacuation flights today.

The Negotiations

There is still confusion as to precisely what demands the fedayeen are making at this point for the release of the remaining forty hostages. This stems in large part from the lack of any effective control over the fedayeen collectively or individually.

Just prior to the destruction of the hijacked aircraft the high command of the fedayeen movement modified their demands to read as follows: “a. Swiss citizens (with the exception of those listed below) and the Swiss aircraft would be released in return for the release of the three fedayeen held by the Swiss Government.

b. British citizens (with the exception of those listed below) to be released in return for the release of Leila Khalid and the body of her companion.

c. German passengers (with the exceptions listed below) will be released in return for the three fedayeen held in Germany.

d. All Americans (with the exceptions below) will be released.

e. Exceptions to the above are: six Swiss passengers, six UK passengers and six German passengers to be held as hostages until the respective fedayeen counters arrive in Amman. Israelis of ‘military status’ and dual nationals of ‘Israeli military status’ to be hostage pending agreement on the exchange of prisoners with the Government of Israel.”

In addition, the Red Cross representatives were informed that the fedayeen intention was “that the respective Governments should make a choice of hostages.”

On the basis of these demands, the Red Cross representatives told the fedayeen high command the Red Cross was withdrawing from its negotiating role and were leaving Amman immediately. They could not, said the Red Cross, negotiate the release of the hostages on a country-by-country basis. Later on a Red Cross representative told a joint UK-U.S.-German embassy meeting that the Red Cross would not be a participant in a “blackmail” deal or serve as an intermediary in deals with separate countries.

Our charge in Amman has persuaded the Red Cross representatives to stay on in Amman until the governments have had time to react and consult in Bern.

The charge notes that his impression is that the Red Cross move is partly tactical and they may hope it will pressure the PFLP—the controlling element of the fedayeen—into a more acceptable position. He feels, however, that as a result of this development the solidarity of the five powers may be coming apart, at least in Amman. The Germans especially seem nervous than before and Chancellor Brandt’s special emissary, despite our demarche, has arrived in Amman and has already been talking privately with the fedayeen leaders. The German charge, moreover, says he thinks that the presence of this individual signals an early German decision to go it alone. The Swiss, of course, are holding firm and are taking the position that no evacuation should take place at present.

Situation in Amman

As of late this afternoon Amman was quiet but tense. During the day there were only a few exchanges of light weapons fire. This may only, however, be the calm before the storm since King Hussein reportedly intends to bring sizeable units of the Jordan Army into Amman within the next several days to insure implementation of the cease-fire agreement. This decision, [less than 1 line not declassified] is based on two main considerations: (a) the fact that the army will not be satisfied with another paper agreement which is not implemented; and (b) the fact that Hussein does not believe, despite the present relative quiet, the fedayeen can or will satisfactorily implement the agreement.

Although he may have no alternative if he is to continue to rule, the obvious danger with Hussein’s plan is that it could very easily trigger the bloody and destructive showdown with the fedayeen that he has been trying so hard to avoid. [less than 1 line not declassified] the King’s chief advisers are cautioning him against such a drastic move in the expectation that the fedayeen can be induced and pressured to implement the recent agreement. But the King’s patience is almost at an end, and despite their efforts, they doubt he can or will compromise. He will have to consider—as last June—whether to hold his move until after all the hostages from the hijacked aircraft are released and evacuated from Amman, since otherwise their lives would be in danger.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

65. Telegram 149944 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, Jordan, Lebanon, and Israel, and the Consulate in Geneva 65. Telegram 149944 From the Department of State to the Embassies in Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, Jordan, Lebanon, and Israel, and the Consulate in Geneva1

Washington, September 13, 1970, 1908Z.

Subj:

Hijacking

1. It is time to take stock of where we stand on this problem. We have passed through Phase One when the possibility of a package deal involving all passengers and aircraft might have been feasible. Fact that all but 50 have been released, and split in fedayeen ranks, presents us with new situation. There is question of continuing ICRC role, possible role of GOJ in this situation, and possible eventual Israeli “contribution” to any solution.

2. The Palestinians seem still bent on moving towards a solution which splits the Europeans from the Israelis and Americans. The price for the European hostages has already been budgeted by the Europeans who will at early time recognize that their people are being used in an effort to obtain the release of Americans and Israelis. It will be increasingly more difficult to maintain a united front under these circumstances, though this is the all important and continuing objective of our policy as best way to secure release of all remaining hostages.

3. The U.S. [U.K.](Greenhill) has already indicated belief that the U.S. contribution to a solution would be to persuade the Israelis to give up Palestinian prisoners in order to complete the exchange.

4. It is evident that the Israelis recognize that they will have to participate (they have already indicated willingness to release two Algerians and some Israeli diplomats have hinted at something more). At the same time the GOI must maintain its stand on principle. It seems therefore that the Israelis will not act until (a) the Palestinians make precise demands, and in particular submit a specific list of fedayeen prisoners, and (b) they can cite overwhelming pressure (especially from U.S.) forcing them to take part in the exchange.

5. For the next day or so, we cannot know clearly how to proceed until some of the following elements clarify.

In particular we need to know: a. Precisely which prisoners the PFLP wish returned to Israel;

b. The security situation in Amman and the capacity of GOJ to be helpful;

c. The length of time the Europeans would be prepared to negotiate in common without breaking ranks;

d. Whether the ICRC will send its top-flight negotiator back to Jordan.

6. We must continue the prudent, cool approach we have thus far followed successfully. Unity of group continues to be essential as we await concrete demands of PFLP, and we explore whether GOJ can play increasingly helpful role. We should apply maximum pressures on ICRC to stay in picture; they cannot leave as we approach crunch. We have succeeded in getting 90 percent of the prisoners; next phase is no more political, or no more “outside ICRC” humanitarian mandate than previous phase. There has been no criticism anywhere of ICRC role.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Sisco and Beaudry, and approved by Sisco.

66. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon 66. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 13, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking Situation Report—10:30 a. m. Sunday Morning

This morning some 350 passengers were safely evacuated from Jordan leaving some 50-60 still in PFLP hands. What is the process this morning is the shaking out of a new and perhaps more difficult negotiating situation surrounding the remaining 50-60 hostages. At this point, the Red Cross may be re-engaging in Amman, but that is not yet clear. So far the Bern group is holding firm, though reports of a separate German deal continue.

The Passengers

All passengers released by the fedayeen have now left Jordan.

Some 50-60 passengers are not yet accounted for. Most of these are believed to be still in the hands of the PFLP as hostages.

Of those 50-60, 40 are American citizens.

Of those 40 Americans, 12 are dual nationals; 16-18 others are thought to be Jewish; 4 are U.S. Government employees.

Of the non-American hostages, 6 are Swiss; 6 are Germans; 6 or 7 are presumably British.

The Negotiations

The Red Cross last night reluctantly agreed to place its negotiating role in a state of “temporary suspension” until the Red Cross negotiators could return from Amman to Bern to meet with the five-nation group there. This morning, however, the negotiators sent a message saying that their departure from Amman would be delayed because of new developments. As of 10:30 a. m. EDT we do not know whether the Red Cross has been re-engaged in negotiations by the PFLP or not.

Following last night’s meeting of the Bern group, the focus has turned sharply to the question of a prisoner exchange between Israel and the PFLP. The PFLP has still not provided a list of the prisoners it wants from Israel, and Israel still adamantly refuses to agree to the principle of an exchange. Israel is, however, building counter pressures: It has informed the Algerian Government via the Swiss that it would release two Algerian officials it holds, and it has rounded up a large number of PFLP sympathizers who live on the occupied West Bank and in Gaza and who presumably have relatives in Jordan.

The British are still holding firm with the united insistence on a package deal but are pressing the Israelis hard to make a contribution to the prisoner exchange. There are press reports of a separate West German deal but no official confirmation.

The Situation in Amman

Amman remained relatively quiet this morning.

1 NationalSource: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

67. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) 67. Memorandum From Harold Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 13, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking—Late Afternoon Situation Report

Sunday continues to be a day of digesting the new situation and waiting for new information on it.

The next concrete action—barring the unexpected—will be a meeting of the Bern group sometime after midnight (Bern time). At this meeting, the Red Cross representatives just back from Amman will report. The U.S. representative will make a strong pitch for keeping the Red Cross engaged in the negotiations. We understand that the Red Cross president is already inclined in the same direction, although the recommendation of the vice president who has been in Amman may modify his stand.

The kinds of information we are seeking as a basis for next decisions are: --Exactly who are the hostages? [The Red Cross man was given a list by the Palestinians just before he left Amman. He should produce it at the meeting.]

--Where are the hostages and in whose custody are they? [There may still be a possibility, according to some reports, that the less militant Palestinians have access to them. Even Jordanian security forces may still be involved.]

--What are the fedayeen demands now? [For all the week’s talk, we have never had a precise formulation. The fedayeen said they would produce one when the Israelis accepted the principle of an exchange. But now the Palestinian Red Crescent is reportedly talking about some specifics. The Red Cross representatives may shed some light.]

--How long are the Europeans prepared to negotiate without breaking ranks? [The U.S. will press tonight for continuing the united stand.]

--How can we exploit the split in the fedayeen ranks?

One emerging piece of information that may come out soon is that the slain would-be hijacker of the El Al plane last weekend now appears to be an American by birth, although he was operating on a forged Honduran passport. This could be a complication in that his body is part of the deal already offered by the UK. If he is American, his next of kin has something to say about the disposition of the body.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret.

68. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon 68. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 14, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking Situation Report

There appears to have been little change in the situation since my memorandum to you yesterday morning. We are still in a period of uncertainty following the destruction of the aircraft, the withdrawal of the Red Cross from a mediating role and the apparent continuing confusion within the ranks of the fedayeen.

The Negotiations

The Bern Group met late last night with the Red Cross representatives who had just returned from Amman. Red Cross Vice President Freymond made the following major points to the group: -- His departure from Amman was a tactical maneuver intentionally designed as a “shock tactic” to demonstrate to all concerned that the Red Cross would not accept the PFLP approach.

-- The Red Cross would continue an active role in the situation. First, and on an urgent basis, it considered its task was to identify and trace the remaining hostages. The second major task is to clarify the conditions which the PFLP is demanding for the release of the hostages. In doing this, the Red Cross will use all pressure possible on the Jordanian Government as well as work with the PFLP and other fedayeen leaders. It will also work with the Palestinian Red Cresent organization.

-- None of the demands — even those stated most explicitly — received from the fedayeen so far can be considered binding or basic for negotiations.

-- The Red Cross will continue to transfer information between both sides and see what steps the governments would wish to take next. How it carries out this role, however, would depend upon its appreciation of the situation. For now at least, neither Freymond or Rochat will be returning to Amman and the mission of the Red Cross representative remaining in Amman consists solely of protecting the hostages and visiting them.

Our representative to the Bern Group comments that, although the Red Cross role is diminished, it is probably adequate for the job. Perhaps more importantly, Freymond’s expose has probably bought another 48 hours solidarity in the positions of the western powers.

The Israelis are still maintaining their hard line toward negotiating with the fedayeen. Last night Israeli Transportation Minister Peres went so far as to publicly state that if the remaining hostages are not released the use of force, in “the limited and more precise sense of the word,” could not be excluded. On Sunday the Israelis rounded up some 450 Arabs within their borders suspected of having connections with the PFLP. According to press reports, the Israeli strategy is to increase the pressure on the PFLP to release the remaining hostages.

The Passengers

We have little further information on the remaining hostages. All of the some 55 hostages (38 now believed to be Americans) are still believed to be in Amman. There are reports that several more hostages will be released today.

The Situation in Jordan

There have been no reports of fighting inside Jordan this morning. Yesterday, however, there reportedly was a major clash between the fedayeen and security forces in the northern part of the country.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings. Secret. Sent for information.

69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan and Switzerland 69. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan and Switzerland1

Washington, September 14, 1970, 1658Z.

Refs:

Bern 2248; Amman 4693, Amman 4708

We agree with Freymond and Amembassy Amman recommendation that Jordanian Government should be encouraged assume greater role in next few days. Specifically GOJ should be able, through its high-level contacts with PLO/Fatah as well as other Palestinian groups, to locate and verify identification hostages as well provide us with any info that may come to them re demands being made for their release. However, we feel strongly ICRC, as confirmed in last night’s Bern meeting, should be negotiating instrumentality. Is our wish to concert more closely with GOJ in this phase.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Scotes, cleared by Seelye, Davis, and Beaudry, and approved by Sisco. Repeated to Bonn, London, Tel Aviv, and USUN New York.

70. Memorandum From the Legal Advisor (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 70. Memorandum From the Legal Advisor (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 15, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Aircraft Hijacking—Special Session of ICAO

I have asked for a meeting with you this afternoon at 2:30 to discuss our initiatives at ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization). Charles Butler, Permanent U.S. Representative to ICAO, John Meadows, Director, Office of Aviation, Joe Sisco, John Rhinelander, Deputy Legal Adviser and I will attend.

The ICAO Council has scheduled a special Session on Friday, September 18, at 10 A.M. in response to our letter we sent to the President of the Council as directed by the President in paragraph 5 of his statement of September 11 (Tabs A and B, respectively). An interagency group has recommended that the only document the U.S. should submit in advance is a draft resolution calling for (a) joint action to suspend service and (b) preparation of a sanctions convention.

A draft resolution for adoption by the ICAO Council is attached (Tab C).

If approved by you, we would propose (1) to send a copy of the draft resolution to our ICAO office in Montreal immediately to begin informal discussions with ICAO Council members and (2) to cable the text to friendly capitals with ICAO Council members to enlist the stronget support possible. Even if the ICAO Council meets on Saturday, September 19, it is unlikely that any resolution will be adopted prior to the following week.

I would like to raise three issues with you this afternoon: (1) Whether our call for joint action to suspend service should be phrased so that it could apply to the present situation in the Middle East. The present draft could apply, for example, in the event the UAR fails to extradite or prosecute the hijackers who destroyed the PANAM 747 in Cairo and would also apply to Jordan if we were to conclude that Jordan was not taking appropriate steps to facilitate the release of passengers and crews still held.

(2) Whether the U.S. should attempt to have the ICAO Council Session public rather than private. The inter-agency group which has reviewed our proposed resolution strongly recommends that we seek a public session and that the statement of the U.S. representative, together with the text of the proposed U.S. resolution, be released to the press in Washington (probably on Friday).

(3) Whether a high level Presidential appointee from Washington should initially present the U.S. position in ICAO . While the presence of a representative from Washington probably will neither help nor hinder whatever success we might have in achieving a successful resolution in ICAO, it could be important for domestic reasons to indicate the Administration’s concern. On the other hand, the U.S. has never replaced its representative to ICAO for any Council session. If a representative from Washington were to make the initial statement, I believe it important that the follow-on efforts should be conducted by Mr. Butler.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Rhinelander. Copies were sent to Sisco and Meadows. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

71. Telegram 153122 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon and Other Posts 71. Telegram 153122 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon and Other Posts1

Washington, September 17, 1970, 2232Z.

Subject:

Special Meeting of ICAO Council re Aircraft Hijacking

Ref:

State 151211

Following are excerpts from statement which will be made by Secretary of Transportation Volpe in ICAO Council tomorrow. Do not release before 10 am, September 18.

Quote The USA requested last Friday that a special meeting of the Council be convened to respond to the most serious threat to international air transportation since its beginnings. President Nixon has described the threat of air piracy as an “international menace”—I doubt whether any of us here concerned with international aviation would disagree.

The Contracting Parties to the International Civil Aviation Convention have obligated themselves to ensure the safe and orderly growth of international civil aviation. This basic mandate is now threatened by criminal acts which threaten the lives and well-being of passengers and crew and international air transport as a whole.

It is imperative that ICAO respond promptly, decisively and effectively to this threat.

In the past, ICAO has sought agreement on collective actions based on the recognition that the vital interests of all states are affected by air piracy.

These past attempts, while significant, are not sufficient to meet the grave threat posed by recent developments. New and more drastic action is required. We have asked that this session of this council be open to the public to demonstrate to the world that ICAO will now generate an international response to air piracy—a cancer that requires swift and clean surgery—to assure the safety of international air travel.

In times of emergency, it is clearly necessary for Contracting States to adopt national programs to thwart certain threats presented by air piracy and international blackmail involving the detention of passengers and crew and destruction of aircraft. Many countries, including the United States, have taken such actions in the past few weeks.

President Nixon, in announcing one week ago a seven-point program which the United States would undertake, directed that several actions be started at once. For instance, he directed that specially trained, armed government employees be placed on US Flag carriers. He also directed US Flag carriers to extend the use of electronic surveillance equipment and other surveillance techniques at US gateway airports. He further directed the Secretary of State to consult with other governments and foreign carriers concerning the full range of techniques they use to prevent hijackings. These three programs are now underway.

However, while our government is taking action, it also seeks to establish a common front in the international community because it is through concerted action by that community that effective solutions can best be achieved.

The reasons for this heightened sense of emergency in the attitudes of our government ardour public are clear: —We have seen aircraft of four international carriers hijacked and destroyed and other attempts frustrated during the past two weeks. — We have seen—and still see—innocent airline passengers held as pawns in an international political struggle. — We have seen hijackers and crew members shot on board aircraft. —We have seen planes hijacked not only for political blackmail purposes but also by passengers seeking political asylum and for other reasons. —We have also seen delays and inconvenience to passengers and airlines caused by stringent security measures adopted at most of the international airports of the world.

We believe that the most important action that the Council should and can—in fact must—now take, is the acceptance and establishment of certain basic principles directed to effective sanctions. This should be the overriding goal of this meeting.

It is essential that the basic principles set forth in the Tokyo Convention and the draft Unlawful Seizure Convention be applied universally to be effective. However, there are at the present time no agreed-upon sanctions to enforce them. Further efforts by ICAO are now plainly required.

The United States believes that the principal action of this meeting should be the adoption of a resolution establishing the basis for application of sanctions where appropriate and has presented for your consideration a resolution for this purpose.

In order to avoid any misunderstandings, let me describe and explain briefly the resolution, paragraph by paragraph.

The first paragraph recites a finding of a heightened threat to the safety and security of international civil air transport. The principal—though obviously not the only—cause is identified as the detention for blackmail purposes of passengers, crew and aircraft and the failure of States to extradite or prosecute persons responsible for such acts.

We believe that hijacking for purposes such as seeking political asylum—no matter how dangerous and reprehensible—does not approach the threat to human life or criminality of hijacking of aircraft for international blackmail purposes. It is this latter practice which squarely challenges the obligations of ICAO members to take further action to ensure the safety of passengers and aircraft engaged in international air transport. It is to this threat that the second paragraph of the draft resolution is directed.

The third paragraph calls upon states to take joint action by suspending services to and from any state in two specific circumstances: —The first set of circumstances is the detention for international blackmail purposes by a State of passengers, crew and aircraft, contrary to Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention, after the unlawful seizure of an aircraft. —The second situation is the failure of any State to extradite or prosecute persons responsible for acts of unlawful seizure involving the detention of passengers, crew or aircraft for international blackmail purposes.

Let me make clear that this third paragraph of our proposed resolution is not self-implementing with respect to any particular situation. It is not intended to prejudge the existing situation. It is designed to establish agreement to the general principle that concerted, multilateral sanctions are appropriate in certain circumstances. It would require a triggering mechanism for international action—probably a request by an individual state—followed by concerted action of the international aviation community to implement the sanction of suspension of service.

This third paragraph cannot, and does not, create any finding legal obligation. However, it is intended to lay the basis for appropriate, concerted international action pending the entry into fore of a new convention calling for the application of sanctions.

The fourth paragraph directs the Legal Committee to extend its session scheduled in London later this month in order to draft a sanctions convention at that meeting.

As you will note, the general principles of sanctions convention as stated in the fourth paragraph of the resolution are identical to those recited in the third paragraph. We do not believe greater detail is needed at this time. The United States will be prepared to submit a draft sanctions convention, as a working paper, at the Legal Committee session in London.

We believe that a sanctions convention should be submitted to this Council by the Legal Committee as soon as possible and thereafter very promptly to a diplomatic conference.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Priority; Limited Official Use. Drafted by Gravatt and approved by Meadows (E/OA).

72. Telegram From the Department of State to the U.S. Mission to NATO 72. Telegram From the Department of State to the U.S. Mission to NATO1

Washington, September 17, 1970, 0152Z.

Subject:

CCMS: Aircraft Hijacks

Ref:

(A) USNATO 3292; (B) USNATO 3234

1. The U.S. will make a major presentation on the problem of aircraft hijacking and sabotage at the CCMS meeting Oct. 19-20. The President is highly desirous that everything possible be done to achieve the most effective level of international cooperation on this important subject and has approved a U.S. effort among our allies to gain their understanding and cooperation in this field.

2. We intend to brief our allies at the CCMS meeting on U.S. policy and practices with respect to international hijacking and aircraft sabotage. In this smaller grouping we hope it will be possible to achieve a higher level of cooperation and exchange of views than would be possible in the larger ICAO forum. Further, we will brief at the CCMS meeting member countries on specific techniques and methods to foil hijackers including exchange of experience and examine together possible cooperative activities aimed at upgrading the technical capabilities of concerned countries in deterring hijackers and other acts of violence against international aircraft.

3. It is our intention to gain the support of NATO member countries for U.S. -backed international initiatives, mainly in the ICAO including the drawing up of an international convention aimed at effective prosecution of persons responsible for acts of unlawful seizure of aircraft.

4. To underline the seriousness of this problem and the importance the President attaches to gaining the cooperation of our allies, Mr. John H. Shaffer, Administrator of the FAA, will personally attend the meeting, assisted by Mr. Charles O. Cary, Assistant Administrator, International Affairs, FAA, along with Department’s Legal Adviser or his Deputy, to conduct the briefing for the CCMS. In keeping with this Presidential initiative and the presence of high-level U.S. officials, we are requesting all of our allies to send to this meeting the highest possible policy-level officials in their countries concerned with this problem to participate in the discussion.

5. The U.S. will shortly telegraph to USNATO and embassies a short paper outlining our views on hijacking with respect to the topics outlined above. This paper should be circulated by USNATO to our allies with a request that it be given high-level attention and requesting appropriate attendance at the CCMS meeting.

6. The Ambassador should, at an early date, brief the Permreps on this subject and urge their support for this initiative. The Ambassador should stress that this special briefing and exchange of views is not meant to duplicate the work of ICAO but rather to supplement it and if possible achieve greater cooperation among our allies in this difficult field. The Ambassador should stress that this presentation was requested by the President in keeping with his desire that our allies be fully consulted on major issues affecting the international community. It is our feeling that this topic is appropriate for CCMS treatment since it relates to an area of high technology and is acutely felt among the industrialized countries of the Alliance given their very great dependence on international air travel.

7. With respect to publicity, we have no objections to it being publicly known that the CCMS will be discussing the hijacking problem, but it is our intention to maintain, in this case, the privacy of the actual discussions which will include descriptions of highly advanced detection techniques. These will be discussed on a confidential basis at the CCMS session.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals. Drafted by H. C. Blaney; cleared by Moynihan and Stevenson and DOT/FAA, OST, SCI, EUR, E/AV, and Behr in substance; and approved by Springsteen (EUR).

73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, and Israel 73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Jordan, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom, and Israel1

Washington, September 19, 1970, 0311Z.

Subject:

PM Meir Discussion of Hostages Sept. 18

Following excerpted from memcon Secretary-Mrs. Meir meeting morning Sept. 18. It is uncleared, NOFORN and FYI only, subject to revision on review.

1. Turning to hostage problem, Secretary said we were trying to keep our British, Swiss and German colleagues together. We did not know why they were so frenetic at times. Secretary noted that he and other Dept. officers had been recipients of middle-of-night calls from concerned diplomats. Mrs. Meir said US position had been very good, that we had held out beautifully. Israel had been asked what its contribution was. She said others seemed ready to contribute people who had tried to kill Israelis. Mrs. Meir described crimes against Israelis committed by fedayeen in British, German and Swiss hands. She said Swiss were good in this affair but Germans and British were awful.

2. Sisco said previous night there had been meeting in Bern and British had put forward draft communique. We have said there would be no partial deals. Our concern is greater that others may eventually want to go own way. British would have five countries including Israel say strongly it was question of total deal and that we as a group would consider what PFLP put forward provided it was a total deal. Israelis were familiar with fedayeen position that Israelis should hand over two Algerians and mixed bunch including Lebanese and agree in principle to release imprisoned fedayeen before fedayeen would give list those they wanted. This was pig in a poke. British communique would lay down position regarding total exchange. Sisco said he hoped Mrs. Meir would look at this proposal. Our concern was that if we could not proceed on unified basis there would be tendency toward separate deals.

3. Secretary said he wished state our position in detail. First, there would be no deal with fedayeen unless all hostages were given over. Second, we did not like idea of demand on Israel to accept in principle exchange of its passengers and would not accept this. Third, we were urging that Israel do nothing under pressure.

4. Mrs. Meir said British could not send out the girl (Lelia Khaled) without Israeli consent. Israel had treaty of extradition. It was question whether when hijacked, El Al plane was legally in British territory or Israeli territory. Sisco commented British communique would help avoid business of Israel committing itself to principle of exchange.

5. Mrs. Meir said she did not like make promises Israel did not intend to keep. Israel would not release these people. They are in jail because they are murderers who had blown up cafeteria and done other things. Israel would not be told later by world opinion that it had agreed to free these people. Secretary said he agreed with this. Now we are trying to avoid split in five. Mrs. Meir said she was not sure about the British but she was sure that the Germans would never agree to a separate exchange for their people, which left Jews still as hostages. This would be too much and they would not do it.

6. Secretary asked if Israelis had any information on where hostages were. Rabin said GOI did not. Mrs. Meir commented that she thought Israel agreed to the release of the ten Lebanese. Political Secretary Dinitz said GOI had announced the two Algerians would not be the stumbling block. There was uncertainty among Israelis in room that GOI actually had said it ready to give up ten Lebanese. Secretary suggested that Israel not say anything regarding Lebanese until it was sure of getting something in return. Secretary again emphasized getting together on some language to keep British and Germans calm.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by H. H. Stackhouse (NEA/IAI) on September 18, cleared by Atherton and Seeley, and approved by Sisco.

74. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) 74. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig)1

Washington, September 18, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking

Dr. Moynihan held a meeting on hijacking last Tuesday evening (15 September 1970). All of the interested agencies were represented, including DOD.

The purpose of the meeting was to convey the President’s desire to use the NATO Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society (CCMS) as one forum among others in which to attack the problem of hijacking.

Administrator Schaffer (DOT/FAA) and Legal Adviser Stevenson (State) reported the current status of the on-going efforts to combat air piracy.

The group consensus favored the NATO/CCMS initiative with no major reservations. OST is preparing a paper which will serve as the basis for discussions at the CCMS meeting of 19-20 October.

Attached at Tab A is a cable to our NATO Mission which provides additional detail.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A was attached but not published.

75. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts except Gaborone, Maseru, Mbabane, and Moscow 75. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts except Gaborone, Maseru, Mbabane, and Moscow1

Washington, September 21, 1970, 2244Z.

Montreal for US Rep ICAO

Subject:

Special Meeting of ICAO Council on Aircraft Hijacking

Ref:

State 151211 and 152430

1. ICAO Council considered in open meeting Sept 18 US proposal for concerted ICAO action to suspend air services to States which for international blackmail purposes detain passengers, crew and aircraft after a hijacking or fail to extradite or prosecute hijackers. Secretary of Transportation Volpe’s statement (STATE 153122) received with great deal of interest. Canada presented draft resolution containing its proposal for amendment of bilateral air transport agreements to implement sanctions. US draft resolution will be considered first when Council next discusses subject on September 29.

2. Preliminary reaction from Governments represented on ICAO Council indicates some confusion on US objectives and general feeling that sanctions may well be desirable but pose certain difficulties.

Missions are urged to draw on info previously furnished in following up earlier representatives.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Repeated to the Consulate in Montreal for US ICAO. Drafted by Meadows and Gravatt, cleared in IO and L, and approved by Meadows.

76. Briefing Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin 76. Briefing Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin1

Washington, September 28, 1970.

Subject:

Hijacking US Initiative in the ICAO Council BRIEFING MEMORANDUM

You have agreed to meet today with the Ambassadors of France and the Federal Republic of Germany on the subject of hijacking. The United States has made a proposal in the ICAO Council for sanctions to be applied where States either detain passengers for blackmail purposes or fail to extradite or prosecute hijackers responsible for such actions.

We understand that France and the FRG are opposed to the US proposal because of their relations with the Near East. We have instructed our Ambassadors to countries represented on the ICAO Council to deliver a note (Tab B), if possible to the respective Foreign Ministers, urging support for the US proposal. You may wish to urge the French and FRG Ambassadors to impress upon their Governments the need for supporting the US proposal, drawing on the talking points at Tab A.

The Deputy Legal Adviser, Mr. John B. Rhinelander, and the Director of the Office of Aviation will be present during your meetings.

Tab A

TALKING POINTS

1. President Nixon is very seriously concerned with recent acts of hijacking which involve international blackmail. He has announced a 7-point program to deal immediately and effectively with the menace of air piracy. One of these points called on the international community to take joint action to suspend international airline services with States which either detain passengers for international blackmail purposes or fail to extradite or prosecute hijackers involved in such acts. Tomorrow a special meeting of the ICAO Council is meeting to consider a United States proposal to this effect. While we are making representations to all the countries represented on the ICAO Council, in view of the President’s concern we are making special representations to France (FRG) because that government is understood to oppose the United States proposal.

2. You may wish to express the hope that the Government of France (FRG) will respond favorably to this United States initiative despite possible difficulties that the proposal may cause all of us. The essential concern here is that hijacking for international blackmail purposes is such a serious danger to the safety and security of international civil aviation that it transcends other considerations. It is for this reason that President Nixon has suggested the severe remedy of economic sanctions. We would hope that due to these overriding circumstances, the Government of France (FRG) would lend its support.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Meadows and cleared by Rhinelander and Hillenbrand. Attached but not published at Tab B was a proposed note.

77. Telegram 5465 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 77. Telegram 5465 From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 30, 1970, 1210Z.

Subj: Hijack List

1. At 1215 local September 30, UAR Second Secretary turned over list of names of detainees to be released as quid pro quo for release hostages. Names being sent septel.

2. Interlocutor made following points as arguments for compliance with fedayeen demands this subject: A. He (the interlocutor) who spoke in name of Fedayeen Central Committee said that if demands are met fedayeen movement will give word of honor that there will be no future hijackings.

B. Number of detainees to be released is 56—same as number of hostages released. German, Swiss and British Governments have already announced willingness to release “seven.” GOI has agreed to release Algerians.

C. Ten Lebanese plus two Algerians are not members of fedayeen organizatlons. Total number of fedayeen to be released is 44.

D. Interlocutor stressed that if demands are met, this would be strong weapon to use in convincing fedayeen that goal can best be reached through negotiation. frustration of this effort might have opposite effect—i.e., that escalating violence is only way to achieve results.

3. Embassy comment: We are skeptical about value of pledge re no future hijackings. At same time, public statement eschewing such activity would be of such obvious value that efforts to obtain it worth considerable risk. Although interlocutor hardly in position to speak for fedayeen movement, we must give him credit for qte bringing home the bacon unqte on final hostage release.

Brown

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Flash. Repeated to Tel Aviv, Bern, Bonn, London, and Geneva.

78. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Rhinelander) and Deputy Assistant for Transportation and Telecommunications (Rein) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan) 78. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Rhinelander) and Deputy Assistant for Transportation and Telecommunications (Rein) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)1

Washington, October 9, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Air Piracy Follow-on International Action Following Adoption by ICAO Council of US Resolution

Adoption by the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) of a somewhat modified version of the US proposa1 calling for joint sanctions against states participating in hijackings for international blackmail purposes or failing to extradite or prosecute their perpetrators constitutes a significant advance in our diplomatic effort to deter future acts of this kind. This memorandum describes measures the Department proposes to take in order to maintain the international momentum achieved through the ICAO resolution.

By its recognition that all states were obligated to act against hijackings for international blackmail purposes by observing the principles of Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention (return of the passengers, crew and aircraft) and Articles 7 and 8 of the draft convention on unlawful seizure of aircraft (extradition or prosecution of offenders), the Council clearly served notice that states could not avoid their responsibilities by failing to adhere to these conventions. Equally important, in recognizing the possibility of action against offending states, the Council provided a recognized international framework for future US action to cut off services and to persuade others to join us. It is worth noting that most of the major civil aviation countries supported the Council’s action.

To drive home the image of the Council action, and to emphasize need to follow through with an effective international convention, we recommend that the President sign attached (draft) letter (Tab A) to the President of the ICAO Council, making it and the text of the ICAO Resolution (Tab B) a White House press release. The wide publicity such a release would generate would help inform the American public of the Administration’s continuing efforts against hijacking while indicating to foreign nations the President’s continuing concern and his interest in effective action. The President’s August 13, 1970 letter to the President of the ICA0’s Council commending ICAO on its declaration against unlawful interference with civil aviation provides an appropriate precedent for this channel of correspondence.

As noted in the proposed letter, the Department has prepared a draft convention (Tab C) to implement the princip1es of the ICAO Resolution which we are tabling in the ICAO Legal Committee now meeting in London. This commotion would have the following features: a) An agreed premise that hijackings for international blackmail purposes and acts of sabotage which damages aircraft or kills or injures passengers is a threat to aviation that requires concerted action by all states directly affected.*

b) Consultative procedures and a framework for determing failures by a State to meet their international obligations in two cases, detention of passengers, crew or aircraft for international blackmail purposes and failure to take into custody, and thereafter extradite or prosecute, hijackers involved in blackmail and saboteurs causing serious harm.

(c) Decision-making machinery to take joint action, including suspending air services, is binding on States upon vote by a majority.

While the convention may appear “tough” to other governments, you should be aware of several important points. First, even if ratified by some states, a convention cannot bind states not party to it to take joint action. Second, while the draft convention is designed to deter air piracy by making states live up to their international obligations, unfortunately the underlying obligations are full of loopholes. For instance, in many cases the laws of a particular state (limited jurisdiction of their criminal laws, exceptions in bilateral extradition agreements) are legally inadequate to deal with the extradition or prosecution of aircraft hijackers or saboteurs, and the key multilateral treaties in the extradition/prosecution areas (Unlawful Seizure and Unlawful Interference Conventions) have not yet been finally negotiated. Third, since we do not expect any obvious “target” state will likely become a party to the draft convention, the convention cannot dispose of the legal arguments raised by many states (including Canada, our strongest supporter) that their bilaterals with “target” states would prevent them from suspending the airline services of the “‘target"” state. Our attempt to dispose of this argument will probably not be accepted as valid by many.

In summary, we are tabling draft convention which we believe appears comprehensive, fair and tough. However, appearance and posture may be more important at this time than any immediate expectation that an effective sanctions convention will come into effect.

On another front, several states (notably the Philippines, Japan and the Netherlands) have inscribed a hijacking item on the calendar of the United Nations General Assembly. We are actively engaged in efforts to direct this initiative toward a resolution supporting the ICAO initiative.

While it it almost certain that there will be efforts to talk our proposal to death at the legal committee meeting and that enthusiasm for the full scope of our Draft will be limited, we believe that given the added thrust of a Presidential letter and the recent efforts of Secretary Volpe there may, nevertheless be an opportunity for progress at the ICAO legal committee meeting.

To obtain optimum tactical benefit from the Presidential letter, we believe it could be desirable for it to be reIeased to the press at 9:00 A.M. on Monday, October 12. We would have this followed up with background material at the “noon-briefing” at the Department of State.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Joseph A. Silberstein (E/AO/AVP) and Rein and cleared by Rhinelander. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

* Sabotage is not covered by the ICAO Resolution, but is an equally serious threat to civil aviation. Similarly, we would have no objection to broadening the provisions of the proposed convention to cover all failures to prosecute or extradite in hijack cases if this proved tactically feasible.

79. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan) 79. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)1

Washington, October 31, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Possible Actions Against Countries Which Are Uncooperative on Hijacking

As we agreed, my staff has prepared from their own resources the attached memorandum on the possible sanctions we might impose on countries which are uncooperative on hijacking. I recognize that the product is insufficient for your purposes, but I believe we must tap outside sources if we are going to get a more comprehensive paper.

Accordingly, I am asking the NSC Under Secretaries Committee to develop a complete package by November 13.

Attachment

SANCTIONS AGAINST COUNTRIES WHICH ARE UNCOOPERATIVE ON HIJACKING

Checklist

Jordan

Receives US economic and military assistance.

Syria

No leverage except through international forums associated with air travel.

Lebanon

Receives US military and economic assistance.

US air carriers land regularly at Beirut.

UAR

We are engaged in an effort to reschedule the Egyptian debt.

Algeria

No leverage except through international bodies.

North Korea and Cuba

We have already severed all financial and trade relations under the Trading with the Enemy Act.

Other Sanctions

… Agreement by US and foreign air carriers to boycott certain airports or take other action associated with air travel through various international forums (ICAO, LATA, pilots’ associations, etc.).

… Refuse to grant Eximbank loans.

… Embargo all exports to a country under the Export Administration Act.

… Economic boycott similar to that against Rhodesia.

… Restriction of passports for travel.

DISCUSSION

The following are countries which have been uncooperative in punishing hijackers or in releasing planes or passengers:

Jordan. The most notorious case of hijacking recently was in Jordan; here the question was not the intention of the Government, but its ability to control the guerrillas.

Syria in September 1969 held for several days all passengers on a hijacked TWA aircraft. They then released non-Israeli passengers and Israeli women and held the handful of Israeli men until they were finally included in a broader UAR-Israel prisoner exchange arranged by the Red Cross. The Syrian government released the hijackers.

Lebanon. The Lebanese have been involved in several hijacking cases, either as a transit point or, in one instance, as the final destination. In almost every case there have been indications of official-inspired laxity in accepting the hijacked aircraft and/or attempting to capture and prosecute the hijackers. Pan American Airways, after the recent hijackings threatened to stop landing in Beirut, and the Lebanese Government has instituted new security procedures.

The UAR should not be placed fully in this category. The UAR Government immediately released all passengers from the Pan Am 747 blown up in Cairo in September. They apprehended the hijackers and still have them in prison. They may falter when it actually comes to sentencing the hijackers, but it is too soon the make that judgment. Cairo for a time closed its airport to hijacked aircraft.

Algeria. Algeria has been less active recently in the hijacking business; but sometime ago it held Moshe Tschombe until his death and also some Israeli victims of hijacking.

North Korea. North Korea has not been involved in many cases, but it did hold the hijacker of a Japanese plane while allowing the plane and passengers to return to Japan. (Somewhat the same is the treatment given hijackers from Communist countries in Germany and Austria; though both states often prosecute the hijackers, they give very light sentences.)

Cuba. Cuba has now become one the best-behaved of the hijacking states, since it immediately allows the planes and passengers to return and often jails the hijackers. It recently returned its first hijacker, and offered to return all hijackers provided we would do the same (a commitment we cannot make because of the political asylum aspect).

Appropriate Sanctions

In deciding which economic weapons to use in hijacking cases, we need to decide first whether we are acting only in cases involving U.S. citizens and aircraft, or whether we are speaking of more general action.

The cases of both Lebanon and Jordan raise the question of whether pressure on governments is an answer. Here the governments are ineffective because of civil strife, and foreign pressure is easily likely to make it harder for these governments to cooperate.

In the case of Lebanon, the Pan American Airways threat to stop landing at Beirut had some effect, and there is no reason why similar sanctions should not be applied provided there is broad international support so that US carriers will not be exploited by those of other flags.

As far as other sanctions are concerned against Lebanon, the U.S. faces a dilemma. On the one hand, everything that can be done to prevent hijacking should be done. On the other, the U.S. has a major interest in buttressing the responsible government of Lebanon against Syrian-backed radical guerrilla groups that operate in Lebanon—as much to undercut the government as to operate against Israel. In the broad political context, the U.S. is providing military and economic assistance to Lebanon in order to help the government contain the radical Palestinians. It is these Palestinians who perpetrate the hijackings. So cutting off aid or trade would run directly counter to the U.S. assistance to the government in controlling these radical groups.

The way to deal with the problem in Lebanon is to apply pressure through the international groups and the carriers in ways directly related to air travel and then to work with the government in providing the capacity to restrict guerrilla activity.

In Syria, the 1969 TWA hijacking experience showed that the U.S.—without even, diplomatic relations — has no leverage-to use against Syria except for those pressures that can be generated through the international forums associated with air travel (ICAO, IATA, pilots). Boycotting Damascus airport was seriously considered in the 1969 hijacking case, but the idea was dropped because U.S. carriers would have been hurt when other governments and non-US carriers refused to go along.

The choice of sanctions also depends upon whether they are unilateral sanctions or whether there is wide international cooperation. Multilateral sanctions are the only effective economic means of pressure, since the United States is not sufficiently important as an external trading or financial partner of the above countries to give us decisive influence through multi-lateral economic measures.

We have proposed in the ICAO a resolution which calls upon member states to take joint action suspending all air connections with states detaining passengers, crew or aircraft for international blackmail purposes, or which fail to extradite or prosecute hijackers. We are also calling for rapid completion of a treaty to accomplish the same ends. These proposals amount to a joint boycott using civil air weapons.

However, even these proposals have been resisted by a number of states, and it is by no means certain that our proposals will prevail. There is much less chance of a multilateral agreement using boycott weapons beyond the civil air field. (Several nations have told us that they would support our proposals at some other time, but that they are unwilling to join an effort which, in view of recent happenings, would be interpreted as anti-Arab.)

There are a number of unilateral actions we could take. However, our importance to these countries is so small that U.S. action alone could not be decisive, though it could be highly annoying to the countries involved. By using instruments outside the civil air field, we would be declaring ineffectual economic war; costing ourselves business to no end other than the marginal gains of a moral stance on the issue; and thus subordinating our entire foreign policy to the hijacking incident.

Of the countries listed above, Jordan and Lebanon are recipients of U.S. aid or arms sales, and we are engaged in an effort to reschedule Egyptian debt.

Another possibility of action would be to cut off loans from the Export-Import Bank, but these are not large for the countries concerned, and the damage in lost export sales would be heavier to us than to the purchasing country.

The main instrument of economic boycott available to the U.S. Government is the Trading with the Enemy Act. This Act has allowed us to sever all financial and trade relations with China, North Vietnam, North Korea, Cuba and Rhodesia. Somewhat similar authority under the Export Administration Act allows us to embargo all exports to those destinations. (Restriction of passports for travel accomplishes the same thing in a more limited field.)

Use of either of these instruments is the equivalent of economic war. No major industrial power uses any instrument of this intensity with the exception of those countries adhering to the Rhodesian boycott. However, though there would be a great symbolic significance in use of these two Acts, the practical effect on the countries concerned would be relatively small and we would be leaving as hostage whatever American investment exists in these countries.

Where American investment in these countries is larger than their holding of assets in the United States, as it is in most, we would lose more than we would take, in a reciprocal confiscation of assets maneuver.

The chances of effective action are better if we continue to pursue the multilateral civil air boycott possibilities, at least until we have thoroughly exhausted them.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials. NSC Files, Box 331, Subject Files, Hijackings II. Secret.

80. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee 80. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Council (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee1

Washington, October 31, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Possible Actions Against Countries Which Are Uncooperative on Hijacking

You will recall that the President, in his September 11 statement on air piracy, said the U.S. would hold those countries in which hijacked planes are landed responsible for taking steps to protect the lives and property of U.S. citizens.

This seems an appropriate matter for the Under Secretaries Committee. Will you please have prepared a package which should include the following subjects: …a list of those countries which have been or might be expected to be uncooperative in this regard;

…an indication of the full range of possible multilateral and bilateral sanctions we might use against each country in this event, including such things as airline rights, trade sanctions, actions on loans, etc.

We would like to have this package by November 13.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. No classification marking.

81. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ethiopia and 38 Other Posts 81. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ethiopia and 38 Other Posts1

Washington, November 2, 1970.

Montreal for US Rep ICAO

Subject:

Washington Conference on International Air Transportation Security, January 11-13, 1971

1. Addressee missions are requested extend following invitation to their host governments to participate in Washington Conference on International Air Transportation Security, January 11, 12, and 13, 1971:

QUOTE I have the honor to extend to your government on behalf of the Secretary of Transportation, John A. Volpe, and the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, John H. Shaffer, of the United States Government an invitation to participate in an International Air Transportation Security Conference to be held in Washington, D. C. on January 11, 12 and 13, 1971. The Conference will be devoted primarily to (1) exchange of information on implementation of specific security specifications and practices, (2) procedures for exchanging intelligence information with respect to threatened or potential acts of hijacking or sabotage, and (3) review of the state of research and development in the field of weapons and explosives detection, including identification of possible areas of cooperative research and development projects.

It would be appreciated if we could be informed, at an early date, whether your Government will be able to accept this invitation and, if possible, the number and identity of your representatives. UNQUOTE

2. In extending this invitation addressee missions are requested to make known to host governments USG’s particular interest in their attendance at this Conference, as States providing major international air transport services and/or international airport facilities.

3. Missions are requested to stress that Conference is in no way intended to derogate from the responsibilities of ICAO but should be viewed as an effort to promote implementation of recommendations already made by that Organization. Although November 1970 had originally been mentioned as the month the conference would be held, it was later found that January 11013, 1971 were more suitable dates.

4. An early report on reaction of host governments to this invitation, together with indication of whether it will be accepted and number and identity of participants, is important. If the question is raised, missions may inform their host governments that personnel from their national airlines and international airports on their delegation would be appropriate.

5. A detailed agenda and possible request for papers on specific subjects from some participants will be forwarded after receipt of information on attendance.

6. FYI Identical invitations being extended through US missions to most other governments which are members of ICAO, but those missions are being asked to present invitations in low key and not repeat not stress US interest in attendance of those governments at this conference. END FYI

FOR DAKAR: Request Embassy, in transmitting invitation to Senegal, suggest twelve Air Afrique nations may find it convenient to designate one or small number of persons to represent them jointly at conference in accordance ABIDJAN 3288. Similar request being made to US missions in other Air Afrique countries in connection extension invitations mentioned in para. 6.

FOR BERN: This invitation is not repeat not being extended to Cuba.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Brasilia, Melbourne, Montreal for U.S. ICAO representative, Karachi, and NATO. Drafted by Gravatt (E/OA/AVP) and R. P. Boyle (FAA), cleared in ARA, EA, EUR, NEA, OIC, AFI, and by Silberstein.

82. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon 82. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon1

Washington, December 7, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Possible Actions Against Countries Which are Uncooperative on Hijacking

The Under Secretaries Committee has prepared the enclosed memorandum in response to Dr. Kissinger’s request of October 31. Section I of the memorandum lists by category those countries which have been or might be expected to be uncooperative in taking steps to protect the lives and property of United States citizens when’ hijacked planes are landed there. Section II indicates the full range of possible multilateral and bilateral sanctions we might use against such countries. Section III analyzes the actual situation in a number of specific countries to indicate the concrete problems which will be posed in using these sanctions in any particular instance.

Both the Department of Defense and the JCS feel that the study is deficient with regard to “political-military implications” as indicated in Mr. Packard’s attached memorandum to me. The Committee has assumed, however, that an analysis of possible military sanctions was not called for at this time. We have, therefore, dealt only with non-military sanctions.

Our general conclusion is that while the United States could apply bilateral economic sanctions against a number of uncooperative states, such application is likely to be costly and may not substantially affect such states’ behavior. While economic sanctions can hurt, politically motivated behavior can usually withstand substantial pain. In the case of some states, such as North Korea, North Vietnam and mainland China, there are no bilateral sanctions available short of military action. Multilateral sanctions which would combine economic and political pressure may be more helpful, but will have to overcome the general reluctance of most Western European countries to become involved in the actual implementation of sanctions.

The Under Secretaries Committee believes that we should concentrate our efforts in this field in continuing to urge the states involved in particular cases to take effective action, even before new treaties are in effect. We should also continue our efforts to create a more effective international legal framework. As you know, we are now working to establish by treaty an international legal obligation to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs and an international legal framework for the imposition of multilateral sanctions, including the suspension of air services.

John N. Irwin II
Chairman

Enclosure

Possible Actions Against Countries Which Are Uncooperative on Hijacking

SECTION I - Dimensions of the Problem

In our view, the actual or potential failure of a state to cooperate to protect the persons or property of US citizens after a hijacked plane lands involves factors beyond that state’s anti-US political orientation or ideology. To understand these failures, one must examine both the actions of states which have participated in or condoned similar behavior (regardless of whether US citizens or property were targets) and the reluctance of other states to aid in the development and implementation of the strong international aviation legal framework which the President considers necessary to deter and to levy sanctions against this type of behavior. States responsible, in varying degrees, for these failures might be divided into five groups.

A. States where hijacked aircraft landed and in which US passengers have been unreasonably detained or US property destroyed with state _participation or with no action taken against identified participants in the act. These states include (as explained in more detail in Section III), Jordan, UAR,* Lebanon, Syria and, in one recent instance, Cuba. Cuba has, however, normally cooperated in protecting US lives and property and returning them without delay.

B. States where hijacked aircraft landed and in which non-US passengers have been unreasonably detained or non-US property destroyed with state participation or with no action taken against identified participants in the act. These states include Cuba, Algeria, which unlawfully detained an Israeli aircraft and some Israeli passengers, and Turkey, which held a small hijacked Soviet aircraft, and has also yet to complete action against two Soviet hijackers who killed a crew member and injured two others. North Korea has held for almost a year an ROK civilian passenger aircraft, several passengers and the crew.

C. States which have espoused “revolutionary” causes and which, valuing-these causes above the accepted standards of international aviation, might find it attractive to cooperate with revolutionary hijackers or at least find it difficult to take action against such hijackers. Arab states such as Iraq, Libya and the Sudan may fall into this category; other “third world” states in Asia and Africa such as Pakistan and Tanzania may be sympathetic to “anti-Zionist” or “anti—imperialist” exploits or to revolutionary actions directed against South Africa, Rhodesia or Portugal; leftist Latin American states including Peru, Bolivia and Chile as well as Cuba may be sympathetic to anti-US gestures. Communist China, North Korea and North Vietnam are likely to be uncooperative in the event of a hijacking, but this will depend, in any particular case, on whether they see an advantage to be gained by being flexible. The situation is aggravated in the case of Communist China by the fact that it was not invited to The Hague Conference.

D. States not actual or potential direct threats to US citizens or property but which have resisted US efforts to develop effective legal instruments to deal with hijacking. France, protecting its political ties with third-world states, has been active in opposing US international initiatives. Belgium and the Scandinavians, while not overtly hostile, have not been enthusiastic in support.

E. States which, while supporting international joint action to enforce hijacking obligations in theory, are reluctant to bear any political or economic costs for achieving this objective. In this category, we might include West Germany, the United Kingdom, other European states and Japan. While the attitude of the USSR remains to be tested in practice, it is probable that it would fit into this category.

SECTION II- Possible Sanction Actions

A. Multilateral Sanctions 1. ICAO

The ICAO Council resolution of October 1 called for consultations upon request of a contracting state, to determine what joint action, including suspension of civil air services, should be taken in accordance with international law in the event (a) hijacked passengers, crew or aircraft are detained by a state for “international blackmail purposes,” contrary to the principles of Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention, or (b) a state refuses contrary to the principles of Articles 7 and 8 of the draft unlawful seizures convention, to extradite or prosecute hijackers involved in such blackmail cases. It should be noted that the resolution calls only for consultations, not automatic sanctions. It is recommendatory only and not legally binding on members of ICAO. Nevertheless, it does provide a framework for seeking joint action including multilaterally applied suspension of air services.

If we are successful in obtaining adoption and significant ratification of the draft sanctions convention we have proposed, this could be a more effective instrument for seeking multilateral sanctions.

2. UN

While we could in theory seek a UN Security Council resolution calling for imposition of mandatory sanctions against an offending state or states along the lines of SC resolutions 232,253 and 277 on Southern Rhodesia (concerning severance of diplomatic, consular, trade and other relations), this is little more than a theoretical possibility. Such action under Chapter VII of the UN Charter would require a finding of a threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression, and it is unlikely that there would be much support for such a finding based on a hijacking incident, even one as serious as the recent case involving the holding of hostages in Jordan. Action of a recommendatory nature, which would not require such a finding, might still meet considerable resistance and would add little to the basis for action already contained in the ICAO Council resolution of October 1. Either type of Council action would be subject to veto by any one of the five permanent Council members (United States, United Kingdom, France, USSR, Republic of-China).

3. Embargo on International Financial Agency Assistance

We would have to be able to marshal a majority of the voting strength in the IBRD (and IDA) and in the IMF to block approval of loans or IMF standby assistance to target countries. We have only 24 percent voting power in these agencies. We could, however, use our influence to block or delay action and we might be able to get the support of some of the leading industrial states, who have important voting power in these institutions, on loans to countries who demonstrate a record of consistent uncooperativeness on hijacking.

In the case of soft loans in the Inter-American Development Bank we have veto power, and we are able to influence the consideration of specific projects at the “hard” window, but cannot unilaterally block loans if IDB management chooses to proceed despite US opposition. In the Asian Development Bank we and the Japanese are the dominant stockholders. With Japanese cooperation we can exert considerable leverage on loan decisions.

4. Private Boycotts

International private groups, such as IFALPA (the association of airline pilots) ASTA (travel agents), and IFTW (transport workers), have frequently shown a disposition to take boycott action in connection with particularly aggravated hijacking cases. They have generally held back, in the belief that governments should be given a chance to deal with the situation. An indication from the United States, or other responsible governments that such action would be favored might very well lead to the imposition of boycotts of states that are uncooperative in dealing with hijackings.

B. Bilateral Sanctions

1. Aviation Services

Where a state demonstrably fails to take proper action under the Tokyo Convention or in the circumstances foreseen in the ICAO Resolution on “international blackmail” hijacking, we believe we would be within our legal rights to suspend all air services to and from such a state, whether or not we have a bilateral air transport agreement with that state. We believe the same legal arguments could be adduced even in instances of “non-blackmail” hijacking.

2. Travel

We could refuse to validate US passports to a particular country. While this might not legally cut off travel, it would undoubtedly discourage tourism.

3. Trade

a. Total Embargo on all Trade Relations

This would require invoking the “trading with the enemy act.” The case would be weak and subject to challenge in Court; though lower courts, at least, have been willing to pay great deference to the Executive judgment on such questions. A new proclamation expressly linking hijacking to national security, would be helpful.

If the target country were a GATT member, in the absence of a UN sanctions resolution, we might have considerable difficulty in justifying such action under the “security”, or any other, exception and we might either seek a waiver from GATT or elect to ignore GATT. (We did not seek a GATT waiver for our action against Cuba, nor have the Cubans ever challenged us on this in GATT.)

Where we have a bilateral trade agreement, or FCN Treaty, with the target country, the problems would be similar.

b. Denial of M-F-N Concessions

No existing authority would justify such action in response to a failure to take appropriate action to curtail hijacking. Specific legislative authorization would be required unless we could label a country as communist, or cite independent trade actions by the target country justifying retaliation.

Similar GATT and’ treaty ‘considerations as in a. above would obtain.

c. Denial of Import Quotas

--Denial of import quotas on long staple cotton would require legislative action.

--If the President finds that a sugar quota is not in the national interest he may suspend it.

--Reduction or elimination of petroleum import quota’s would probably require a finding by OEP that such action is required on security grounds.

--Cotton textile import quotas might be reduced to a limited extent by terminating or failing to renew existing bilateral agreements. Where no bilateral agreement exists, new quotas could be imposed if consistent with the criteria of the LTA. Imposition of quotas on participants or non-participants at lower levels than permitted by the LTA could be challenged in the courts by interested importers as outside the President’s domestic legislative authority to carry out the LTA.

Such restrictions might give rise to GATT and bilateral agreements problems similar to those mentioned under a. above.

d. Export Control

In addition to authority under the Trading with the Enemy Act, broad or partial limitations on US exports to the target country could be instituted under the Export Administration Act and the Munitions Control Act by citing security or foreign policy grounds. Such limitations might be attacked in court on the ground that protection against hijacking is not the kind of foreign policy objective that can be enforced under these Acts.

Such restrictions might give rise to GATT and bilateral agreements problems similar to those mentioned under a. above.

4. Financial Assistance and Military Aid

We can, of course, unilaterally decide whether or not to extend Export-Import Bank loans, guarantees and insurance, AID grant or loan assistance as well as PL 480 sales, or military aid to a target country.

In regard to the Interest Equalization Tax levied on foreign borrowing in the United States and on purchases by US citizens of foreign bonds and notes, a developing country might be taken off the exempt list if statutory notification procedures are followed; however, such action would not find support in the purposes of the Interest Equalization Act. We could also put a developing country in a more restrictive category under the Foreign Direct Investment Controls on US direct investment abroad, but this action would similarly be outside the purposes of the FDIC program. In both cases, actions could probably be brought to test the validity of the action involved.

SECTION III - Possible Target Countries and Consideration of Action that Might be Taken

A. Cuba

Since 1962, almost sixty planes of US registry have been hijacked to Cuba and over fifty planes of other registry. It is noteworthy — well nigh miraculous — that to date neither a life nor a plane has been lost in these hijackings, although death or serious injury resulted from abortive hijacking attempts. US registered planes and their passengers have generally been returned promptly from Cuba. In many instances the hijacker has been jailed or otherwise given harsh treatment by the Cuban Government, to the point where 21 eventually left Cuba and were returned or turned themselves in for prosecution in the United States. We have been discussing with Cuba, through the Swiss Embassy in Havana, an arrangement for the return of hijackers, excluding those seeking political asylum. Cuba, however, continues to be regarded as a goal or haven for potential hijackers. This is particularly so in cases where the hijackers claim revolutionary motivation. The Castro Government continues to value its image as a model for revolutionaries and is unlikely to deal harshly with hijackers who act out of what Cuba views as political motives. As long as this is so, the danger of death to US citizens or destruction of-property will be present.

On October 21,a Costa Rican plane was hijacked to Cuba. In this instance the hijackers, apparently Central American extremists, threatened the lives of American citizens unless other Central Americans in jail in Costa Idea were released. The jailed extremists were released by the Costa Rican Government almost immediately. However, the passengers were detained for over five days in Cuba. The plane was held for 20 days and only released on provision of a guarantee for $65,000 in charges. There are no indications yet of any intent to prosecute or extradite the hijackers. While it may be difficult to prove a case of detention of the passengers, this was clearly a case of hijacking for international blackmail purposes.

If the Cubans take no action against the hijackers of the costa Rican plane, there would be a clear basis for invoking the ICAO Council Resolution of October 1. We have urged the Costa Ricans to seek extradition or prosecution in Cuba and have indicated we propose to follow up with Cuba. Costa Rica has this question under consideration. We could, as a second step, urge the Costa Ricans to call for consultations with Spain, Czechoslovakia and the USSR whose airlines serve Cuba, as well as Mexico to which the Cuban airline flies, and Portugal, Canada and France which extend technical landing rights to the Cuban airline. We could urge these states that provide civil air services to Cuba to consider suspending their services. We cannot be sanguine as to the cooperation such an approach would elicit. The Czechs and the Soviets would be unlikely to take an action hostile to Cuba despite their hard and loud demands that hijackers should be extradited. The Mexicans are already angered by the Cubans’ lack of response to their requests for extradition of hijackers of Mexican aircraft and might cooperate. Spain may resist. She values her trade with Cuba and her airline’s aviation business with Cuba. Portugal and possibly Canada might be willing to terminate the technical landing rights they provide Cuba.

B. Lebanon

The Government of Lebanon has as yet not acted to take into custody the Arab guerrillas who participated in the destruction of the PAA 747 by passing on explosives when the hijackers forced the plane to land at Beirut airport. Also, the Lebanese have just given a mild sentence (three years reduced to the actual nine months imprisonment served while awaiting trial) to a Frenchman (Belon) who hijacked a TWA plane to Beirut in January. 1970. (It should be noted, nevertheless, that Western European countries which have prosecuted hijackers from Eastern Europe have also dealt out light sentences and, presumably, not all the sentences will be served.)

If the Government of Lebanon takes no action against the conspirators in the PAA 747 dynamiting, we would have grounds for invoking the ICAO Resolution of October 1. However, to be effective, a suspension of civil air services to Lebanon would have to be-widespread since Beirut is served by a broad spectrum of foreign civil airlines.

Bilateral trade sanctions would offer only modest leverage on Lebanon. Exports to the United States are small (about $10 million per annum) representing only about 5 percent of the country’s total exports. On the other hand, Lebanon has been purchasing about $90 million per annum from us. Our bilateral assistance program has been running at only modest levels. We provided only about $7.5 million in PL 480 sales and $100,000 in MAP assistance in FY 1970. Recent Export-Import Bank activity has alsobeen low, although in FY 1969, Export-Import Bank loans, guarantees or insurance involving Lebanon totalled over $50 million, mainly for aircraft.

Travel restrictions might have greater leverage. Tourism has long been important to Lebanon’s balance of payments. Lebanon’s tourist industry has already been suffering since the destruction caused by the six-day war in 1967 and successive military flare-ups in the Middle East since then. Although declining, US tourists entering Lebanon have been in the range of 50,000 per annum.

We have a bilateral air transport agreement with Lebanon and recently agreed to a cargo route for Lebanon air carriers to the United States. We have not yet provided the certification for a Lebanon carrier on this route.

We must, of course, recognize that any action we might take to sanction Lebanon would run counter to what has been our general approach of seeking to bolster this relatively moderate Arab regime, which faces a serious internal problem with the Arab guerrillas. Sanctions imposed by the United States and other Western States, against Lebanon, could seriously affect our efforts to bring about a Middle East settlement.

C. UAR

In the past, the Government of the UAR has acted cooperatively, with regard to the treatment given passengers, crew and plane, in instances where a US plane has been hijacked to Egypt. In the case of the PAA 747 destruction on the ground in Cairo on September 7, although the hijackers were taken into custody, no move to prosecute them has been made. The UAR has also permitted the departure of Leila Khaled, who participated in the hijacking of and serious damage to a US plane hijacked to Damascus in August of 1969 and was also involved in the abortive hijacking attempt on September 6 of an El Al plane.

If the UAR takes no action against the hijackers who destroyed the PAA 747 plane, we would have grounds for invoking the ICAO Resolution of October 1. We have suggested to the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Swiss (members of the “Bern Group” of countries) that they make independent and coordinated approaches to the UAR, as well as to Lebanon and Jordan. To be effective, the denial of civil air services would have to be widespread. The UAR is served by a long list of East and West European airlines, as well as African and Arab airlines.

If we were to attempt bilateral sanctions, we could not seriously affect the UAR economically and could only open the door to economic retaliation such as counter-embargo and action against oil companies.

US trade with the UAR is at only modest levels and the balance is in our favor. In 1969, we sold the UAR $67 million and bought $38 million. Included in our purchases have been long-staple cotton, considerably reduced from earlier years, and crude oil, almost exclusively company owned (Standard of Indiana). We recently concluded a bilateral cotton textiles agreement with the UAR under which the UAR can ship us about $5 million per annum on textiles.

Other than a few scientific research projects, we have no assistance programs with the UAR, nor are we currently providing Export-Import Bank loans.

We have a bilateral air transport agreement under which TWA serves Cairo (of marginal commercial value). The UAR has landing rights in New York, but has not exercised them. UAR earnings from US tourists are estimated at $5 million annually.

Again, sanctions against the UAR, the key Arab State, insofar as a Middle East peace settlement is concerned, would have repercussions adverse to attainment of this objective.

D. Jordan

There has been no indication that the Government of Jordan has made any effort to take into custody the fedayeen involved in the hijacking and destruction of the three planes blown up at Dawson Field on September 14.

If Jordan takes no action against the hijackers who destroyed the aircraft at Dawson Field, we would have grounds for invoking the ICAO Resolution of October 1. We have no direct civil air services with Jordan. However, Jordan is served by the Dutch, Soviets, Italians and several Arab states. Jordan airlines also fly to Greece, Turkey and Germany, as well as to nearby Arab states.

Our imports from Jordan are insignificant. However, our exports have been running at as much as $70 million per annum. Over the years 1946 to 1970 we have provided about $214 million in military assistance to Jordan. During FY 1970 our assistance program consisted Of only about $1.6 million in technical assistance, $600,000 in PL 480 sales, and $210,000 in MAP assistance. Plans for 1971 involve increased aid. Tourism, once important, has been cut to very low levels as a result of the 1967 war and subsequent disturbances and civil war.

In the case of Jordan—and also Lebanon—sanctions might put us at cross purposes with our efforts to bolster the regime in its dealings with the fedayeen. Were we to impose sanctions against Jordan, our efforts to bring about a Middle East settlement could very well be wiped out.

E. Syria

In August of 1969, Arab guerrillas hijacked a TWA 707 to Damascus. After passengers were disembarked damage estimated at from $3 to 5 million was wreaked on the plane. Although most of the passengers were allowed to leave, two Israeli passengers were held for an extended period. While the hijackers were taken into custody there has never been any indication they, were actually prosecuted. In fact, Leila Khaled, one of the hijackers, surfaced this year as a participant in the attempted hijacking of the El Al plane.

Bilateral Syria-US trade is very small nor has there been any US tourism to Syria of any significance since 1967. We do not provide Syria with economic and military assistance.

We have a bilateral air transport agreement with Syria, but it does not provide for a Syrian route to the United States. Pan Am makes a weekly stop at Damascus. The Syrians have made it clear that unless we continue to provide some air service to Damascus, they will not permit US planes to overfly their country. Pan Am places great value on these overflight rights, an important link in its round-the-world flights. It also would be useful to TWA to be able to overfly Syria.

F. France

Our various initiatives in ICAO to develop international legal instruments to deal with hijacking have not always obtained widespread cooperation. Most recently, and most egregiously, the French, perhaps determined to maintain their ties with Arab and other third world countries, were particularly uncooperative with respect to our efforts to obtain adoption of the ICAO resolution on “international blackmail hijacking” and to promote consideration of our draft convention on sanctions. They have also proposed a number of weakening amendments to a draft UNGA resolution on this subject. The question of French cooperation on a specific case may arise, should Belon, the French hijacker, recently freed in Lebanon, return to France and should we elect to request his extradition.

We have a bilateral air transport agreement with France under which the French have recently called for consultations. We can anticipate they will ask for additional landing rights. We doubt that they have a case and would be unlikely to extend them new rights even absent our concerns on hijacking. We could show our displeasure by refusing to meet with them. However, we are obligated under the bilateral to consult when requested.

We, of course, have extensive trade and financial relations with France as we do with all leading industrial states. However, we doubt these could afford us opportunities to take action against France. Inevitably, action would give rise to counter action, with a potential spiraling effect that could have broad political as well as economic implications. Moreover, we are co record against taking trade action affecting France for other than trade reasons.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret.

* The UAR has taken the hijackers of the PAA 747 into custody, but it is not clear whether they will be prosecuted.

83.Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of State 83.Telegram From the Embassy in the Netherlands to the Department of State1

The Hague, December 16, 1970, 1330Z.

USUN for Stevenson Montreal for USRep ICAO

Subject:

Final Text of Hijacking Convention

Ref:

State 203473

Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft

Preamble

The states parties to this convention

Considering that unlawful acts of seizure or excerise of control of aircraft in flight jeopardize the safety of persons and property, seriously affect the operation of air services and undermine the confidence of the peoples of the world in the safety of civil aviation:

Considering that the occurrence of such acts is a matter of grave concern:

Considering that, for the purpose of deterring such acts, there is an urgent need to provide appropriate measures for punishment of offenders:

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

Any person who on board an aircraft in flight: (A) unlawfully, by force, or threat thereof, or by any other form of intimidation, seizes, or exercises control of that aircraft, or attempts to perform any such act, or

(B) is an accomplice of a person who performs or attempts to perform any such act commits an offence (hereinafter referred to as “the offence”),

Article 2

Each contracting state undertakes to make the offence punishable by severe penalties.

Article 3

1. For the purposes of this convention, an aircraft is considered to be in flight at any time from the moment when all its external doors are closed following embarkation until the moment when any such door is opened for disembarkaton. In the case of a forced landing, the flight shall be deemed to continue until the competent authorities take over the responsibility for the aircraft and for persons and property on board.

2. This convention shall not apply to aircraft used in military, customs or police services.

3. This convention shall apply only if the place of take-off or the place of actual landing of the aircraft onboard which the offence is committed is situated outside the territory of the state of registration of that aircraft; it shall be immaterial whether the aircraft is engaged in an international or domestic flight.

4. In the cases mentioned in Article 5, this convention shall not apply if the place of take-off and the place of actual landing of the aircraft on board which the offence is committed are situated within the territory of the same state where that state is one other than the state of registration of that aircraft.

5. Notwithstanding paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article, Articles 6, 7, 8 and 10 shall apply whatever the place of take-off or the place of actual landing of the aircraft, if the offender or the alleged offender is found in the territory of a state other than the state of registration of that aircraft.

Article 4

1. Each contracting state shall take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offence and any other act of violence against passengers or crew committed by the alleged offender in connection with the offence, in the following cases: (A) when the offfence is committed on board an aircraft registered in that state;

(B) when the aircraft on board which the offence is committed lands in its territory with the alleged offender still on board;

(C) when the offence is committed on board an aircraft leased without crew to a lessee who has his principal place of business or, if the lessee has no such place of business, his permanent residence, in that state.

2. Each contracting state shall likewise take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offence in the case where the alleged offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite him pursuant to Article 8 to any of the states mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article.

3. This convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in accordance with national law.

Article 5

The contracting states which establish joint air transport operating organizations or international operating agencies, which operate aircraft which are subject to joint or international registration shall, by appropriate means, designate for each aircraft the state among them which shall exercise the jurisdiction and have the attributes of the state of registration for the purpose of this convention and shall give notice thereof to the international civil aviation organization which shall communicate the notice to all states parties to this convention.

Article 6

1. Upon being satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, any contracting state in the territory of which the offender or the alleged offender is present, shall take him into custody or take other measures to ensure his presence. The custody and other measures shall be as provided in the law of that state but may only be continued for such time as is necessary to enable any criminal or extradition proceedings to be instituted.

2. Such state shall immediately make a preliminary enquiry into the facts.

3. Any person in custody pursuant to paragraph 1 of this Article shall be assisted in communicating immediately with the nearest appropriate representative of the state of which he is a national.

4. When a state, pursuant to this Article, has taken a person into custody, it shall immediately notify the state of registration of the aircraft, the state mentioned in Article 4, paragraph 1 (c), the state of nationality of the detained person and, if it considers it advisable, any other interested states of the fact that such person is in custody and of the circumstances which warrant his detention. The state which makes the preliminary enquiry contemplated in paragraph 2 of this article shall indicate whether it intends to exercise jurisdiction.

Article 7

The contracting state in the territory of which the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever, and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of that state.

Article 8

1. The offence shall be deemed to be included as an extraditable offence in any extradition treaty existing between contracting states. Contracting states undertake to include the offence as an extraditable offence in every extradition treaty to be concluded between them.

2. If a contracting state which makes extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty receives a request for extradition from another contracting state with which it has no extradition treaty, it may as its option consider this convention as the legal basis for extradition in respect of the offense. Extradition shall be subject to the other conditions provided by the law of the requested state.

3. Contracting states which do not make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offence as an extraditable offence between themselves subject to the conditions provided by the law of the requested state.

4. The offence shall be treated, for the purpose of extradition between contracting states, as if it had been committed not only in the place in which it occurred but also in the territories of the states required to establish their jurisdiction in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 1.

Article 9

1. When any of the acts mentioned in Article 1 (a) has occurred or is about to occur, contracting states shall take all appropriate measures to restore control of the aircraft to its lawful commander or to preserve his control of the aircraft.

2. In the cases contemplated by the preceding paragraph, any contracting state in which the aircraft or its passengers or crew are present shall facilitate the continuation of the journey of the passengers and crew as soon as practicable, and shall without delay return the aircraft and its cargo to the persons lawfully entitled to possession.

Article 10

1. Contracting states shall afford one another the greatest measure of assistance in connection with criminal proceedings brought in respect of the offence and other acts mentioned in Article 4. The law of the state requested shall apply in all cases.

2. The provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article shall not affect obligations under any other treaty, bilateral or multilateral, which governs or will govern, in whole or in part, mutual assistance in criminal matters.

Each contracting state shall in accordance with its national law report to the Council of the International Civil Aviation organization as promptly as possible any relevant information in its possession concerning: (A) the circumstances of the offence;

(B) the action taken pursuant to Article 9;

(C) the measures taken in relation to the offender or the alleged offender, and, in particular, the results of any extradition proceedings or other legal proceedings.

Article 12

1. Any dispute between two or more contracting states concerning the interpretation or application of this convention which cannot be settled through negotiation, shall, at the request of one of them, be submitted to arbitration. If within six months from the date of the request for arbitration the parties are unable to agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice by request in conformity with the statute of the court.

2. Each state may at the time of signature or ratification of this convention or accession thereto, declare that it does not consider itself bound by the preceding paragraph. The other contracting states shall not be bound by the preceding paragraph with respect to any contracting state having made such a reservation.

3. Any contracting state having made a reservation in accordance with the preceding paragraph may at any time withdraw this reservation by notification to the depositary governments.

Article 13

1. This convention shall be open for signature at The Hague on 16 December 1970, by states participating in the International Conference on Air Law held at The Hague from 1 to 16 December 1970 (hereinafter referred to as The Hague Conference). After 31 December 1970, the convention shall be open to all states for signature in Moscow, London and Washington. Any state which does not sign this convention before its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article may accede to it at any time.

2. This convention shall be subject to ratification by the signatory states. Instruments of ratification and instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America, which are hereby designated the depositary governments.

3. This convention shall enter into force thirty days following the date of the deposit of instruments of ratification by ten states signatory to this convention which participated in The Hague Conference.

4. For other states, this convention shall enter into force on the date of entry into force of this convention in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, or thirty days following the date of deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession, whichever is later.

5. The depositary governments shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding states of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession, the date of entry into force of this convention, and other notices.

6. As soon as this convention comes into force, it shall be registered by the depositary governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations and pursuant to Article 83 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago, 1944).

Article 14

1. Any contracting state may denounce this convention by written notification to the depositary governments.

2. Denunciation shall take effect six months following the date on which notification is received by the depositary governments.

In witness thereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly authorized thereto by their governments, have signed this convention.

Done at The Hague, this Sixteenth day of December, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Seventy, in three originals, each being drawn up in four authentic texts in the English, French, Russian and Spanish languages.

Middendorf

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified; Immediate. Repeated to USUN and the Consulate at Montreal with a request that the Department pass to FAA, DOT, CAB, and Justice.

84. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 84. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 24, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, Recommended for Submission to the Senate

There is enclosed for signature by the President a message transmitting to the Senate for advice and consent to ratification the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague December 16, 1970.

The Convention, directed toward alleviating the increasingly serious global threat to international aviation posed by aircraft hijacking, is designed to ensure the prosecution of hijackers no matter where a hijacking takes place or a hijacker is found. A State which becomes a party to the Convention will be required to submit the case of a hijacker to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution if it does not extradite him.

The Convention has the support of all interested agencies in the Executive Branch. The Department anticipates Senate approval without serious opposition, but we recognize that some question maybe raised regarding our hijacking policy as it affects political refugees.

Implementing legislation is being prepared for submission to the Congress and should be ready shortly; however, it is not necessary to delay submission of the Convention until then.

The Department would appreciate being informed when the Convention is about to be submitted to the Senate, so that all signatories since the international conference, particularly some expected Arab countries, can be indicated in press guidance.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. Drafted by Sylvia Nilsen.

85.Letter From Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of Transportation Volpe 85.Letter From Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of Transportation Volpe1

Washington, July 23, 1971.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

This is to confirm arrangements we discussed the other day by telephone for closer coordination between the Departments of State and Transportation on hijackings of international commercial aircraft.

When such an event takes place, the Operations Center in the Department of State immediately begins close surveillance of the situation and alerts representatives from the geographic bureau or bureaus concerned, as well as our aviation office in the Economic area. In addition, Jack Irwin, Bill Macomber and I are informed and one of us is always available for such direction as is necessary. If the gravity and complexity of events so dictate, a task force may be organized, physically located in the Operations Center, comprised of the representatives I have mentioned, to coordinate action until resolution of the episode.

Recognizing your Department’s interest in these matters, I propose that our Department Operations Officer alert General Benjamin Davis whenever an international hijacking occurs or whenever it appears that a domestic hijacking is evolving into an international incident. General Davis would be informed who is directing action for the Department and would be notified immediately if a formal task force is organized in order that Department of Transportation representatives might be provided. I believe these measures will meet your requirements. If you agree, I suggest that a member of your staff contact Mr. Theodore Eliot, our Executive Secretary, to work out appropriate details.

I should note that hijackings directly to Cuba are normally handled by our Coordinator for Cuban Affairs directly with the Cubans through the Swiss Embassy. We have had no problems with this arrangement, so that these incidents are never likely to require establishment of a task force. We will, however, keep your Department informed on these cases, as we have in the past.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the letter.

86. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to the Associate Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Carlucci) 86. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration (Macomber) to the Associate Director of the Office of Management and Budget (Carlucci)1

Washington, June 10, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Western Airline Hijacking

It now appears doubtful that the Algerians will expeditiously return Western’s $500,000 and unlikely that they will punish or extradite the hijackers. These circumstances combined with the recent Czech hijacking, the Tel Aviv affair, and the boycott threat by IFALPA create an urgent requirement for action and a favorable international atmosphere for high level positive consideration of means for dealing with menaces to civil aviation security.

This morning, Under Secretary Johnson firmly stated our position to the Algerian charge. He indicated that we were now beginning to consult broadly with other nations on ways to deal with the overall problem of aviation security illustrated in the Western case (see attached telegram). This is the final bilateral approach we intend to make to Algeria before we instruct all posts to inform their host governments that we now intend to seek broader international action. We do not, however, exclude additional contacts with the Algerians.

We are now planning to pursue immediately an international action program aimed at three specific goals: (a) Establishing formal international machinery to deal with future failures to punish hijackers or return planes, crews, passengers or property;

(b) Affirming the commitment of all nations to take necessary unilateral measures (including physical security measures) to make international aviation secure; and

(c) Bringing international diplomatic pressure to bear on Algeria to resolve the Western case and exploring the possibility of a (government or private) boycott of air services.

Certain preliminary steps toward each of these goals have already been taken. These steps and our proposed further actions, are summarized below:

A. Establishing Formal International Machinery to Deal with Future Failures to Punish Hijackers or Return Planes, Crews, Passengers or Property.

In October 1970, ICAO passed a US resolution acknowledging the right of ICAO states to consult together to take actions, including the suspension of air services, against a state which failed to extradite or prosecute persons committing a hijacking for blackmail purposes. Since that time, the US and Canada have been seeking to establish a sanctions convention which would create implementing machinery for this resolution and would give clear warning to states in Algeria’s position that their actions could be reviewed and dealt with internationally in relatively short order. Our efforts have been resisted by a number of countries, most actively the USSR and France.

We believe that the present circumstances, including IFALPA’s express endorsement of the US-Canada approach may give us an opportunity to get the sanctions convention moving in ICAO. We have instructed our ICAO representative to seek support for this approach and have prepared an implementing resolution (see attached telegram). To give priority to this approach, two further steps will be required.

(a) We must disassociate our approach from a similar sanctions endeavor by Israel based on the Tel Aviv incident. Express connection with Arab-Israel politics will almost certainly spell defeat. To this end, we would seek to have Israel withdraw its proposal to ICAO or, alternatively (and less desirably) seek to have our resolution heard first. We are prepared to discuss this matter with the Israelis in Washington and Montreal on Monday morning.

(b) We must make strong high level approaches to ICAO council members likely to be sympathetic in principle but concerned with their Arab relations. These states would include the UK, France, Germany, Japan, Belgium and Italy. We would also plan to coordinate with the Soviet Union and work with Czechoslovakia.

There is no guarantee that this effort would succeed, but we may never have a better chance to try it. The consequences of failure are somewhat mitigated by the fact that this is a standing rather than new, U.S. initiative. Also, we could fall back to a resolution calling for a special ICAO council meeting to consider implementation of the October 1970 resolution.

B. Affirming the Commitment of All Nations to Take Necessary Measures to Make International Civil Aviation Activity Secure.

We are actively exploring the possibility of placing the weight of the Security Council behind international cooperative efforts to ensure the safety of international civil aviation. In order to avoid a contentious Arab-Israeli debate on the LOD incident, which would probably force the Soviets and Chinese to oppose our proposal, we are working to develop support for a statement which could be endorsed by the Council without a formal meeting or debate.

We have, therefore, approached the Soviet delegation in New York with a view to developing a consensus resolution which would avoid the political aspects of recent hijacking incidents but express concern over and condemn the threat to lives stemming from hijacking or other interference with international civil aviation, call on states to take measures to suppress such acts and prosecute those who commit them, and to expand and intensify cooperative efforts in this field.

If we can obtain a consensus on this essentially hortatory statement, it should facilitate our task of moving ICAO and the international community to place into effect the existing conventions and move toward a convention which would invoke sanctions against offending states. It should also help if we decide now or later to seek cooperative sanction action outside the ICAO framework.

Perhaps influenced by the commitment in the US-Soviet declaration and the recent hijacking incident from Czechoslovakia, the Soviet delegation has appeared receptive. We should have their response by Monday, June 12. If it is favorable we should have a good chance to obtain SC action on a consensus statement by the middle of the week. We informed the UK delegation of our proposal and their initial reaction seemed favorable.

C. Bringing International Diplomatic Pressure to Bear on Algeria to Resolve the Western Case and Exploring the Possibility of a (Government or Private) Boycott of Air Services.

We have already requested our posts in countries having air connections with Algeria (including France, Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia) to seek the assistance of those countries in resolving the Western case. By Monday we should know how much assistance we can expect in terms of diplomatic pressure. We could attempt to increase this pressure by a more public or wider effort but this might be counter-productive since it might dig the Algerians in harder and not impose a substantial cost deterrent on “revolutionary” states.

IFALPA (International Federation of Air Line Pilots Associations) has called for a boycott of air services to and from Algeria by its members as well as a secondary boycott of those continuing to fly to Algeria. ALPA (American Pilots Association) strongly supports this initiative and we have not quarrelled with it in the way in which we have opposed the idea of a worldwide shutdown. We could continue to encourage this private initiative either by a public effort to secure the same result on a governmental basis or by private encouragement. A boycott, while perhaps creating short term political intransigence, would hurt and would substantially deter future actions of this kind. An IFALPA boycott was threatened at the time of the release of an El Al plane held by Algeria in 1968. On the other hand, any boycott which seems to be inspired by the US Government runs the risk of Arab countermeasures against US interests.

If we were to pursue a boycott on a government basis, we could do so in an ad hoc meeting convened under the October 1970 ICAO resolution. We would not seek to convene such a meeting unless: a) There was sympathy for action on the part of a number of states serving Algeria; and/or

b) We believed that the public and IFALPA pressure stirred by such a meeting would obtain meaningful results; or

c) Despite the possibility of failure, we wished to underline USG concern.

With respect to invitees, we could either: a) Limit the meeting to states serving Algeria and the US as aggrieved party, or

b) Add other states with a major interest in international air transportation, e.g., Canada, Japan, UK, Netherlands, or

c) Broaden the consultations to include states interested in the Czech hijacking (i.e. those serving Germany) and reduce the focus on Algeria.

William B. Macomber, Jr.
Deputy Under Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 331, Hijackings II. Secret. Johnson’s telegram to the Algerian chargi is attached but not published.

87. Memorandum From Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 87. Memorandum From Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 13, 1972.

SUBJECT:

International Efforts to Stop Air Piracy

The following is to bring you up to date on recent activities generated by the newest acts of air piracy.

The Lod Airport massacre along with the recent hijackings of a Czech airliner to West Germany (by 9 Czechs who killed the pilot) and of a Western Airlines jet to Algeria (by two Americans with $500,000 in “ransom money”) have touched off renewed international efforts to stop air piracy. The International Federation of Air Line Pilots Associations (IFALPA) has warned that it will stop world air service on June 19 unless effective action against air piracy is taken. Our own pilots (American Air Line Pilots Association) have endorsed IFALPA’s stance. In addition to tightening up existing domestic procedures for screening airline passengers, we are seeking more effective international action to prevent hijacking.

Security Council Action. The pilots associations have called for Security Council consideration of the hijacking problem. However, this is the wrong forum for serious action because the Arab-Israeli question could too easily polarize the Council, and, in any case, the veto will preclude anything but the blandest of resolutions. We are in fact asking the Soviets to go along with a toothless consensus resolution. If they do, which is still problematical, we will still have to get other countries like the PRC and France on board.

Action on Air Piracy Conventions. More significant action could come in the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) whose Council is now meeting in Montreal. We are seeking to use the present climate to gain support for a sanctions convention — an old objective — which would, among other things, provide for the suspension of commercial airline services to states which fail to extradite or prosecute certain air pirates. Until now, the USSR and France have opposed such sanctions, which are strongly favored by the airline unions.

We are also mounting a diplomatic campaign seeking wider adherence to two existing conventions:

The 1970 Hague Convention requiring the extradition or prosecution of hijackers has been signed by 81 states. We are encouraging states to ratify rapidly. We ourselves have done so, and we should soon have implementing legislation.

The 1971 Montreal Convention seeks extradition or prosecution of all airline saboteurs. So far, it has only 39 signatories. State is speeding up our own request for Senate advice and consent (not yet submitted).

The Algeria Case. The Algerian Government is taking its time deciding what to do with the authors of the June 3 hijacking of a Western Airlines jet to Algiers. The hijackers (whose extradition or prosecution we have requested) remain in custody there, along with $500,000 in ransom money, which the Algerians have promised to return. The Algerians have complained to us about the international pressure they feel we have brought to bear on them. In fact, we did not instigate the Air Line Pilots boycott threat (as the Algerians suspect), but impatience with Algerian procrastination — which could encourage other hijackers — is running high in the U.S. Government, and State has instructed low-key approaches in a number of capitals to see if third country intercession with Algiers might be possible. This will set back the evolution of bilateral relations, but that is a storm that will just have to be weathered.

Overall responsibility for air piracy matters has been assigned by the President to the Department of Transportation which is working closely with State. Over here, Frank Carlucci of OMB is coordinator for these matters with Ehrlichman, Flanigan and ourselves.

Hal Saunders concurs with this memorandum.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 330, Hijackings II. Secret. Sent for information.

88. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 88. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, June 15, 1972.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT - Evening Report

1. United States Action in International Civil Aviation Organization Regarding Aviation Security - In view of the Lod Airport massacre in Tel Aviv and the recent hijacking of a U.S. aircraft to Algeria, the United States has introduced a resolution in the Council of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) calling for the resumption of work on an international convention to provide for sanctions against Governments which fail to prosecute or extradite hijackers. This resolution will be considered by the ICAO Council on June 16. Although only last month the Legal Committee of ICAO voted to suspend work on a sanctions convention, our Embassies in most of the other ICAO Council member States, including the USSR, are endeavoring at high levels to obtain support for our proposal. We are hopeful that the recent incidents will spur sufficient support for our proposal to be adopted tomorrow. We are also making efforts to obtain a consensus statement at the UN Security Council which would back up our efforts in ICAO.

The International Federation of Airline Pilots Association has called for a strike on June 19 unless in the meantime action has been taken by the UN and ICAO on aviation security.

We are continuing to press the Algerians to prosecute the hijackers and return the ransom money from the recent Western Airlines hijacking.

[Omitted here are two paragraphs unrelated to Global Issues]

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164.

89. Airgram A-6325 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Missions 89. Airgram A-6325 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Missions1

Washington, June 23, 1972.

SUBJECT:

ICAO and UN Action Regarding Aircraft Hijacking and Violence Against Civil Aviation

Following is the full text of the resolution adopted by the ICAO Council on June 19 QUOTE

THE COUNCIL,

DEPLORING the continuing frequency of acts of unlawful interference which cause serious safety problems, endanger lives and undermine confidence in international air transport;

MINDFUL of the solemn declaration of the 17th Session of the Assembly condemning all acts of violence which may be directed against aircraft, crews and passengers engaged in, and against civil aviation personnel, civil airports and other facilities used by, international civil air transport;

RECALLING the resolutions of the ICAO Assembly, the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council relating to unlawful interference with international civil aviation;

CALLS UPON Contracting States to implement to the fullest extent possible the security measures contained in Resolution A17-10, which are amplified in the ICAO Security Manual, and to report, as soon as possible and not later than 31 October 1972, on measures they have taken to implement them, for review and analysis by the Council within 30 days of that date, and decides that all communications in this field with Contracting States should be treated as being of a strictly confidential character;

DIRECTS the Legal Committee to convene immediately a special Subcommittee to work on the preparation of an international convention to establish appropriate multilateral procedures within the ICAO framework for determining whether there is a need for joint action in cases envisaged in the first resolution adopted by the Council on 1 October 1970 and for deciding on the nature of joint action if it is to be taken;

URGES Contracting States to cooperate in the development of practical and effective security provisions which may form the basis for the adoption of ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices at the earliest possible date, so that the uniform application of such Standards and Recommended Practices will enhance the safety of civil aviation;

URGES States to become parties as soon as possible to the Tokyo Convention on Offenses and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft; the Hague Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft; and the Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation;

URGES States, in the interim, prior to their becoming parties to the above mentioned Conventions, to observe to the maximum extent possible under their national laws the provisions of those Conventions. UNQUOTE

Following is the text of the statement incorporating the UN Security Council’s consensus on Hijacking: QUOTE

Decision of the Security Council on Hijacking. The President of the Security Council announces that the members of the Security Council adopted on June 20, 1972 by consensus the following decision: “(1) Members of the Security Council are gravely concerned at the threat to the lives of passengers and crews arising from the hijacking of aircraft and other unlawful interference with international civil aviation. In these circumstances, they wish to reaffirm Security Council Resolution 286 (1970) of 9 September 1970 and to recall that General Assembly has expressed its deep concern about the situation.

“(2) Members of the Security Council condemn and consider it necessary to put an end to acts that are directed against the safety of civil aviation and that are being perpetrated in various parts of the world presenting serious obstacles to normal use of air transportation, an important means of international intercourse.

“(3) The Security Council calls upon States to take all appropriate measures within their jurisdiction to deter and prevent such acts and to take effective measures to deal with those who commit such acts.

“(4) The Security Council invites all States to expand and intensify cooperative international efforts and measures in this field, in conformity with charter obligations, with a view to ensuring maximum possible safety and reliability of international civil aviation. UNQUOTE.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Drafted by Gravatt on June 21, cleared by Joseph N. Greene, Jr. (IO/UNP), and approved by Silberstein.

The Olympic Attack and the Anti-Terrorism Initiatives, September−December 1972The Olympic Attack and the Anti-Terrorism Initiatives, September−December 1972

90. Memorandum from Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 5, 1972.

Hoskinson reported on the Israeli hostage situation in Munich and commented that the Department of State was at a loss over how to apply pressure on the terrorists.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for information.

91. Editorial Note

Excerpts of telephone conversations between President Nixon, the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig, Secretary of State Rogers, and Attorney General Kleindiest on September 5 discussing how to respond to the death of athletes of the Israeli Olympic team.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Telcons, 1972. No classification marking. The transcripts were prepared in the White House.

92. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 6, 1972.

Kissinger was informed that the Israeli Olympic athletes were killed during a rescue mission attempted by West German security forces. Hoskinson suggested that there was very little that could be done to prevent terrorism.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger wrote: “Thanks, Sam” on the first page. Attached but not published was a memorandum for the President to use at a meeting with Rogers and Kissinger.

93. Conversation Between President Nixon and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 6, 1972, 8:13 a.m.

Prior to meeting with Secretary of State Rogers and the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Haig at 8:30 a.m., the President and Kissinger discussed how to respond to the Munich Olympic massacre.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation 771-2. No classification marking. The editors transcribed the portion of the conversation published here specifically for this volume. At 8:32 a.m., Rogers and Haig joined the President and Kissinger; see Document 94.

94. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) for the President’s File,

Washington, September 6, 1972, 8:30 a.m.

The President, his Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger, Secretary of State Rogers, and Haig discussed how to respond to the deaths of 11 Israeli athletes in Munich.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Memcons, Jan-Dec, 1972. Secret. Drafted by Haig on September 11. Haig stated that the meeting began at 10 a.m., but according to the President’s Daily Diary it began at 8:30 a.m. (Ibid., White House Central Files)

95. Conversation Among President Nixon, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and White House Chief of Staff (Haldeman)

Washington, September 6, 1972, 9:53 a.m.-12:38 p.m.

Discussion of how to respond to the Munich Olympic terrorist incidents.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation No. 771-5. No classification marking. The editors transcribed the portion of the conversation published here specifically for this volume.

96. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson and Fernando Rondon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 6, 1972.

Hoskinson and Rondon recommended that action against international terrorism should not be pursued in the United Nations at this time.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for action. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “OBE.” There is no indication that Kissinger agreed or disagreed with any of the recommendations.

97. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 6, 1972.

Rogers informed the President of the anti-terrorism initiatives he planned to take after the Municfh Olympics massacre.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. No classification marking.

98. Telegram 164170 From the Department of State to Embassy in Israel

Washington, September 8, 1972, 2025Z.

Rogers and Israeli Ambassador Rabin discussed how to respond to the Munich incident.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 609, Country Files, Middle East, Israel, Sept 1971-Sept. 1972. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Stackhouse (NEA/IAI) on September 7 and approved by Atherton, Bremer, and Eliot. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Beirut, Kuwait, Jidda, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Tripoli, and USUN.

99. Circular Telegram 164986 From the Department of State of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom and Other Posts

Washington, September 9, 1972, 2334Z.

In a personal message to ambassadors, Rogers said that Nixon had charged him with the responsibility to mobilize the international community to take action to combat terrorism and directed them to approach host governments in an attempt to persuade the Arabs to disassociate themselves from terrorists.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by G. Norman Anderson of (NEA/EGY). Copies were sent to 55 embassies. Cleared by Sisco, Fessenden, Ross, Phillip H. Stoddard (INR/DDR/RNA), Herz, Hummel, Davies, and Atherton; and approved by Rogers.

100. Telegram 167911 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations

Washington, September 14, 1972, 1941Z.

Ambassador Bush was directed to transmit a letter to Secretary-General Waldheim from Secretary Rogers expressing continued U.S. interest in the problem of terrorism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by John Norton Moore (L) and cleared by Sisco and De Palma.

101. Telegram 169556 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations

Washington, September 15, 1972, 2354Z.

The Department discussed its strategy on handling terrorism issues at the UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Routine. Repeated to 21 additional posts. Drafted by Armitage, and cleared by De Palma, Stevenson, Atherton, and Sisco.

102. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 18, 1972.

Rogers provided the President with an initial report on current measures to combat terrorism and proposals for the future.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Atherton on September 14 and cleared by Donelan, Sisco, Armitage, Boyd, Wright, Fessenden, and Ross.

103. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 21, 1972.

Rogers informed the President of international measures taken to combat terrorism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Donelan on September 20.

104. Information Memorandum From Assistant Secretary of State, International Organization Affairs (De Palma) and Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September, 21, 1972.

De Palma and Sisco briefed Rogers on the Department’s scenario for handling the terrorism item at the UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by Fessenden, L, Ross, EA, Atherton, and ARA. Tabs A and B are attached but not published.

105. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 22, 1972.

Stevenson described the new draft convention for prevention of terrorism to be circulated by the United States at the United Nations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. Drafted by Moore. The draft convention was attached but not published.

106. Telegram 174121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ceylon

Washington, September 22, 1972, 2335Z.

The Department of State instructed key posts to explain to host governments that a vote against inscription of the terrorism item on the UNGA agenda would be a vote against the Secretary-General and would weaken the United Nations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Herz and Armitage and approved by Atherton, Moore, and Daniel Goott (EUR). Sent to Kuala Lumpur, New Delhi, Valletta, Singapore, Vientiane, and USUN; repeated to Amman, Islamabad, and Kathmandu.

107. Telegram 3421 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, September 22, 1972, 2311Z.

Ambassador Bush reported that inscription of Secretary-General Waldheim’s terrorism item would likely fail.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Priority.

108. Telegram 174571 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal

Washington, September 25, 1972, 17:36Z.

Extracts from Secretary of State Rogers’ remarks before the UN General Assembly setting out steps to counter international terrorism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified; Priority. Drafted by C. J. Grip (IO/TRC), and cleared in substance in IO/P and E/AVP.

109. Memorandum From President Nixon to Heads of Departments and Agencies

Washington, September 25, 1972.

The President directed the establishment of a Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism to be chaired by Secretary of State Rogers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. See Document 110 for text of Nixon’s message to Rogers.

110. Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 25, 1972.

The President described the membership of the Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism and set the scope of its activities.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking.

111. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 29, 1972.

Kissinger answered the President’s query about attacks on U.S. businesses overseas in a 3-page memorandum that summarized a longer CIA memorandum on the topic.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicated that the President saw it. Tab B was attached but not published.

112. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 21, 1972.

The Department reported on a setback to U.S.-supported terrorism items at the UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives. RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by De Palma, Bettauer, and Meyer. M.J. Habil signed for Eliot.

113. Memorandum From Fernando Rondon and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 25, 1972.

NSC staffers updated Kissinger on the status of the Terrorism Convention and the Convention on the Protection of Diplomats at the United Nations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Confidential. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Saunders and Young. Tab A is published as Document 112.

114. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, November 1, 1972.

Kennedy brought Kissinger up-to-date on all anti-terrorism action taken since the President’s directive of September 25th.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the first page of the memorandum reads: “OBE.”

115. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, November 7, 1972.

Rogers recounted for the President both domestic and international counterterrorism actions undertaken by the United States.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Armin Meyer with concurrence from Sisco.

116. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Attorney General Kleindienst

Washington, November 13, 1972.

Rogers asked Kleindienst how the U.S. Government could prevent terrorist violence by Yugoslav imigri groups operating in the United States and asked Kleindienst to investigate these types of activities.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. Drafted by Director of Eastern European Affairs Richard G. Johnson and John R. Crook (L/EUR) on October 27 with concurrence by Russell, Brower, Baker, Armin Meyer, and Stoessel. An August 21, 1972, memorandum from the Yugoslavian Government was attached but not published.

117. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 1, 1972.

The memorandum summarized the CIA’s assessment of the terrorist threat to U.S. business enterprises overseas.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum reads: “OBE.”

118. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, December 11, 1972.

Rogers reported that the UN’s Legal Committee had voted to support a “disappointingly weak” resolution on terrorism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164.

119. Telegram 5526 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

New York, December 13, 1972, 0052Z.

Text of the terrorism item as adopted by the UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Unclassified; Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State.

120. Telegram 5582 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, December 15, 1972, 0221Z.

Ambassador Bush explained how Arab pressure on Africans and Third World discontent with Western nations led to a weak and ineffectual UN resolution on terrorism.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential.

121. Telegram 227601 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, December 16, 1972, 1825Z.

The Department agreed with reluctance that the U.S. delegation should participate on the terrorism committee required by the UNGA terrorism resolution.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Routine. Repeated to London, Paris, Rome, and NATO. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by De Palma.

90. Memorandum from Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 90. Memorandum from Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 5, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Munich Situation as of 5:30 EDT

The latest unconfirmed news report is that the terrorists and the hostages have been taken to the Munich airport. No further details are yet available. The terrorists reportedly continue to stand firm on maintaining that the remaining Israeli hostages will be killed unless Israel agrees to release some 200 Arabs currently under detention for political offenses. Meanwhile, all Olympic competitive events have been suspended pending the outcome of the negotiations and final decisions on the continuation of the games reportedly will be made tomorrow.

Our embassy in Tel Aviv reports that the Israeli public appears stunned. They expect that if more Israeli lives are lost the reaction in Israel will be extremely bitter and could transcend the fedayeen issue and bring on a souring of public attitudes toward any efforts to reach peace with the Arabs. The West Germans, at all times a sensitive subject in Israel, also could be expected to come in for their share of Israeli bitterness. Nor does the embassy think that the Israelis are very likely to forgive their own security forces for allowing an attack on the team, given reported prior warnings of the German security services.

State is at a loss over how to apply effective leverage on the terrorists. The best they could come up with today was a cable to the major European capitals plus Jidda and Kuwait (the big financial contributers to the fedayeen) calling on them to use whatever influence they may have in Arab capitals or elsewhere to bring pressure to bear on the terrorists. Secretary Rogers and Department spokesmen have also made the appropriate remarks of outrage in public. We have offered our assistance to the Israelis, but so far they have not asked.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for information.

91. Editorial Note 91. Editorial Note1

At 10:35 p.m. on September 5, 1972, the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs Alexander Haig called President Nixon and informed him: “We have got some very shocking news on the Israeli thing.” The President asked: “How many killed?” and Haig said, “All killed.” “Oh, my,” Nixon responded. After some discussion the President suggested: “Under the circumstances we ought to discuss with the Russians and do something. The whole world is going to be shocked by this. Think we have got to take it up…out of interest. We are going to intervene in it.” Haig stated: “The Israelis are going to react.” Nixon asked: “Who are they going to hit though?” Haig suggested: “Lebanon, though—they will find out where based—.” The President responded: “They are capable of it. They have got to hit somebody, don’t you think?” Haig agreed. Nixon then warned: “We don’t want to set something off.” After some additional discussion, Haig suggested to the President: “Think we will probably have to say something tonight. That you were saddened—.” (Transcript of telephone conversation between Haig and Nixon, December 5, 10:35 p.m.; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Telcons, 1972)

Ten minutes later, at 10:45 p.m., the President called Haig and said: “This isn’t of course a very big thing. You could talk to Rogers about this. The United States should indicate that they will break diplomatic relations with countries that harbor any sort of guerrilla groups. Hell, what do we care about Lebanon. Think we have to be awfully tough. I want you to run that by a couple of people. Any nation that harbors or gives sanctuary to these international outlaws we will cut off all economic support—obviously Lebanon. Jordan’s another. Don’t know who else we have relations with—.” Haig interjected: “We may have some Chinese problem on this.” The President responded: “Screw the Chinese on this one. Be very tough.” (Transcript of telephone conversation between Haig and Nixon, December 5, 10:45 p.m.; ibid.)

As the President suggested, Haig called Secretary of State Rogers at 10:55 p.m. and raised Nixon’s ideas. Haig noted that the President had made a statement in San Francisco that “could look like a real slap at the Germans.” Roger commented: “He left that impression in his television appearance.” Haig responded: “He [Nixon] really ad-libbed it and I puckered at the time.” Rogers informed Haig that the Department of State was preparing a statement “expressing deep regret and I think that’s about all you can do tonight.” Haig stated that Nixon planned to call a meeting at 8:30 a.m. the next day and “he has asked you to come over and sit down and see where to go on this. He’s threatened to break relations with nations that harbor or give sanctuary to these guerrillas.” Rogers protested: “He can’t do that, especially when we don’t know which nations. What we are trying to do tonight—we are trying to get some protection against a JDL blowup. We are taking whatever security precautions there are to take.” Haig commented: “That’s what I told him.” Rogers believed that “we did everything we could. We got in touch with the Olympic Delegation, sent out telegrams, talked to the German Government… and… talked today about what kind of reprisals we might make.” Haig suggested: “Tomorrow we should call for calm.” Noted Rogers: “There are financial angels—Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Libya too. We have got to be careful.” Haig agreed: “He always wants to do something. We have to be careful not to do something he will regret.” (Transcript of telephone conversation between Haig and Rogers, December 5, 10:55 p.m.; ibid.) The ad-libbed statement Nixon made in California that Rogers apparently saw on television is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1972, pages 857-858. Also printed ibid., page 858, is a message of condolence of September 6 from Nixon to Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir.

Nixon called Haig at 11 p.m. on September 5, noting that, “I might consider showing our position on this by flying to the Israelis’ funeral.” Haig suggested that the Germans would be criticized and “we don’t want to insult them.” The President responded: “I have to show more than the usual concern.” Haig counseled holding off with other remarks as, “it looks like a slap for the Germans.” Nixon instructed Haig: “Tell them that I am here at the White House getting reports as they come in and that I am saddened and shocked by this terrible incident and we will comment in the morning.” Nixon again asked Haig to call Rogers for advice. (Transcript of telephone conversation between Nixon and Haig, December 5, 11 p.m.; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Telcons, 1972)

At 11:25 p.m. Rogers and Haig talked on the telephone, and Rogers suggested that Nixon issue an executive order for a “day of mourning in Washington with flags at half mast.” Haig stated: “All I am worried about is some cynics coming back and saying, ‘You are bombing the hell out of Vietnam …’” Rogers interjected: “I suppose they will say that, but for Christ’s sake, it is like somebody you shouldn’t have gone to the funeral or something.” Haig agreed. (Transcript of telephone conversation between Haig and Rogers, December 5, 11:25 p.m.; ibid.) Haig called Attorney General Kleindienst to discuss the possibility of a day of mourning; Kleindienst indicated that he would study this possibility. (Transcript of telephone conversation between Kleindienst and Haig, September 5, 11:30 p.m.; ibid.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Telcons, 1972. No classification marking. The transcripts were prepared in the White House.

92. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 92. Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 6, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Munich Killings

As you know, all of the Israeli Olympians held hostage by the fedayeen terrorists were killed last night when West German security forces attempted to kill or capture the terrorists at an airport on the outskirts of Munich. This is by far the most dramatic and outrageous incident since fedayeen radicals hijacked five aircraft over Labor Day weekend two years ago.

Attached is a memo which you can provide the President for his use during the meeting this morning with you, Secretary Rogers and others on this incident. It stresses the operational measures we might take at this point. The hard reality, however, is that there is really very little we, or any major power, can do to rectify this situation or make sure that it will not happen again. We can attempt to focus world moral indignation and press for tighter international security measures, but we will remain vulnerable to the dedicated extremist.

This being the case, it would seem best at this point to strike a statesmanlike posture; deeply concerned but not over reacting. We will want to do everything reasonably possible to help avert similar tragedies in the future, but should not let our sense of outrage lead us into actions which could jeopardize other important interests which we have in the Middle East. We will want to identify with Israeli sorrow and bitterness, but it would not be in our interest to do this in a way that closes off our options to work with both Arabs and Israelis to produce a peace settlement.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger wrote: “Thanks, Sam” on the first page. Attached but not published was a memorandum for the President to use at a meeting with Rogers and Kissinger.

93. Conversation Between President Nixon and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 93. Conversation Between President Nixon and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 6, 1972, 8:13 a.m.

Conversation: 771-2

Date: September 6, 1972

Time: 8:13 am−9:48 am

Location: Oval Office

Participants: Richard M. Nixon, William P. Rogers, Henry A. Kissinger, Alexander Haig

Kissinger: … Now, let me say a word about the Israeli situation, Mr. President, because I feel very, very strongly about it. I look at it the way we would look at it if eight Pakistanis killed eight Indians.

Nixon: I know. [Unclear] Unfortunately [unclear]

Kissinger: No, I know, Mr. President. But I think you have been a statesman. And I don’t think we should throw it away in cheap shots. Now, and this thing could easily turn now. My great fear is, World War I started because the Austrians had been frustrated for 15 years, had the Archduke assassinated, the Germans and the whole world was outraged. And they thought that for once they would have a free shot, and they were going to settle the Serbian problem once and for all.

Nixon: The Austrians thought so?

Kissinger: I beg your pardon?

Nixon: The Austrians thought so?

Kissinger: The Austrians thought. Now, my worry is that if we say to the Israelis too much that they—

Nixon: I talked to Rabin last night. He sure hasn’t talked that way.

Kissinger: Well I would really like to talk to Rabin in a formal way today when he comes back.

Nixon: The thing that I would emphasize to Rabin, I hadn’t thought on this, which would be a very good test for the Israelis—I don’t know whether they are able to do it or not. Mrs. Meir, and she’s the only one that can do it, should call upon the International Olympic Committee to go forward with those games.

Kissinger: I agree with you.

Nixon: [Unclear] But the other reason is she can say, “Well that’s what my boys would have wanted.” It will make them look good rather than—you see, the trouble with the Jews is that they’ve always played these things in terms of outrage. You’ve got the Jewish Defense League raising hell and saying we ought to kill every Arab diplomat. What we have to do is enough here, that we’re showing an interest. It’s my thought that the best thing here is to let Rogers take the lead in the damn thing.

Kissinger: Oh, I [agree]—

Nixon: —rather than me. That’s why we’ve got to get him in here. He’s apparently done well. Mrs. Meir has said, “I’ve heard from Secretary Rogers.” I said, “fine.”

Kissinger: Well what I—

Nixon: But you see, we’ve got to show we care on this one because, you were in this country, well I guess you weren’t—you don’t really know, Henry, what the Jewish community will do on this. It’s going to be the goddamnedist thing you’ve ever saw. Did you see both papers this morning?

Kissinger: What papers?

Nixon: Both papers.

Kissinger: Yes.

Nixon: And you’re absolutely right that that can stir it all up into something very, very—so we’ve got to show the greatest understanding and sympathy and the rest so that they don’t get into the hands of the extremists.

Kissinger: Tonight—last night, Mr. President, Haig and I have been on the phone half the night with the Israelis, who wanted us to do the opposite of what you suggested, which is the right thing. They wanted us to appeal to the International Olympic Committee to cancel it [the games].

Nixon: They’re crazy. But they want to look good, don’t they?

Kissinger: I talked to Rogers too.

Nixon: You see, that’s exactly what the—the reason Mrs. Meir should do it. She’s the only one that can. Is that what the terrorists want? They want to make it appear that they’ve stopped the games. It’s like these assholes that tried to stop us running the government.

Kissinger: That’s right.

Nixon: If we’d have stopped like some of the softheads here around [wanted] or gone over and prayed at the Lincoln Memorial, that’s what they want. So the thing to do is to do it the other way. That’s what I mean.

Kissinger: Well I refused to wake you up. Rogers, incidentally, agreed. So there’s no problem with Rogers.

Nixon: Oh, no. [Unclear]called upon them to stop the games. That was not going to be our position.

Kissinger: I don’t think we can—

Nixon: You don’t think you can get Rabin in?

Kissinger: I think, in fact—well I will talk to Rabin because they don’t trust Rogers but they do trust me. But I’ll talk to him quietly.

Nixon: Say, “Look, this is a thought that we—we’re in a position where we can’t ask them to do a lot. But perhaps you should.” And then they will look good.

Kissinger: They won’t do that. That’s out of the question.

Nixon: What’s the matter with them?

Kissinger: I don’t think we can even suggest it because they’d be too outraged. What we can do, though, is to keep them from blackjacking us over not having to fear. In general, I think we ought to—

Nixon: What does Rogers think we should do?

Kissinger: Well Rogers thinks we should declare a national day of mourning. I’m against even that. It’s not our day of mourning, Mr. President. It’s easy enough now to do a number of grandstanding—

Nixon: [Unclear] But I don’t think that works.

Kissinger: And also, God I am Jewish. I’ve had 13 members of my family killed. So I can’t be insensitive to this. But I think you have to think also of the anti-Semitic woes in this country. If we let our policy be run by the Jewish community—

Nixon: By the radical Jewish community—

Kissinger: By the radical Jewish community and declare a national—

Nixon: You understand what I was talking to Haig about last night was gestures. Let’s do some things here. But nothing that would make the Germans too mad and so forth.

Kissinger: What I would favor, Mr. President, is to go to the UN—

Nixon: Me?

Kissinger: Not you. Not physically. To have the Untied States to go to the UN and see whether we can get some international rules on harboring guerillas and so forth. That is a concrete measure that affects the world. That’s a statesmen like thing. It’s not—

Nixon: Well what could you do, though, if the UN is not in session? The General Assembly?

Kissinger: Well we can get the Security Council into session. And I think the Russians might join us on that.

Nixon: The Chinese?

Kissinger: Well that’d be interesting. Then if they don’t, we’ll say we’ll take it up with the UN.

Nixon: I want you to mention this. Did you mention this to Dobrynin?

Kissinger: Well—

Nixon: [Unclear]

Kissinger: The news hit me when I was there yesterday. And he was outraged.

Nixon: All right. How ‘bout mentioning it to the Chinese.

Kissinger: Yes.

Nixon: I would now—You see I also feel that you’ve got to take up now on your trip to Russia, I didn’t think so before, but you’ve got to mention this damn little thing [in] some way or other with Dobrynin.

Kissinger: All right, Mr. President.

Nixon: You see my point?

Kissinger: I will raise it.

Nixon: You see it’s got to be said—everybody asks us the question, “Did we discuss this?” You’ve got to say “yes.”

Kissinger: What I told Dobrynin yesterday, which will get us more mileage, is why don’t we call Vorontsov—Dobrynin will be in Moscow next week—why don’t we after I’m through with my talk, say on Wednesday, call Vorontsov into the State Department, make an official démarche.

Nixon: And have Rogers call him?

Kissinger: Have Alex Johnson call him.

Nixon: When?

Kissinger: Wednesday or Thursday.

Nixon: [Unclear]

Kissinger: Well, it escalates it. We really have to be careful with the Russians.

Nixon: Well you know Rogers, now. Let Alex do it.

Kissinger: Let Alex Johnson do it. Because if Rogers does it, they’ll spread it all over the newspapers.

Nixon: Alex.

Kissinger: Alex will do it.

Nixon: Well then on our plate this morning what can we do? Now, I’ve called Rabin. I’ve asked him to call me this morning to get me a report. You know they have the best intelligence. You know he was so good last night. He said I don’t have the report or anything. He says I haven’t got all the information.

Kissinger: Do you mind if I talk to him and say that you’re busy at this moment—

Nixon: No, no, no. That’s perfectly all right. He left it open. He said I can’t talk because I won’t know till around 10:30. I said well let me know. Obviously he expects to call. But—

Kissinger: Because my worry is—I’m really concerned that it’s easy enough now there’s a lot of emotion for it, but if they take Beirut, which they could, they’ll do something.

Nixon: They mustn’t do that.

Kissinger: Well, I’m going to get him in today and talk to him very seriously.

Nixon: They can’t start a war over this.

Kissinger: Well, I agree with you.

Nixon: You think they might?

Kissinger: I think they might. They’re in the best position they’ve ever been in. No Russians there. We’ve got an election campaign. Now I got a promise out of Golda Meir 2 months ago when you asked me to that they wouldn’t take military action. But this is an enormous provocation. And they are emotional. And I don’t want them to think that they’ve got you in their hip pocket.

Nixon: Tell them that here’s a chance for them to make their points in a more effective way. Well let me say, you have no problems with Rabin. The way he’s talking he’s very rational.

Kissinger: Rabin is the sanest guy. But they—

Nixon: But he has others that are not.

Kissinger: They have their own election campaign coming up next spring.

Nixon: Yeah.

Kissinger: And I’m sure it is an outrage. It’s a horrible—it’s a horror.

Nixon: Well you don’t start a war over anything like this.

Kissinger: I agree. But—no this morning the most constructive thing we could do is to go to the Security Council to see whether we could get some international rules.

Nixon: Why don’t we go ask Rogers to do that?

Kissinger: Sure.

Nixon: Have him go announce it to the press.

Kissinger: That we’re against countries that harbor guerillas. That is something that affects the international community.

Nixon: Did you discuss that with Rogers?

Kissinger: No. No, you can do it on your own.

[Omitted here is a discussion of Kissinger’s trip to Germany]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation 771-2. No classification marking. The editors transcribed the portion of the conversation published here specifically for this volume. At 8:32 a.m., Rogers and Haig joined the President and Kissinger; see Document 94.

94. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) for the President’s File, 94. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) for the President’s File,1

Washington, September 6, 1972, 8:30 a.m.

SUBJECT:

President’s Meeting with Secretary of State Rogers, Dr. Kissinger and M/Gen. Haig

TIME AND DATE: 10:00 a.m., Wednesday, September 6, 1972

PLACE: The Oval Office

PARTICIPANTS:

President Nixon

Secretary of State William Rogers

Henry A. Kissinger

M/Gen. Alexander M. Haig, Jr.

The meeting was held for the purpose of discussing the situation in Munich which resulted in the death of 11 Israeli athletes together with Arab terrorists.

The President stated that he had had spoken to Ambassador Rabin the previous evening and found him to be completely rational. The President continued that the US must pursue a delicate line which demonstrated justified sympathy for Israel but which did not serve to encourage Israeli retaliation which could only further escalate tensions and dangers in the Middle East. The President noted that he had called Mrs. Meir from San Clemente the day before and assured her that the United States was working diligently on the terrorist problem. It now remains to outline a number of measures, practical and public, with which to deal with the problem.

Secretary Rogers noted that it was tragic that the German Government had handled the public notification of the situation so poorly with initial reports that the athletes were safe followed by a complete reversal of this news. The Department of State had formed a task force that had been working all the previous day and throughout the night on the situation. There was some indication that the Israeli Government might ask the United States Government to cancel its further participation in the Olympics. This developed earlier that morning and General Haig, Dr. Kissinger and Secretary Rogers coordinated on a position which precluded our becoming involved in this knotty issue. Nevertheless, it could come up again in the hours ahead. The Secretary noted that one of the measures which we might consider would be to direct the US flags in Washington be placed at half mast and declare a day of mourning.

The President stated that the United States should not agree to drop out of the Olympics and that Israel should remain consistent with the position it announced earlier to see the games through.

Secretary Rogers stated that all had agreed on this stand the day before since it would be a terrible slap at the Germans to precipitously with-draw. It appeared that the Germans were in deep difficulty already for their handling of the situation at the NATO airbase. Secretary Rogers stated that most nations were in deep sympathy with Israel but were they to withdraw from the games that sympathy could be reversed. An additional problem was the fact that even if the United States were to accept Israel’s logic it could not control either its athletes or the head of the Olympic Committee.

The President directed that Israel be informed that we wished to continue.

Dr. Kissinger commented that it was important that the United States not permit Israel to “put the heat” on us to withdraw. The President noted that withdrawal would be the New York Times/McGovern approact

Secretary Rogers again asked about the propriety of lowering our flags and a day of mourning. The President stated that we had not done similar things when deaths occurred in Ireland or during the earthquake in Peru and we must be careful not to demonstrate a double standard. Secretary Rogers suggested that we could call for a period of silence during the funeral of the Israeli athletes. He added that the Israelis apparently do not want high-level delegations in order to avoid politicization and perhaps we should send some of our athletes such as the US swimmer who is of Jewish descent. In any event, we should abide carefully by Israel’s own wishes.

Secretary Rogers stated that the Department of State is not favorably inclined towards the suggestion that we convene the Security Council on the terrorist issue. The President stated that this kind of action would butt us up against China and the Soviet Union but if the US were to go to the Security Council condemning countries which harbor guerrillas, this would in effect support Israel while at the same time not encouraging it to take escalatory retaliatory action.

Secretary Rogers stated that a cable had been prepared to the Prime Minister outlining our disgust and sympathy. He noted that he would make a strong statement at the International Hijacking Conference being conducted at the Department of State that day. The President agreed that the message should go and that the Secretary should make the statement. He inquired what kind of a resolution we would seek should we decide to go to the United Nations.

Dr. Kissinger stated that no resolution would be likely to pass. The question is how to posture ourselves. The resolution should talk about rules of conduct of those who sponsor radicals who operate across international borders. It is probable that the Peoples’ Republic of China would veto. On the other hand, this would be a statesmanlike US position. It would likely engender extensive debate and would tend to defuse Israeli emotions during the critical hours ahead. Then when the General Assembly meets the debate could continue. All this tends to control Israeli retaliatory action.

The President stated that we should now turn to the public relations aspects of the problem and following that bring Mr. Ziegler to the meeting.

Secretary Rogers again expressed opposition to the United Nations initiative. Dr. Kissinger stated that the government lawyers could develop a formulation which included something on border crossing, something on countries who harbor organizations which operate beyond their borders and in this way the US would go to the Security Council in a statesmanlike posture and solicit the views of other nations. Secretary Rogers stated that it would be impossible to get any kind of action. Dr. Kissinger stated that this was true but it would serve as a deterrent to Israeli action. Secretary Rogers stated that the Israelis would not be impressed by Security Council action and that for the moment it is important that we keep in close contact with them.

The President noted that we had been doing precisely this. He also noted that the public statements made thus far by Israel were also statesmanlike. Dr. Kissinger stated that all of this is true. Nevertheless if we do nothing it is probable that we will see strong Israeli action. Secretary Rogers urged that the President think about this before proceeding with the UN initiative.

The President stated that in his discussions last night with Ambassador Rabin he underlined the fact that despite the disadvantages of the tragedy it would bring the terrorist activity to the attention of the world. Secretary Rogers stated that another advantage of the tragedy was that it will again underline the need for an overall settlement. He noted that Dayan had made some overtures and that Egypt would probably launch some initiatives in conjunction with the General Assembly meeting this fall. This is the basic problem and only a settlement will solve it. If Dayan was actually speaking for Israel then it is important that we get the process started for another round of negotiations.

The President stated that the situation in Munich will not soften up the Israeli attitudes but will strengthen their hawks. Secretary Rogers agreed but said that this only underlined the need for seeking a solution to the Middle East situation and certainly there will be efforts in the fall to get negotiations started.

The President stated that Secretary Rogers should make a strong statement at the hijacking conference. Secretary Rogers stated that with respect to the UN initiative we should leave it open until he has an opportunity to check the Israeli view.

The President instructed the Secretary to see what kind of a game plan we could come up with for the United Nations. Secretary Rogers stated that his people were tired and he hoped that Dr. Kissinger’s people would also work on this. Dr. Kissinger stated that if the decision is made to proceed in the UN it must be done quickly.

The President stated that ‘we might also have some legislation for the Congress to get the Conventions for Hijacking, etc. moved. Also we should give some thought to what the Congress could do on terrorism.

The President told Secretary Rogers to consider the UN initiative seriously, since it might just serve to buy time. It serves as a visible reaction to the Israeli outcries. Secretary Rogers said that he would discuss it with Rabin although he does not think the Israelis will sup-port it because of their anti-UN feelings. Secretary Rogers continued to the effect that feelings in Israel are very high against the Germans for three reasons: (1) because they afforded poor protection to the Israeli athletes, (2) because of the reporting of the incident, and (3) because of the trigger-happy performance of the German police.

The President commented that it was ironic that the German Government found itself in the position of protecting Israeli athletes. He stated that in summary the following actions should be undertaken: 1. The cable sent to Mrs. Meir.

2. Secretary Rogers would make a strong statement at the Hijacking Conference.

3. We would look into the feasibility of a UN initiative.

4. We would do whatever remained to be done with our own Congress with respect to pending legislation and the possibility of new legislation.

5. Secretary Rogers should ask Ambassador Rabin about the UN initiative, tell him that we have no illusions but that it would serve to spotlight the issue.

Secretary Rogers asked that Dr. Kissinger keep him informed if he should have any contact with the Israelis. The President told General Haig to do this should Ambassador Rabin contact the White House.

Secretary Rogers then noted as an aside that the President should give a brief speech at the IMF Conference since it was a good platform for an expression of the President’s monetary policies. The President stated that Treasury Secretary Shultz was opposed on the convertibility issue but that Mr. Burns favored it. Secretary Rogers agreed that this was a problem.

Secretary Rogers recapitulated noting that he would call Ambassador Rabin, that we should continue to consider lowering our flags and that he would give the speech at the Hijacking Conference.

The President stated that he did not think the flag at half mast was a good idea. Dr. Kissinger agreed. Secretary Rogers said that we would just do this in public buildings. The President stated maybe just the White House. Dr. Kissinger again stated that he disagreed. Secretary Rogers stated that an alternative would be a moment of silence during the funeral. The President stated that it might be worth considering. Dr. Kissinger stated that it was less troublesome than lowering the flags. The President asked why not do something on a personal basis. He could go to church at the time of the funeral. This looked more spontaneous and more of an individual reaction rather than a government reaction.

Press Secretary Ziegler was then called into the Oval Office and was given the following press guidance. He should discuss the fact of the meeting, the message to the Prime Minister, and the fact that we are considering measures to include consultations with other governments on an urgent basis to see what can be done to prevent terrorist activity. The point should be made that the President, Secretary Rogers and Dr. Kissinger consulted throughout the night and that close consultation was maintained with Israel and Bonn. It should be noted that the President talked to Ambassador Rabin and that Secretary Rogers will see the Ambassador later today. The point should be made that precautionary measures have been ordered by the President to ensure the security of Israeli and other foreign personnel and facilities in the rising tensions.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998, Haig Memcons, Jan-Dec, 1972. Secret. Drafted by Haig on September 11. Haig stated that the meeting began at 10 a.m., but according to the President’s Daily Diary it began at 8:30 a.m. (Ibid., White House Central Files)

95. Conversation Among President Nixon, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and White House Chief of Staff (Haldeman) 95. Conversation Among President Nixon, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and White House Chief of Staff (Haldeman)1

Washington, September 6, 1972, 9:53 a.m.-12:38 p.m.

Conversation: 771-5

Location: Oval Office

Participants: Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger

Nixon: I want to get him [Rogers] off of the other thing. As you know, he wants to have a long talk with me this morning, and [unclear] I don’t want to get into the Russian thing, so let him do this thing.

Kissinger: Oh, no, no—

Nixon: [Unclear] Let him be the lead horse.

Kissinger: Oh, God. The only thing I want—the Israelis distrust him so much they wouldn’t do a thing without checking with us anyway.

Nixon: If you could tell Rabin, “Look here, the Secretary wants to be helpful here and the President’s [unclear] to do some things publicly and visibly. You should go see him and talk to him.

Kissinger: By all means.

Nixon: You tell Rabin that.

Kissinger: I’m strongly for it. Now there’s one thing, however, that does concern me. One is, I don’t think he should go to Tel Aviv for the funeral even if he should engineer an invitation.

Nixon: Bill? Oh, shit no.

Kissinger: [Unclear]

Nixon: [Unclear]

Kissinger: Second—yeah, but they might want him. That might give them some visible American support, and that would embroil us with the Arabs.

Nixon: Yeah, all right. Yeah.

Kissinger: Second, which is more important. It is true that [Moshe] Dayan has talked to our Chargé. Now what these guys want to do is to elicit—I’ve sat on a cable they want to send.

Nixon: Listen, let me tell you something. My view, this incident blows any chance at [a peace agreement]

Kissinger: You are 100 percent right.

Nixon: You ought to know that, for Christ sakes. I had to listen—I know that’s bullshit. They want to go forward with that damn—see the Israelis, this time, they’re riding high. They don’t want to deal. And this helps them in arms in that way.

Kissinger: You’re 100 percent right.

Nixon: But the point is, let’s let Bill be out in front. Your idea of going to the UN, he finally got the point. I said, “gee”—

Kissinger: But actually—

Nixon: And it will be great for him and it will be great for us.

Kissinger: Above all, it will be good for you, Mr. President.

Nixon: Sure.

Kissinger: Because if he goes up to the UN, he will be doing something concrete. Of course, nothing will come out. Nothing ever comes out. But we could make a lot of statesman-like speeches about curbing terrorism.

Nixon: And the hijacking thing won’t do it.

Kissinger: That hijacking things is a third level—

Nixon: That’s right.

Kissinger: —conference, and it’s a one-shot affair.

Nixon: That’s right.

Kissinger: But if we go to the Security Council and we say that we’re not here on behalf of Israel. We are here on an international problem.

Nixon: Yeah.

Kissinger: What happens—

Nixon: Now he’s going to—when you talk to Rabin, and I hope you can get him soon on the phone, I want you to call him.

Kissinger: I’ll tell Rabin to urge it.

Nixon: Would you tell him that—let me put it this way: Tell him, “Look, Mr. Ambassador, the President wants to get Rogers on the right side of this issue.”

Kissinger: No, I’ll get Rabin—

Nixon: And second, tell him it will be good to put the goddamn UN on the spot. We want to put them on the spot on this issue, because we think we got them by the balls here. For him to urge Rogers to go to the UN. Would you tell him the President would like for him to do that?

Kissinger: Right away. [Unclear]

Nixon: Also, tell Rabin that I consider it very statesmanlike Mrs. Meir’s statement. Would he please convey that to her. Particularly with regard to going forward with the games. That I had independently reached that conclusion, but did not want, of course, to suggest it. But I think that’s exactly the kind of thing that will make tremendous points in the world by not trying to knock off the games. That’s what the athletes would have wanted. Third point is that now that they’re in this good position, don’t blow it. Tell him, “Don’t blow it.” [Unclear] You’ve got to remember that the President is their friend. Now we’ve got some world opinion for them. But don’t—these things can turn very fast.

Kissinger: Right.

Nixon: Right?

Kissinger: Yes.

Nixon: That’s the point.

Kissinger: Well my major worry is—

Nixon: I don’t want them to go conquer Beirut. I don’t mind them going in and knocking off a few camps, but even that’s bad right now.

Kissinger: I think—

Nixon: They would be very well to be the injured—play the injured martyr.

Kissinger: But if we can get to the UN within the next 24 hours. Now this statement here will hold us for 24 hours.

Nixon: What statement?

Kissinger: Well, where we say we’ve consulted with other governments. Frankly, I wouldn’t consult because if you do it they’ll say no. And if we go—

Nixon: All right.

Kissinger: But that’s a tactical issue, and the state of the world doesn’t depend on it.

Nixon: Uh huh.

Kissinger: But I think we would only have to gain and only have to lose. Sure they won’t vote with us. So what. Even the Russians—

Nixon: You see, Bob, of course nobody understands what the president is trying to do here. I’m trying to get Bill doing something! As I told you last night on the phone, Bob, rather than farting around whether Henry sees Heath, or Brandt, or some other. Now Brandt may pose a problem at this point.

[Omitted here is a portion of the conversation unrelated to the Munich terrorist incident]

Nixon: Now on Bill, Bob you can see the point, getting him—what he wanted today, he wanted to be out in front on this thing.

Kissinger: That’s fine. That’s the way it should be.

Haldeman: The UN thing is an ideal thing.

Nixon: Let’s talk a little about lowering the flag. Everybody—what I’m concerned about is that you can be sure as hell that [New York City Mayor] Lindsay is going to lower the flag, Congress is going to call for lowering the flag.

Kissinger: Well I don’t know how—

Nixon: Here’s the point. [Unclear] Why don’t you order the flag when some Irish nationalists get killed?

Kissinger: That’s right.

Nixon: See my point?

Kissinger: What will Irishmen say if you didn’t lower it when the school children got killed in Belfast—

Nixon: That’s right. It really hits the point that the flag ought to be low all the time.

Haldeman: You didn’t lower it when the guys went in the airport and shot up the people.

Nixon: Well, it’s the Olympics. The Olympics, they’re international and all that business. Suppose, for example, somebody went in and machine gunned the UN and killed six Arabs there.

Kissinger: My instinct is—sure, right now you’ll get a lot of indignation. But whether more people won’t feel that this is the President of all the people—

Nixon: Going too far?

Kissinger: But Bob would have a better judgment than I.

Nixon: Well Bill’s reaction, of course, is public relations-oriented. He’s strong in lowering the flag.

Kissinger: Well, he’s been around—

Haldeman: I wonder if that isn’t over-reacting, though.

Nixon: Yeah. Now the idea of the church thing appeals to me if I do it my way. My way would be I call upon all Americans to go to church and a moment of silence. But I think, in my way, I quietly slip out of this damn door—

Kissinger: That doesn’t bother me.

Nixon: —and pick maybe that little church across the way without—

Kissinger: I mean that’s—

Nixon: —without any notice of it. I just walk round, sit in the church for 5 minutes and walk out. Get my point?

Kissinger: I mean that you would do—

Nixon: That’s my moment of silence.

Kissinger: That you would do—

Nixon: Each in an individual way. [Unclear] How does that sound to you?

Haldeman: I think that’s pretty good.

Nixon: Yeah.

Kissinger: That I sort of like. That’s Richard Nixon—

Nixon: That’s right.

Kissinger: —not the office of the President.

Nixon: That’s the way I feel.

Kissinger: That I think, that has meaning. That has human compassion. You show where you stand, but you don’t involve the presidency of the United States in an official act. On behalf, I mean let’s face it, if Pakistan’s and Kashmir’s killed eight Indians in the Olympic stadium in front of everybody, we would [unclear] the Israeli Government.

[Omitted here is a portion of the conversation not related to the Munich incident]

Kissinger: I talked to Rabin.

Nixon: Sit down.

Kissinger: He was, he was delighted. But he said he had to check with Tel Aviv. He couldn’t make that decision on his own. So then he went to see Rogers. And Rogers called Haig and said, just as I predicted, total lack of enthusiasm [for going to the UN]. Rabin is totally opposed to it personally, but he’ll just refer it to Jerusalem. Total lack of enthusiasm. So Haig said, “Well, that’s too bad because the President is getting sort of interested in it.” And I have a tape of my conversation with Rabin so I’m not making this up. [Unclear]

Nixon: [unclear] Bill is, of course, again here he’s got a chance, star of the world stage-

Kissinger: I know but Bill wants-

Nixon: I don’t why the hell—he’ll do it over here with that [hijacking conference]-

Kissinger: Well he’s done that and that’s fine.

Nixon: That doesn’t make any difference.

Kissinger: But it won’t get us any mileage.

Nixon: By the way, if he doesn’t do it, the hell with it.

Kissinger: We shouldn’t fall on our sword over that.

[Omitted here is discussion of the peace process.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Oval Office, Conversation No. 771-5. No classification marking. The editors transcribed the portion of the conversation published here specifically for this volume.

96. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson and Fernando Rondon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 96. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson and Fernando Rondon of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 6, 1972.

SUBJECT:

International Terrorism at the UN

This would not appear to be an ideal time to get the Security Council to take effective action against international terrorism. At a maximum, we would be seeking to (1) focus world public pressure on those governments which tacitly or directly support groups which engage in acts of international terrorism, (2) bleed Israeli reaction away from acts of military retaliation into more constructive channels, and (3) project our determination to stamp out international terrorism.

In order to achieve the purposes cited above, a Security Council resolution would be needed which: --condemns all acts of international terrorism;

--calls for immediate action by all member states to take all necessary steps to prevent future acts of terrorism;

--demands that member states withhold support from organizations which engage in international terrorism.

Realistically, we would have to expect any resolution containing the foregoing provisions to fail. Only the US, UK, Belgium, Japan, Italy and Argentina could be counted on voting for a strong resolution. If France were persuaded to go along, we would still only have seven affirmative votes—nine are required. Panama and India would be the swing votes, with six negative votes (including possible vetoes) expected from the USSR, PRC, Yugoslavia, Somalia, Sudan and Guinea. (In the General Assembly, things would be worse for us because of Afro-Asian support for liberation movements in general).

The basic issue boils down to whether we wish to back a losing but strong resolution in the Security Council or settle for something less. If we lose: --the terrorists may take heart by the Security Council’s failure to act against them and by an unhelpful airing of Arab grievances against Israel;

--the Israelis, who might well oppose any move to the UN in the first place, would only be further embittered by an abortive effort and even more inclined to handle things their own way;

--the UN would be further exposed as an ineffectual institution.

In short, an appeal to the UN Security Council to seek a strong resolution might exacerbate rather than ease the already tense situation created by the terrorist attack on the Israeli Olympic Team. For these reasons we recommend against seeking meaningful action now on terrorism from the UN Security Council.

Agree ________ Disagree ___________

If, in response to public pressure, we still want to take the matter to the UN, we might instruct our UN Mission to seek a resolution specifically condemning the Munich attack acceptable to the Security Council as a whole. This would stand a better chance of getting through.

Agree _________ Disagree _____________

Another option would be to ask George Bush to explore urgently with UN officials and other delegations how UN action in any form might be taken against international terrorism.

Agree __________ Disagree __________

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 368, 1976 Olympics. Secret. Sent for action. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “OBE.” There is no indication that Kissinger agreed or disagreed with any of the recommendations.

97. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 97. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 6, 1972.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT — Evening Report

1. ICAO Conference — I addressed a legal conference of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) at the Department of State this noon, expressing United States Government shock and sympathy with respect to the terrorist attack at the Munich Olympics. I urged the Conference to work hard to produce a draft convention which would help put an end to aerial piracy and terrorism. There is reason to hope that the Munich events, added to the publicity surrounding the conference and my appearance, may have the effect of galvanizing the conference into success-fully drafting such a convention. For example, the UK, which heretofore has opposed a convention, today put forth a positive proposal.

2. Munich tragedy stimulates legislative action — We are taking steps to insure that the legislative implications of Munich are thoroughly understood on the Hill. I called Senator Eastland to suggest that we should move without delay on the House version of the Administration’s legislation for the protection of foreign officials in the United States which passed the House this session. David Abshire and Marshall Wright called on Senator Hruska this afternoon for the same purpose. As a result, Eastland and Hruska have now agreed to call a special meeting of the Judiciary Committee tomorrow afternoon at which time the House bill will be approved with the intention of reporting it to the floor for passage on Friday.

We also discussed with Senator Hruska the need to move without delay on his air piracy bill (S. 2567) and on the implementing legislation for the Hague Convention on Hijacking, both of which are languishing in the Commerce Committee. Senator Hruska is totally cooperative, and we will be moving vigorously in the next few days to try to stimulate action in both the Senate and House Committees.

3. Congressional Reaction to the Munich Tragedy — The Senate today passed by a vote of 83-0 S.Res. 358 which expressed the sense of the Senate on the tragic killings of the Israeli Olympic team members at the 20th Olympiad at Munich. The resolution expressed sorrow and alarm at the episode, condemned terrorism anywhere in the world and called for the U.S. to join with the world in combatting the menace by all available means. Senators Scott and Mansfield took the leadership introducing the resolution and were joined by numerous other Senators.

The House passed an identical resolution, introduced by Congressman Cellar, by a vote of 346-0.

No public criticism of Chancellor Brandt or the German Government has been expressed by members of Congress.

4. Consultations with Ambassadors on Measures to avoid Terrorism -We called in Ambassadors and Charges from all over the world e.g. UK, France, Germany, USSR, Canada, Latin American countries, Morocco, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Turkey, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, India, Iran, Kuwait and Jordan to convey U.S. views on the Munich tragedy and to urge them to devote renewed attention to combatting acts of terrorism. We called attention to your sending the Montreal Sabotage Convention to the Senate today and to our appeal to Congress for prompt legislation to strengthen U.S. laws against hijacking and improving protection of foreign officials. We asked for collective effort and any suggestions for a program to develop an effective counter program. Apart from deploring the Munich tragedy most Ambassadors listened intently and promised to query their governments for views and ideas. The Saudi, Lebanese and Kuwaiti Ambassadors cautiously threaded a line between not condoning the violence but not condemning the fedayeen movement outright.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. No classification marking.

98. Telegram 164170 From the Department of State to Embassy in Israel 98. Telegram 164170 From the Department of State to Embassy in Israel1

Washington, September 8, 1972, 2025Z.

Subject:

Munich Incident: Secretary-Rabin Conversation Sept 6

1. Secretary and Israeli Ambassador Rabin met September 6 to discuss aspects of Munich incident. Also present were Minister Dean, Political Counselor Raviv, Ambassador Barbour, Deputy Assistant Secretary Atherton, and Country Director Stackhouse. Summary of conversation transmitted by reftel.

2. secretary opened conversation with expressions of shock and sorrow we felt at Munich incident. Rabin expressed gratitude. He said he would first like to give reaction to idea that terrorist problem might be taken to Security Council. Foreign Minister Eban appreciated deeply U.S. efforts to be helpful but he did have reservations re using Security Council as means to achieve goals. Reasons Foreign Minister believed SC meeting would not be helpful were: (1) the main reason is that President of SC is representative of Peoples Republic of China. Israel did not believe it could have any doubts re his attitude and unwillingness to cooperate in SC, (2) in 20 years in which Israel had been in UN, it knew of no resolutions passed by SC when Arabs were in opposition. Israel did not believe it had any reason to hope that this would change. (3) Demonstrable incapacity of SC to do anything effective creates quote deep depression unquote in Israel. An attempt and then a failure encourages those it is meant to condemn. (4) Israel believed that UN prestige, even in public relations matters, had reached such low ebb that for U.S. to turn to it would give it unjustified increase in prestige.

3. Secretary thanked Rabin for quick response. As Rabin knew Secretary had shared Foreign Minister’s reservation re resort to SC. USG, however, was anxious bring about effective action and felt all possible alternatives should be considered. Secretary wanted GOI to know that even though we had had reservations re feasible UN action, we were prepared proceed along these lines if Israel thought it useful. Secretary noted he had made statement before committee meeting in Washington (Legal Subcommittee, ICAO) to devise means to end hijacking. This statement might be helpful in bringing about some action. We ought to be thinking about what else might be done in circumstances. We were talking with other governments, including Arab governments giving financial support to terrorists. This could be useful.

4. Rabin said that GOI asked that USG take following actions: 1) Talk to those Arab countries believed to support Arab terrorists. GOI believed there was relation between Black September group and Fatah. Secretary and Atherton interjected that we had information to same effect. Rabin noted the Lebanese Prime Minister had admitted indirectly there was such a link. (2) U.S. could come out in clear way and explain to Cairo, Beirut and Damascus that as long as they offered their territory as refuge for groups acting against Israel, or as staging areas for actions in other countries, they would have to bear responsibility. (3) USG could take action by talking with Western European countries to persuade them to carry out, by more effective means, actions against Arab organizations linked to terrorist organizations.

5. Secretary said we were talking to European countries already. Rabin commented that there were specific organizations operating in Europe and he noted that even in New York, PLO had Reps. Rabin Said that these organizations must be made to know they could not operate freely.

6. Rabin said that another way that might be employed to improve security would be for U.S. to advise European countries re security matters. It would also be helpful if at working level means could be devised for more practical exchange of views about what could be done re hijacking and other terrorist acts.

7. Secretary said that was good idea and we ought to do it. He noted that in last 24 hours, USG working intensively with local authorities, had ensured increased security for Israelis in U.S. Atherton Said that NEA, in response to request from Minister Dean to Country Director Stackhouse that morning, had forwarded to Dep Asst Sec Gentile recommendations designed to lead to improved security of Israeli personnel and installations in U.S. Secretary remarked that President’s comments to Mrs. Meir re our resolve to assure Israeli security in U.S. would be helpful in obtaining resources necessary at local and national levels. Secretary continued that U.S. wanted have close working relations with Israel on this matter to obtain quick action if necessary and to know what each is doing on continuing basis. Secretary noted that we could not do everything at once. But we should exchange views. There were, as Israel knew, problems deriving from division of federal and local authorities. Secretary offered to try to be of help in resolving such problems.

8. Rabin said that Israel’s problems, of course, were not only those arising in U.S. There was need to do all necessary to encourage better climate generally. There was need to make provision of security of Israelis traveling in U.S. (he mentioned approaching visit of 100 man Israeli Philharmonic), but there was need as well to cooperate in political field so as to increase pressure and prevent repetition of atrocities.

9. Secretary Rogers agreed now was time to undertake such actions. He again noted USG had made many diplomatic contacts Sept 6. All Assistant Secretaries responsible for geographic areas had been involved. Part of job, he recognized, was to keep Ambassador Rabin advised of what we were doing. Countries, of course, might be able to help. Secretary encouraged Rabin to pass any suggestions to Atherton.

10. Rabin then turned to question of cancellation of Olympic Games. He described GOI position carefully: Israeli view in view of what had happened at Olympic Games was that games should not continue. GOI did not want to turn and present request to others to withdraw from Olympic Games but if U.S. team would have cut its presence there, Israel would have welcomed this. Therefore, this was way Israel was putting it officially. All other formulations of Israeli position on this matter USG might have heard were irrelevant.

11. Secretary said he understood. Rabin said he did not believe it was advisable to elaborate. What Rabin was expressing was GOI feeling rather than firm operational request.

12. Rabin asked what USG had heard re reaction to Munich incident in Arab countries. How did USG analyze it? Atherton said it was hard to generalize. A common theme, however, seemed to be general sense of feeling of discomfiture and uneasiness and reluctance of governments to speak out officially either way or even to give press guidelines. We did not know if this situation would hold. Atherton said we were getting private Arab statements of disapproval but none were ready to come out publicly in this sense. Atherton said only clear critical Arab statement was from King Hussein. Lebanese statement was less strong but not bad for Lebanon: it opened with expression of regret but then made statements stressing Palestinian despair and trying explain Palestinian motives.

13. Secretary commented on idiotic and insane nature of atrocity at Munich. Games had been going so well and now one result was that Arab cause in eyes of world had suffered setback. Perhaps one day those who died would be considered martyrs in cause of peace.

14. Rabin said notion he sensed in some media comment was that Munich incident would stimulate efforts for peace. Israel believed there was need for peace but assumption that atrocities should bring new political initiatives only plays into hand of those who commit atrocities. Secretary interjected, point we were making to diplomats was that Munich incident was setback to prospects of peace. Rabin said that after Egyptian expulsion of Russians there seemed to be sense of relaxation and broadening of chances for peace. Now after Munich, things were taken back to where they were. Rabin said that feeling in Israel was if there were groups like this in Arab world, who could guarantee to Israel once there was political settlement, that Israel would not be in worse position? At present Arab options were limited because of military positions Israel held but imagine if there were terrorist incidents like this after an interim agreement, what would happen? People would turn to each other and ask, what lessons can we draw? This was setback to hopes aroused by Russian pull out that more options might be opened up.

15. Secretary said it was obvious this was not time to make definitive analysis because we were too close to events. In any event, one could not talk of peace initiatives now. We would not do it. In this case, people would say Munich is way to do it. Secretary hoped world reaction would cause Arab government to say to their peoples world opinion was opposed to terrorism. Secretary noted Munich would likely weaken Sadat’s hand in UN. We hoped Munich would not be setback to cause of peace in long run and that, in fact, it would help. but Rabin might be right. Rabin said Israel would be careful not to talk about new initiatives.

16. After brief exchange regarding funeral arrangements in Israel, there was further discussion of advantages for terrorists in cancellation of Games. Ambassador Barbour observed Games in fact were innocent party in this atrocity. Secretary noted that terrorists might call cancellation of Games a victory. Dean said that almost anything that might be done would be exploited by them. Now terrorist supporters were claiming that fact games were not stopped meant world was not on side of Israel.

17. Secretary asked if Rabin knew where terrorists had been based. Rabin replied in negative, commenting this was problem in which security services could have done better. Rabin said he did not have any real report on incident. He noted Prime Minister’s statement of appreciation that FRG had taken all measures to control situation, including use of force. Secretary remarked that President aware of this statement and regarded it as statesmanlike.

18. It was agreed that in his comments to press, Rabin would, if asked, express GOI position as he had put it to Secretary re ending of Games, would note discussion had been about measures to increase security and say that both sides agreed stay in close touch and encourage others to enhance security precautions.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 609, Country Files, Middle East, Israel, Sept 1971-Sept. 1972. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Stackhouse (NEA/IAI) on September 7 and approved by Atherton, Bremer, and Eliot. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Beirut, Kuwait, Jidda, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Tripoli, and USUN.

99. Circular Telegram 164986 From the Department of State of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom and Other Posts 99. Circular Telegram 164986 From the Department of State of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom and Other Posts1

Washington, September 9, 1972, 2334Z.

1. The President has charged me with responsibility for U.S. efforts to mobilize the international community to take action to combat terrorism in the wake of the Munich tragedy. We believe that as part of our efforts, it would be worthwhile to try to get Arab states which implicitly or explicitly condone terrorism to see themselves as others see them. We are attempting to convey our views on this score to Arab states with which we have influence. Inasmuch as such U.S. efforts are hampered, however, by Arab perception of U.S. as a supporter of Israel, we believe other capitals, such as action addressees, which we see as sharing our aim of combatting terrorism, may be in better position than we to convince Arab friends that condoning or maintaining ambivalent attitude toward terrorism is against Arabs’ best interests.

2. You should therefore approach host governments at highest appropriate level for purpose of suggesting that these governments try to find ways to get across to Arabs the negative effects that support of or failure to disassociate selves from terrorism have on Arab image and real interests. In addition to explaining purpose of this exercise along above lines, you may present following arguments for possible use by host governments in making case against terrorism with arabs.

{A} Munich tragedy has once again brought home lesson that terrorism works against best Arab interests. In our judgment, Arab image in world public opinion, not just American opinion, has been badly tarnished. Despite fact that most responsible Arabs privately recognize negative impact of terrorism on Arab interests, their failure, by and large, to disassociate themselves from terrorist acts places even these responsible elements in role of supporters of terrorism in eyes of world. Position taken by some Arab governments that they have no connection with terrorist acts is simply not credible to international opinion, inasmuch as terrorists carry Arab passports, operate from Arab countries, broadcast and print their views from Arab capitals, etc. moreover, failure to exert more control renders policies of Arab governments prisoner to situation created by terrorists.

{B} Prospects for just and lasting Middle East peace have been seriously undermined by terrorism. Such acts as Munich murders have in fact markedly raised tensions in Middle East. As long as terrorist war is inflicted on Israel, Israelis, as much as we may wish it were otherwise, will inevitably wage counter-war, as witness recent retaliatory raids against fedayeen installations in Lebanon and Syria. Area situation can quickly become very dangerous under such circumstances. furthermore, Arab diplomatic efforts at UN and in other international forums in favor of peaceful resolution of Arab Israeli conflict lose credibility when Arabs at same time are seen as promoting, tacitly or explicitly, indiscriminate violence.

{C} While we recognize some Arab governments will continue to feel they cannot condemn terrorists publicly, we would hope they could at least disassociate themselves from the terrorists by denying latter means and opportunities of operating from territory of Arab states in question. Although decision to do so might involve strains, net result would work greatly to Arab advantage by improving Arab public image, increasing chances for ultimate peace, and enhancing security of Arab states.

3. You should point out Black September organization (BSO) has claimed credit not only for Munich massacre but also for murder of Jordanian Prime Minister Wasfi Tell in Cairo in November 1971, attempted murder of Jordanian Ambassador to U.K. Zaid Rifai in December 1971, hijacking of Sabena jetliner to Tel Aviv in May 1972, and blowing up of oil storage tanks in Trieste in August 1972. Our information indicates that BSO has clandestine links with Fatah. Yasir Arafat, head of Palestine Liberation Organization (the overall umbrella organization) and Fatah (main component of PLO), was quoted after Munich massacre as emphasizing unity of all fedayeen action, thus lending credence to indications of linkage of BSO to Fatah. It is thus not credible to make distinction, as terrorist organizations and certain Arab governments sometimes try to do, between “respectable” fedayeen organizations and those engaging in indiscriminate terrorism. We therefore hope that governments will express publicly their condemnation not only of BSO but of fedayeen terrorism in general and at the same time call publicly on states harboring or supporting terrorists to cease this support. You should also point out that silence on part of governments would contribute to perpetuation of myth that there is no connection between “respectable” fedayeen and those practicing terrorism.

Additional action addressees:

Sofia, Warsaw, Stockholm, Bern, Djakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Rabat, Tunis, Ankara, Athens, Khartoum, Kinshasa, Dakar, Lusaka, Dar es Salaam, New Delhi, Tehran, Panama City, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Brasilia, Caracas, Bogota, Lima, Asuncion, Georgetown, Kingston, Port of Spain, Jerusalem

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by G. Norman Anderson of (NEA/EGY). Copies were sent to 55 embassies. Cleared by Sisco, Fessenden, Ross, Phillip H. Stoddard (INR/DDR/RNA), Herz, Hummel, Davies, and Atherton; and approved by Rogers.

100. Telegram 167911 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations 100. Telegram 167911 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations1

Washington, September 14, 1972, 1941Z.

For Bush

1. You are requested to transmit the following letter from Secretary Rogers to Secretary General Waldheim. Its principal purpose is to show the continuing U.S. interest in the problem of terrorism and our intention to play a constructive role within the context of the Waldheim item. We would like very much for this letter to be made public by you. However, we are aware of the considerations that you have outlined, including Waldheim’s own views, which might make it undesirable for this letter to be made public. Therefore, you should ask Waldheim, emphasizing however our preference for making the letter public. If, of course, he has strong objections, then letter would remain in the private domain and we would defer to his views. However, we would want to be sure that he feels strongly on this matter because if Waldheim is more or less relaxed and puts his views more or less in terms of qte preference unqte, our preference is that it be made public.

2. Qte: Dear Mr. Secretary General: The United States welcomes your initiative in requesting the inclusion in the agenda of the 27th session of the General Assembly of an item of an important and urgent character entitled “measures to prevent terrorism and other forms of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms.” The tragic spread of terrorist violence most recently evidenced by the criminal attacks at the Olympic Games in Munich can only be halted if all members of the United Nations take effective action to fulfill their obligations under international law to prevent their territory from being used by terrorist groups to organize and plan violent acts against other states or their nationals.

International law has long recognized an obligation of states not to assist, finance or tolerate terrorist activities directed toward the violent overthrow of the regime of another state or toward fomenting civil strife in another state.

Most recently, the General Assembly declared in the Declaration on Principle of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations (G.A. Res. 2625 (XXV)), adopted on October 24, 1970 that: ‘Every state has the duty to refrain from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of civil strife or terrorist acts in another state or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts, when the acts referred to. . .involve a threat or use of force. . . .

‘Also, no state shall organize, assist, foment, finance, incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities directed towards the violent overthrow of the regime of another state, or interfere in civil strife in another state.’

The General Assembly’s unanimous reaffirmation of these legal principles constitutes an important statement of the charter obligations of member states. Full implementation of these principles by all members is vital for the maintenance of international peace and security and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

It is also important that states take effective measures to apprehend and punish individuals who have committed acts of terrorism against innocent persons. As an immediate first step the United States hopes that as many governments as possible will become parties to existing conventions dealing with crimes against civil aviation and will expedite efforts to enforce the internationally endorsed principles of these conventions. Similarly, the United States believes that the General Assembly should give priority attention to the draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons with a view to the adoption of a new international convention on this subject at the earliest possible time.

The United Nations can perform a great service by recommending measures to fully implement existing international law concerning terrorist acts against innocent persons and by developing effective measures for the protection of fundamental freedoms against terrorist violence.

Again, Mr. Secretary General may I assure you of our desire to cooperate fully with you in your very timely and constructive initiative.

Sincerely, William P. Rogers Unqte

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by John Norton Moore (L) and cleared by Sisco and De Palma.

101. Telegram 169556 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations 101. Telegram 169556 From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations1

Washington, September 15, 1972, 2354Z.

Subject:

Handling of Terrorism in UNGA

Ref:

USUN 3167 and 3256

1. Dept has not reached final position on content of res we hope to emerge from UNGA debate on terrorism but in general we plan for res to focus on as concrete steps as are feasible, such as urging ratification of three conventions on civil aviation safety, cooperation in drafting of enforcement convention underpinning those conventions, calling for states not to encourage or give sanctuary to terrorists but to take necessary measures to deter or punish them. We have given extensive consideration to prospect of convention on terrorism but have not yet reached firm conclusion on how this aspect should be handled.

2. We fully share SYG’s desire to take advantage of present international mood deploring recent terrorist acts. We believe that we must do all possible to build momentum within Assembly to translate this general attitude into specific desirable actions. In our view best way to stimulate delegates to a will to act is to air problem in all its aspects in course of general debate and to obtain maximum attention to subject at very opening of UNGA. Secretary’s speech will be directed toward this purpose and as you know we are urging other Foreign Ministers and representatives to highlight problem of terrorism and call for Assembly action to cope with it. Initial indications are that number of other speakers in general debate will be doing so. Following this full airing in general debate we see advantage in General Committee having referred item directly to Sixth Committee for action. We would not see advantage in having plenary take up substance of issue prior to committee consideration, as lengthy debate in that forum would be most likely to delay consideration of substance and do little if anything not accomplished in general debate to improve chance of obtaining optimum resolution.

3. In addition we wish to have Sixth Committee act as expeditiously as possible on report of ILC which contains ILC draft articles on protection of diplomats, which scheduled to be first item on agenda. These articles are in relatively good shape and constitute significant substantive step forward in measures against broad problem of terrorism. However, we do not wish two items to be intermingled as ILC report stands much better chance of quick positive action if explicit connection between two issues is avoided. We hope that draft articles on protection of diplomats will lead to earliest possible convention and hope for GA resolution which would convene a conference prior to 28th UNGA with states requested to submit their written observations on draft articles prior to conference. USUN is requested to inquire of Secretariat if dates are available for scheduling three week conference. An early WEO meeting to consider best tactics on this item would seem desirable.

4. You should seek earliest opportunity to convey above views to SYG stressing our conviction that allocation of item on terrorism to plenary prior to Sixth Committee consideration would not be advantageous and urging tactical approach which would get item referred promptly to Sixth Committee for its action on resolution. You should assure SYG we are making every effort to induce extensive attention to this item in general debate speeches of others.

Info: Ottawa, Paris, Reykjavik, Rome, NATO, The Hague, Stockholm, Bern, Wellington, Canberra, Tokyo

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Routine. Repeated to 21 additional posts. Drafted by Armitage, and cleared by De Palma, Stevenson, Atherton, and Sisco.

102. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 102. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 18, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Measures to Combat Terrorism

I want to give you an initial report on the steps we have already taken, and some idea of what we have in mind for the future, pursuant to your directive to me to initiate international and domestic actions to combat terrorism.

Your strong statement the morning after the Munich tragedy and the follow-on actions we have taken with other Governments have had a considerable impact in imparting a sense of urgency on this question throughout the world community. Our veto of the one-sided Security Council Resolution on Sunday and George Bush’s forceful remarks in the Council have clearly signaled the seriousness of our concern and our determination to convince others that the time has come to get tough in the fight against terrorism. We intend to keep up the momentum we have generated and are now considering our strategy on this question at the forthcoming UNGA, where we expect terrorism to be a priority item.

I have established two special committees in the Department of State under Deputy Secretary Irwin, one to stimulate and coordinate international actions against terrorism chaired by Assistant Secretary Sisco, and the second to protect foreign persons and property in the United States headed, in Deputy Under Secretary Macomber’s absence this week, by Acting Deputy Under Secretary Donelan. The following is a summary of the more important specific actions we have taken and are contemplating:

Domestic

1. Immediately after the September 5 Munich incident and the killing of the Israeli hostages, we asked the Executive Protective Service to provide increased protection for Israeli, Arab, German and Soviet diplomatic and consular establishments against attacks by the JDL or other groups. In response to Mayor Lindsay’s request to you for federal assistance, 40 Secret Service and EPS officers were made available to man 23 fixed posts in the city. Security during the UN General Assembly in New York will pose a special problem, to which we will give priority consideration.

2. We have taken steps to screen more closely visa applications of potential terrorists.

3. We are looking into ways to tighten controls over foreign groups and organizations in the United States which have ties to movements advocating or practicing political terrorism; e.g., the Palestine Liberation Office in New York, and groups of Arab and Iranian students in this country.

International

4. September 6-7 we initiated consultations with Ambassadors and Charges of nearly 50 countries in Washington to solicit any ideas which their governments might have on ways to tackle the problem of political terrorism.

5. We have approached some 42 governments urging them to get across to the Arab governments that the latter cannot evade responsibility for acts of fedayeen terrorism so long as they do not take steps to deny support and facilities to them. We have also made known our views on this point directly to certain Arab governments.

6. Paralleling these approaches we sent a circular to all diplomatic posts instructing our Chiefs of Mission to deliver a personal letter from me to the Foreign Ministers and Secretaries September 11 stressing the need for more effective international action to prevent terrorist acts. I also urged that they join us in encouraging as many governments as possible to become parties to existing international conventions in dealing with criminal interference with civil aviation and to expedite efforts to enforce the principles of these conventions. Finally, I made it very clear that we are prepared to join in the most effective international action which other governments are willing to undertake.

7. Secretary General Waldheim has moved rapidly to include the issue of terrorism on the agenda for the forthcoming United Nations General Assembly. I will be sending him a message shortly expressing our appreciation for the attention which he has directed to this pressing problem and assuring him of our readiness to cooperate fully to obtain effective international action against political terrorism.

8. To stress the importance which we attach to this problem, I intend in my opening address to the General Assembly to emphasize the need for early international action to come to grips with the problem of terrorism. I am also urging other Foreign Ministers and other heads of delegation to focus on this subject in their speeches.

9. The Legal Adviser has contacted several nongovernmental organizations in the field of international law and protection of human rights to enlist their assistance in contributing ideas and in possibly adopting statements or resolutions deploring the spread of terrorism and calling on governments to fulfill their international obligations to prevent terrorism and to punish terrorists. Charles Rhyne of the World Peace Through Law Center, Whitney Debevoise of the International Commission of Jurists, and John Carey of the International League for the Rights of Man all expressed a willingness to help, and we are sending them draft resolutions for their consideration. The International Law Association (Cecil Olmstead) and the American Society of International Law (Stephen Schwebel) are also possibilities which we will contact in this regard.

10. Our delegation to the Interpol General Assembly in Frankfurt September 19-27, which will be headed by Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Rossides, will make a major effort to get the Assembly to focus on terrorism as an international police problem. Specifically, we will seek to obtain Interpol Assembly endorsement of a resolution agreeing to use of existing Interpol machinery and services for this purpose.

11. We have set up an ad hoc interagency committee to coordinate intelligence data regarding terrorist organizations and their activities and to improve exchanges of such information with other governments.

12. We have also noted Senate Resolution 358 and House Resolution 1106, both passed unanimously, which resolved that “all means be sought by which the civilized world may cut off from contact with civilized mankind any peoples or any nation giving sanctuary, support, sympathy, aid, or comfort to acts of murder and barbarism such as those at Munich”. We are looking closely to see what steps might appropriately be taken in conformity with the views expressed in Congress. However, the idea of a boycott of certain countries poses a number of serious questions which must be carefully considered before reaching any decisions. Meanwhile, we are drafting a suggested “sense of the Congress” resolution which would re-enforce the kinds of action the Executive Branch is pursuing.

13. Finally, we are urging the Senate to complete action on HR-15883, an Act for the Protection of Foreign Officials and Official Guests. This bill, as amended, would make it possible to extend the facilities of the Executive Protective Service not only to foreign officials in the United States on official business but also to official guests such as the Israeli Philharmonic Orchestra which will commence a tour of this country later this month.

We are keeping in particularly close touch with the Israelis with regard both to (a) the measures we have already undertaken and have in mind to protect Israeli installations and personnel in this country, and (b) our efforts in the international field. They have expressed their satisfaction with these steps and appreciation for the Administration’s determination to protect Israeli personnel and installations in the United States.

I will be giving you progress reports from time to time as our plans develop and as progress toward combatting terrorism is achieved.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Atherton on September 14 and cleared by Donelan, Sisco, Armitage, Boyd, Wright, Fessenden, and Ross.

103. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 103. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, September 21, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Measures to Combat Terrorism

In my report to you on September 18, I advised of the initiatives taken or placed in train with foreign governments, our posts abroad, and with intelligence enforcement agencies of the Executive Branch.

High level consultations were undertaken with foreign government representatives here and abroad and with the Secretary General of the United Nations. Discussions were held here with Ambassadors and Charges of nearly 50 countries on ways to tackle the problem of political terrorism; abroad we have approached some 42 governments urging them to get across to Arab governments that the latter cannot evade responsibility for acts of fedayeen terrorists; and I have sent personal letters through our Chiefs of Mission to over one hundred Foreign Ministers, stressing the need for more effective international action and urging widest support for international conventions relating to hijacking. In my opening address to the UNCA, I will emphasize the need for early international action to come to grips with the problem of terrorism. I have urged foreign ministers and other. heads of delegations to focus on this subject in their speeches and a large number have indicated that they will do so.

We have proposed an initiative at the INTERPOL General Assembly now meeting in Frankfurt, Germany, to urge the Assembly to focus on terrorism as an international police problem. Present indications are that the Assembly will agree to a resolution on committing INTERPOL resources.

On the domestic side, we have taken coordinative action with the intelligence and enforcement agencies of the Executive Branch. Meeting regularly with these agencies (FBI, CIA, INS, NSA, Customs, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Secret Service and Treasury), we have reviewed the flow of intelligence from overseas to the domestic agencies, and to local police jurisdictions, and the existing mechanisms for prompt and efficient exchange and follow-up of all possible leads. All these organizations are giving the highest priority to the problem before us. The next meeting of this group is scheduled for 10 a.m., September 26,1972.

Our posts abroad have been instructed to intensify the examination of all Arab visa applicants, and a system has been initiated under which the names of all such applicants will be screened against the records of CIA, FBI, INS, and the U.S. Secret Service prior to the issuance of the visa. The INS is furnishing the FBI with the names and locations of all Arab students currently in the United States.

As a result of past terrorist actions against our personnel overseas, detailed defensive plans against kidnapping and terrorism had been developed. All overseas posts have been alerted to activate these plans. These posts have also been alerted to the threat that explosive letters might be mailed to U.S. installations worldwide and were instructed to implement screening procedures. Descriptions of known types of explosive letters and packages are being furnished all posts.

As I reported earlier, the Executive Protective Service and the local police jurisdictions are providing increased protection to Israeli, Arab, German and Soviet diplomatic establishments throughout the United States. The Secret Service has assumed responsibility for the personal protection of certain distinguished foreign visitors (such as Israeli Foreign Minister Eban, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko, Jordanian Foreign Minister Zayd, Jordanian Crown Prince Hassan, Yemen Prime Minister Al-Aini, Israeli Finance Minister Sapir) coming to the UNGA, as well as to the International Monetary Fund meeting to be held in Washington, September 25-29.

All enforcement agencies, Federal and local, have been advised of the several foreign performing arts groups currently touring the United States, and local jurisdictions have been requested to provide police protection.

I will keep you advised of further developments.

Wllliam P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Donelan on September 20.

104. Information Memorandum From Assistant Secretary of State, International Organization Affairs (De Palma) and Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers 104. Information Memorandum From Assistant Secretary of State, International Organization Affairs (De Palma) and Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September, 21, 1972.

Scenario for Handling Terrorism Item at the General Assembly

Our objective at the General Assembly will be to stimulate intensive international concern over the problem of international terrorism and to seek as much concrete action as we are able to obtain. We have in mind circulating a resolution which would (a) urge ratification of the three existing conventions dealing with offenses against civil aviation, (b) call for urgent ICAO drafting of and a plenipotentiary conference on an enforcement convention underpinning these conventions before the end of the year, (c) urge states not to aid or give sanctuary to terrorists but to take necessary measures to deter or punish them (d) ask that a plenipotentiary conference be held in early 1973 to consider adoption of a convention against terrorism, a draft of which we will have circulated, and (e) urge members to address the political problems which may provide a pretext for terrorist acts (draft text of resolution is at Tab A).

The International Law Commission has prepared draft articles of a convention on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents. These draft articles are in the ILC report which we will want to have taken up as the first item in the Sixth Committee in order that the committee can act on the report outside the context of its debate on terrorism which is bound to create sharp controversy. We will ask that the Sixth Committee complete a convention based on these articles and that this Assembly adopt and open it for signature.

The Assembly will be initially seized with the item on terrorism when the General Committee meets September 21. We will seek to obtain a recommendation that the item be referred promptly to the Sixth Committee where we will push for urgent action. The Assembly debate on the General Committee report is limited and we would anticipate sufficient support to have the item inscribed and assigned as recommended by the General Committee on or about September 22.

Your speech on September 25 will launch the effort to stress the urgency of the problem and elicit public expressions of concern and support. Initial responses to your letter have, in general, been encouraging and we will be continuing in the corridors our efforts to have others speak out on the issue. We would plan for you to use the occasions of your lunches with the Latin Americans and African representatives, and selected bilateral discussions to urge your colleagues to include stress on the problem of terrorism in their addresses (see Tab B for more detailed suggestions), and to support General Assembly action along the lines of our draft resolution. The ten Foreign Ministers of the European Community have already issued a statement expressing their concern and their intent to concert their positions on the subject at the UN. We would expect further support from Latin American and possibly some Asian or African representatives. There seems little doubt that the subject will receive a full airing in the course of the general debate.

Our major parliamentary problem will be to prevent the formation of a solid African front against the item as an expression of solidarity with the Arabs and on the grounds that it will be used against national liberation movements. The item will also give rise to a far-ranging debate, covering the Middle East and possibly Vietnam, and the final resolution may well include some language distasteful to us. Efforts may be made to have a general debate on the item in plenary, prior to its allocation to a committee, in order to provide a larger forum for such a political debate.

Sixth Committee consideration of the item would probably take place in late October. There will be extended debate in the committee but we would hope to have a resolution reported out for vote in the General Assembly by early December.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by Fessenden, L, Ross, EA, Atherton, and ARA. Tabs A and B are attached but not published.

105. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 105. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 22, 1972.

Draft Convention For the Prevention and Punishment of Certain Acts of International Terrorism

The new Draft Terrorism Convention is intended to deal with the danngerous recent trend to internationalize terrorism and civil violence as evidenced in the recent Munich tragedy. The central mechanism of the convention is to single out acts of political violence which occur both outside the State of nationality of the perpetrator and outside the State against which the act is directed. In addition, to be covered an act is required to be directed against civilians rather than members of the Armed Forces of a State in the course of military hostilities.

The Convention is narrowly drawn and would exclude civil violence in which a national is acting against his own government within the territory of his State. In addition it would exclude acts of violence which take place in the State against which the acts are directed. The purpose of limiting the Convention in this fashion is to try to single out the recent internationalization of violent acts committed abroad, and to increase the chances for agreement.

Within the scope of covered acts the Convention then declares that anyone who unlawfully kills, causes serious bodily harm or kidnaps another person commits an offense of international significance. States Party to the Convention would be required to extend their jurisdiction over such offenses, make such offenses crimes punishable by severe penalties, and to extradite or prose-cute alleged offenders found in their territory. The machinery for extradition and prosecution basically follows the Montreal Hijacking and ILC Protection of Diplomats machinery.

COVERED ACTS WOULD INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: (1) The Munich Tragedy and any other case of a Palestinian attack on Israeli citizens abroad,

(2) The assassination of the Foreign Minister of Jordan in Egypt,

(3) The recent mailings of explosive devices to Israeli diplomats,

(4) The Croatian hijacking in Switzerland (though the hijacking Conventions would take precedence).

ACTS NOT COVERED WOULD INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: (1) The Lod Airport attack,

(2) Palestinian attacks on Israel if committed within Israel,

(3) Attacks by liberation groups in Southern Africa within the territory of the State attacked,

(4) Acts by or against members of the Armed Forces of a State in the course of military hostilities.

We have this afternoon given copies of the new Draft Convention to IO, AF, and NEA.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. Drafted by Moore. The draft convention was attached but not published.

106. Telegram 174121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ceylon 106. Telegram 174121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Ceylon1

Washington, September 22, 1972, 2335Z.

Subject:

Terrorism Item in UN General Assembly

1. GA will consider Saturday Sept. 23 whether to approve recommendation of General Committee, passed Sept. 22 by 15 (Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Cyprus, France, Haiti, Iceland, Japan, New Zealand, Philippines, Paraguay, Rwanda, UK, USA, Uruguay) to 7 (China, Ethiopia, Guinea, Libya, Mauritania, Mauritius, Syria) with 2 (Czechoslovakia, USSR) abstentions, that terrorism item be inscribed on agenda. Present indications are that unless tomorrow in plenary number of countries now apparently taking uncertain positions decide to vote in favor this recommendation could be defeated. Therefore, urgent efforts are required with govts to explain why inscription is in their enlightened interest and why defeat of GC recommendation would involve serious blow to the UN for a number of reasons.

2. SYG Waldheim proposed this item himself and entirely on his own initiative. A vote against inscription would be widely interpreted as a vote against him and his office, weakening the UN. Still more important, unwillingness of UN majority even to consider issue of terrorism, which peoples of the world regard as urgent concern of the world community, would be widely interpreted as sign of futility and irrelevance of the organization.

3. As far as US is concerned, we regard issue of terrorism as matter of top priority. This may not be, of course, an argument that will weigh heavily with some countries. You should know however that top levels of our govt will be looking at Sept. 23 vote, how individual countries voted, and what efforts were made to make sure they are aware of significance of their vote.

4. With regard to relation this problem to Middle East we believe that, while undertaking urgent measures to eradicate terrorism, we should also address underlying conflicts from which it springs. However, following realities must be recognized: a) only ultimate solution remains peaceful settlement on basis of Security Council Resolution 242; b) Palestinian Arabs from whose ranks terrorist movement draws its principal participants, have legitimate grievances; c) terrorist route to their solution is destructive of real interests of Palestinians of whom terrorists represent small minority and of Arab world generally for two basic reasons: 1) universal abhorrence of terrorist acts destroys understanding of and sympathy for legitimate end responsible Arabs seek, a peaceful settlement and 2) terrorism advocates oppose instead of supporting peaceful settlement; it is erroneous to maintain progress toward settlement in accordance SC Res 242 would in itself end terrorism. Opposite is true; it is necessary to make progress toward ending terrorism in order to make progress toward settlement based on Res 242.

5. You can say that the word terrorism is not the important matter. We are flexible on this. It would be very helpful indeed if instructions to host gov delegation could point out that the substance of terrorism being on the agenda is the important thing, not the particular wording employed. As far as liberation movements are concerned, Departmental spokesman made clear their movements and activities are in our view separate. This question should not confuse the issue. General Assembly has already taken clear positions on that subject and will no doubt continue to do so.

6. You can also point out that failure of the GA to inscribe the subject of terrorism on the agenda, particularly when it is a matter of worldwide concern, would in our considered view represent a blow not just to the prestige of its Secretary General but to the credibility of the institution itself. It is obvious that there are widely differing opinions about the subject of terrorism. To refuse to give the General Assembly even the opportunity to air those opinions, to discuss and debate the subject, would be seriously prejudicial to the future of the organization itself. It could be a turning point in its history. Within US, Congress and public would find it incomprehensible that on heels of Munich tragedy, the Croatian hijacking and continued campaign of murder via explosives in mail United Nations failed even to address this issue.

7. Timing of GA votes is always uncertain. you should therefore not be deterred from demarche by belief that it may be too late.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Herz and Armitage and approved by Atherton, Moore, and Daniel Goott (EUR). Sent to Kuala Lumpur, New Delhi, Valletta, Singapore, Vientiane, and USUN; repeated to Amman, Islamabad, and Kathmandu.

107. Telegram 3421 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 107. Telegram 3421 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, September 22, 1972, 2311Z.

Subj: Preliminary Comment on General Committee Action on Terrorism Item

Ref:

USUN 3412

1. As reported reftel, SYG’s efforts at compromise Sept 21 and early Sept 22 did not bear fruit. As UN community gathered in GC chamber mid-morning, supporters of SYG’s initiative had little confidence that initiative could be inscribed in respectable form. UK and France were getting cold feet; Amb Bush spoke to them repeatedly. However, efforts at compromise had so heartened Arab-African group that they overplayed their hand. In particular, African spokesman, who had already pushed for “compromise” that would have sent item to barely honorable burial in ad hoc committee with no responsibility to take meaningful action within specified time-frame, began to threaten SYG and pro-items members that inscription of item would divide UN membership into two hostile camps for indefinite future.

2. In this situation informal caucuses on floor were arena of critical consultations. To US and Western European dels it seemed clear that UN was at least momentarily in serious crisis. Choice seemed to lie between caving to Arab-African efforts to emasculate item and chancing outright defeat on inscription. Either course could have resulted in humiliating experience for SYG and UN.

3. In consultations with key WE dels and with Secretariat, Amb Bush took line that compromise with opponents of item would merely generate increasingly intolerable pressures on Western community in UN. In response to this logic and to his own resentment of Arab-African assaults on prestige of his office, SYG not only abandoned further efforts at compromise but withdrew concessions already offered. SYG explained to General Committee his exhaustive efforts to find solution that could be supported by all members; he believed he had done all he could and had no further proposal to make. With dignity and in resolute tones, SYG said he would not withdraw.

4. Campaign of pro-item elements to retrieve situation immediately gained considerable momentum. With US and WES including France strongly committed, campaign took on sometimes explicit save-the-UN character. Critical factors included staunchness of LA members of GC, PRC inability to mount fast lobbying effort, equivocal position of Soviet Union (which did not lobby and ultimately abstained), encouraging statesmanship of individual dels including Rwanda and Cyprus as reported reftel, Amb Bush made strong speech in support of inscripition.

5. Outcome of GC vote somewhat strengthened prospect that GA plenary will uphold committee recommendations. We continue to feel, however, that maximum effort is required to send item to Sixth Committee with mandate that will hold out some promise of further forward motion. Arabs and AFs can be expected to make last ditch effort in plenary.

Bush

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Priority.

108. Telegram 174571 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal 108. Telegram 174571 From the Department of State to the Consulate in Montreal1

Washington, September 25, 1972, 17:36Z.

For USRep ICAO

Subject:

Proposed ICAO Enforcement Convention

Portion of Secretary Roger’s statement before UNGA setting out steps now required to counter international terrorism follows:

“Two years ago, before the problem had reached its present dimensions, the General Assembly took the first step—the step that must guide us now. In the Declaration on Friendly Relations Among States, which so strongly reaffirmed the right of self-determination, the General Assembly also unanimously declared that each nation has a duty to refrain from assisting or in any way participating in terrorist acts in another state or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts.

The time has come to make that obligation, which this General Assembly solemnly undertook, more specific and meaningful.

In the past two years, the international community has taken certain steps in the field of hijacking. Conventions have been concluded prescribing severe penalties for the hijacking and sabotage of aircraft and requiring states to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs. We urge all states which have not ratified these conventions to do so.

We are now faced with an urgent need to deter and punish international crimes of violence not only in the air but throughout our societies. The United States urges that this Assembly act—and act at once—to meet this challenge.

First, the draft treaty to prosecute or extradite those who attack or kidnap diplomats or officials of foreign governments or international organizations should be completed and opened for signature at this session of the Assembly. The draft articles are already before this Assembly in document A/8710.

Second, a treaty providing for suspension of all air service to countries which fail to punish or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft should be promptly completed and opened for signature. A nation which is a haven for hijackers should be outlawed by the international community. A draft of a treaty to do this has already been considered by a subcommittee of the Civil Aviation Organization. To achieve early action the process of deliberation should be accelerated and a diplomatic conference to complete the treaty should be called without delay.

Third, a new treaty on the export of international terrorism should be concluded and opened for signature as soon as possible. It should include universal condemnation of and require the prosecution or extradition of persons who kill, seriously injure, or kidnap innocent civilians in a foreign state for the purpose of harming or forcing concessions from a state or from an international organization. To complete such a treaty a diplomatic conference should be convened as soon as possible. The United States Government is today circulating a first draft of a treaty. We urge all governments to give it their earnest attention.

We have also embodied these various proposals in a draft resolution, which we submitted to the Secretariat for distribution this morning.”

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Unclassified; Priority. Drafted by C. J. Grip (IO/TRC), and cleared in substance in IO/P and E/AVP.

109. Memorandum From President Nixon to Heads of Departments and Agencies 109. Memorandum From President Nixon to Heads of Departments and Agencies1

Washington, September 25, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Action to Combat Terrorism

As I stated in the attached memorandum to the Secretary of State, I have today directed the establishment of a Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism, to be chaired by Secretary Rogers. I consider it to be of the utmost importance that we move urgently and efficiently to attack this worldwide problem.

This Committee will consider the most effective means by which to prevent terrorism here and abroad, and it will also take the lead in establishing procedures to ensure that our Government can take appropriate action in response to terrorist acts swiftly and effectively. In this regard, Secretary Rogers will be in touch with other governments and international organizations.

I expect that you will be fully responsive to the requests of the Secretary of State and assist him in every way in his efforts to coordinate government-wide actions against terrorism.

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. See Document 110 for text of Nixon’s message to Rogers.

110. Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers 110. Memorandum From President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 25, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Action to Combat Terrorism

Your report to me on the measures that are being taken to combat terrorism indicates that we are moving effectively against the problem of thwarting acts of terrorism both here and abroad. The two committees you have set up to cope with this major problem are making commendable progress toward this end.

Because of the great importance and urgency I attach to dealing with the worldwide problem of terrorism, which encompasses diplomatic, intelligence, and law enforcement functions, I am hereby establishing a Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism.

The Cabinet Committee will be chaired by the Secretary of State and will comprise

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Secretary of Transportation

The United States Ambassador to the United Nations

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs

The Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation

and such others as the Chairman may consider necessary.

The Cabinet Committee will be supported by a Working Group comprised of personally designated senior representatives of the members of the Committee, chaired by the designee of the Secretary of State.

The Committee will consider the most effective means by which to prevent terrorism here and abroad, and it will also take the lead in establishing procedures to ensure that our government can take appropriate action in response to acts of terrorism swiftly and effectively. The Secretary of State will be in touch with other governments and international organizations toward this goal.

Federal officers and Federal departments and agencies are to cooperate fully with the Cabinet Committee in carrying out its functions under this directive, and they shall comply with the policies, guidelines, standards, and procedures prescribed by the Cabinet Committee.

More specifically, the Cabinet Committee shall: (1) Coordinate, among the government agencies, ongoing activity for the prevention of terrorism. This will include such activities as the collection of intelligence worldwide and the physical protection U.S. personnel and installations abroad and foreign diplomats, and diplomatic installations in the United States.

(2) Evaluate all such programs and activities and where necessary recommend methods for their effective implementation.

(3) Devise procedures for reacting swiftly and effectively to acts of terrorism that occur.

(4) Make recommendations to the Director of. the Office of Management and Budget concerning proposed funding of such programs; and

(5) Report to the President, from time to time, concerning the foregoing.

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking.

111. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 111. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 29, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Terrorist Attacks on U.S. Companies

In response to your request of September 18, 1972 regarding the morning brief item (Tab B) on terrorist attacks against four private U.S. companies in Mexico, CIA has submitted a memorandum (Tab A) assessing those incidents and others throughout the world.

CIA notes that in most instances the bombings of U.S. firms, like those in Mexico, are the work of local dissident groups that are essentially motivated by the internal politics of their own country. The violence directed at American businesses in various parts of the world is not part of a campaign against U.S. firms as such, but rather a result of political conflict in which these companies are identified with the establishment or with policies opposed by the dissident groups. In many cases, the violence is part of the generational phenomenon with disaffected, ultranationalist youth striking out at the local “establishment” and its ties to “U.S. economic imperialism” and in other cases, the violence stems from anti-Vietnam war groups.

Those responsible for the violence have, at most, only loose, occasional links with terrorist groups elsewhere and do not appear to be involved in an international conspiracy against American firms.

--An important exception to the above is the alliance of Arab terrorist organizations that have conducted operations across national borders in the Mideast and in Western Europe.

Looking at terrorist incidents area by area, the CIA memorandum notes that: -- In Mexico, the bombings of U.S. -owned businesses on 14-15 September were the first such incidents in recent memory. There is no evidence that the explosions were part of any broad plan. On the same night that the U.S. companies were hit, bombs exploded at the offices of a government financial institution and at a nearby Mexican-owned clothing store. Because these incidents came 48 hours before Mexico’s Independence Day celebration, they probably were set off by dissident elements to embarrass President Echeverria.

-- In Argentina, U.S. businesses have been frequent targets of terrorist attacks in recent years. The most serious came in June 1969 during Governor Rockefeller’s fact-finding trip to Buenos Aires. The bombings on that occasion were professional and well coordinated and all involved supermarkets at least partially owned by Rockefeller financial interests. Since 1969 there have been several incidents involving U.S. businesses but never on the scale of the supermarket bombings. In fact, other foreign businesses — FIAT and certain British firms — have suffered as much as U.S. companies.

-- In Venezuela, urban terrorism and rural guerrilla activity resumed in May and June 1972 after a long hiatus. U.S. Government installations and private U.S. business interests were hit, although much of the violence was aimed at the Caldera government. [less than 1 line not declassified] expect terrorist activities to increase between now and the Venezuelan Presidential election in December 1973.

-- Elsewhere in Latin America, attacks against U.S. businesses have been sporadic and those that have occurred were often related to political or labor strife in the host country.

-- When bombings or robberies against U.S. firms are carried out by terrorists, the perpetrators are usually left-wing extremists who have broken away from more orthodox communist movements.

-- In the Middle East, there is no doubt that fedayeen groups have carried out coordinated attacks against U.S. business firms and the likelihood is for increased terrorist actions against both official and private U.S. interests over the next several months in light of the Arab guerrilla’s belief that the Black September Organization’s Munich operation was a success.

-- In Western Europe, incidents aimed at U.S. business firms and at government property apparently are the work of anti-Vietnam war groups. The unexploded bombs which were found in the Paris offices of Pan American Airways and Trans World Airlines in May of this year were linked to anti-war groups as were a series of attacks against U.S. commercial enterprises in Milan on June 3, 1972. Other incidents against American firms in Spain, West Germany and the Netherlands this year were also the work of anti-war demonstrators.

-- In Asia and Africa what little anti-U.S. violence has occurred has usually been directed at U.S. official installations rather than at U.S. businesses. The occasional small-scale violence that has been focused on U.S. companies in some African countries has been spontaneous and looks more like vandalism than the result of planning by extremist groups.

In sum, except for the Arab terrorists and anti-war groups, attacks against U.S. business firms in the rest of the world appear to be random events, resulting from local dissident activities. There is no available evidence that extremist groups in Latin America, for example, have planned to conduct coordinated operations against U.S. businesses. We can expect to see the fedayeen organizations, however, attempt to expand their connections with other terrorist groups, especially in the Mideast and Western Europe. Even so, it is unlikely, in CIA’s view, that such contacts will result in a formal international network of terrorist organizations.

Tab B

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

26 September 1972

MEMORANDUM No. 2073/72

Terrorism Against US Business Firms Abroad

In recent years US business firms overseas have been frequent targets for terrorist attacks in a number of Latin American countries. Attacks against American firms have also occurred on occasion in the Mideast and Western Europe. Companies such as Coca-Cola, Pan American Airways, and IBM are used as convenient symbols of “foreign aggression” and “imperialism” by extremists who resort to acts of violence for a variety of reasons. The trend toward nationalistic policies in much of the world probably has added impetus to those who seek to victimize US companies. The proliferation of American-owned businesses in many countries means that US firms are often easily accessible.

In most instances the bombings of US firms, like those in Mexico earlier this month, are the work of local dissident groups that are essentially motivated by the internal politics of their own country. In some cases, particularly in Western Europe, the at-tacks against US firms are expressions of anti-Vietnam War sentiments. The violence directed at American business is not part of a campaign against US firms as such, but rather a result of political conflict in which these companies are identified with the establishment or with policies opposed by nationalistic dissident groups. Those responsible for the violence have at most only loose, occasional links with terrorist groups elsewhere and do not appear to be involved in an international conspiracy. An important exception is the alliance of Arab terrorist organizations that have conducted operations across national borders in the Mideast and in Western Europe.

Arab terrorist groups, buoyed by the publicity received from the guerrilla operation at Munich during the Olympic Games, may well attempt to step up their activities over the next several months. If so, US firms and official installations, particularly in Western Europe and the Mideast, would probably come under attack. The fedayeen have discussed such plans from time to time.

Sporadic bombings and other forms of violence carried out against American companies are also likely in several Latin American countries, but no coordinated plan of attack against these firms is foreseen.

LATIN AMERICA

MEXICO

The bombings of US-owned businesses on 14-15 September were the first directed against American companies in Mexico in recent memory. Although there have been sporadic attacks, including bombings, against US consulates and other US Government-affiliated installations in past years, none has been serious or part of an organized terrorist campaign. Similarly, there is no evidence that the recent ex-plosions are part of any broad plan. Because they came 48 hours before Mexico’s Independence Day celebration, they no doubt were set off by dissident elements to embarrass President Echeverria. Terrorist incidents designed to disrupt national holidays and celebrations and thus achieve maximum publicity have occurred in recent years.

The bombs were exploded at the offices of IBM and Ford Motor Co. in Mexico City, Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola in Morelia, and at another Coca-Cola office in Guadalajara. With the exception of the IBM building, where two bombs damaged intricate electronic equipment at the company’s most important computer center in Latin America, only minor damage was reported. Mexican public buildings have also been targets. On the night the US companies were hit, bombs exploded at the offices of a government financial institution in the center of Mexico City and at a nearby Mexican-owned clothing store. On 4 September a bomb was exploded near the entrance to the Secretariat of Finance, which is housed in the National Palace.

No group has claimed responsibility for these bombings. Suspects have been detained, and they may be linked to an extreme leftist peasant-labor guerrilla group that Mexican security officials believe was responsible for exploding a bomb at the National Palace earlier this month, just before the President’s state of the nation address. [1 line not declassified] members of this group have long been planning terrorist acts against interests of the Mexican “upper-class,” which they consider the “exploiters.” No US companies were singled out in their plans.

Several other guerrilla/terrorist organizations have appeared in Mexico in the last two years. Many of them have pulled off kidnappings and bank robberies that have created a nagging security problem for the government. Any one of these groups or a radical student organization could have been behind the ex-plosions. The dissidents believe the Mexican revolution has run out of steam and that the Mexican “establishment” perpetuates the status quo behind a facade of representative political democracy. US businesses are seen not only as part and parcel of this “establishment,” but also as representing “economic imperialism,” and are thus a natural target for the radical groups. Despite stepped-up efforts by Mexican security forces, sporadic terrorist activity will probably continue.

ARGENTINA

US businesses have been frequent targets of terrorist attacks in recent years. The most serious incident came in June 1969 during Governor Rockefeller’s fact-finding trip to Buenos Aires. The bombings on that occasion were professional and well coordinated; all involved supermarkets at least partially owned by Rockefeller financial interests. This outburst appears to have been primarily an expression of Argentine nationalism and was probably carried out by an established terrorist group to gain maximum publicity.

Since 1969 there have been several incidents involving US businesses, but never on the scale of the supermarket bombings. Leftist terrorism has been on the upsurge, however, with the well-publicized objective of ridding Argentina of “imperialist monopolies.” In fact, other foreign businesses—FIAT of Italy and certain British firms—have suffered as much as US companies.

“Anti-imperialism” has become the watchword of leftists in general, but there is no evidence of an organized campaign against US businesses. Some incidents can be attributed to organized terrorist groups, but others were staged by unorganized pro-testers who were simply presented with a target and an opportunity. In all cases, the attacks on US businesses were the direct outgrowth of strictly Argentine problems and developments. Security forces have made great strides in containing terrorism in general and attacks against US installations, in particular. There have been no attacks in recent weeks.

VENEZUELA

During the past decade, US businesses and installations have frequently been targets for Venezuela’s several active terrorist and guerrilla organizations. The peak of this activity was reached during the mid-60s, when leftist groups attempted to undermine Venezuela’s democratic government. The success of the Christian Democratic government’s “pacification” campaign since 1968 has resulted in the assimilation of most of the dissidents into the country’s political life. The entire Marxist left is now functioning legally and generally eschews violence. Some die-hard insurgents, however, are still active in small rag-tag bands, and they at-tract some disenchanted youth.

After a long hiatus, urban terrorism and rural guerrilla activity resumed in May and June 1972. Much of the violence was aimed at the Caldera government, but US government installations and private US business interests were also hit. The First National City Bank of New York, International Telephone and Telegraph, Mercke-Sharpe-Dohme Pharmaceuticals, the Caracas Hilton, and the Rockefeller supermarket chain were special targets of the terrorists. An upsurge in telephone harassment, including anonymous bomb threats, was also reported by US businesses.

Terrorist activities have run the gamut from kidnaping and bombings to bank robberies and petty crimes; they appear to spring as much from domestic protests as from opposition to US influence. The attacks are intended to bolster the morale of the terrorists in the face of increasingly effective government counterinsurgency operations; to raise money for terrorist causes; to embarrass the government and create an atmosphere of political instability; and finally to win over more moderate leftists and nationalists by striking out at what they believe to be symbols of US economic exploitation and domination.

Venezuela has experienced an upsurge of nationalism over the last couple of years, and much of it is directed at the US. Given this climate and the high visibility of some $2.7 billion in US private investments in the country, it is surprising that more attacks have not been directed against US interests, particularly petroleum pipelines that are extremely vulnerable to sabotage. For the past several months the Caldera government has had to contend with repeated student demonstrations and violence in the major urban centers. Much of the disruption probably is directed by leftist extremists, but US businesses have experienced little violence.

[1 line of text not declassified] expect terrorist activities to increase between now and the presidential election in December 1973. An expected close presidential race, the introduction into the campaign of nationalistic issues, and a volatile student population could create an atmosphere lending itself to exploitation by terrorist groups. The Venezuelan Government is aware of the dangers, and its security agencies have prepared contingency plans to counter any threats that arise.

OTHER

Elsewhere in Latin America, attacks against US businesses have been insignificant and sporadic. Those that have occurred were often related to political or labor strife in the host country. In late 1971, for example, sabotage at Colombia’s Barrancabermeja refinery, partially owned by Texaco-Gulf, came during a prolonged and bitter strike at this installation.

Student demonstrations and riots have frequently caused damage to US-owned property, but in many cases the targets were not pre-selected but simply happened to be in the path of march. There is no discernible pattern or direction to such attacks, and host country businesses also suffer.

When bombing or robberies against US firms are planned and carried out by terrorists, the perpetrators are usually left-wing extremists who have broken away from more orthodox Communist movements. In many instances, the violence is part of the generational phenomenon, with disaffected, ultranationalistic youth striking out at the local “establishment” and its ties to “US economic imperialism.” In Uruguay the Tupamaro organization burned the General Motors plant in 1969 around the time of Governor Rockefeller’s visit to Montevideo. In April and May 1970, an International Harvester warehouse and several other US-franchised firms, including a branch of First National City Bank, Squibb Laboratories, and the distributor for Phillip Morris cigarettes, were bombed. In most of these in-stances, however, damage was light.

Such attacks are a means of raising morale and acquiring funds and publicity. A raid on a US firm or subsidiary guarantees instantaneous and international attention while a similar act against a local business would go almost unnoticed outside the host country.

It is worth noting that the pro-Castro terrorists in Guatemala, the most persistent of the Hemisphere’s insurgents, have devoted little attention to US businesses. During the past decade, however, they have assassinated three members of the US diplomatic mission, including an ambassador, kidnaped an-other, and attacked US Government property. Other terrorist organizations in Latin America have also attacked US embassies, consulates, binational centers, and USIS offices, while allowing substantial US private investments to go relatively unmolested.

THE MIDEAST

During the past few years fedayeen groups have carried out several terrorist operations against US business firms in the Mideast. Other operations aimed at US businesses have been planned, but for various reasons have not been implemented. In some cases disclosure of the plans to local security services probably led to preventive measures that frustrated the terrorist plans.

Most of the incidents that occurred involved sabotage of the oil pipeline owned by the Arabian-American Oil Company; there have been five instances of sabotage since early 1971, usually in Jordan. Other incidents include the blowing up of a hijacked Pan American 747 in Cairo in September 1970 and of a Trans World Airlines 707 in Jordan that had been hijacked at the same time. In November of last year, four explosions reportedly hit the Intercontinental Hotel in Amman, which is managed by US personnel and at one time had some US backing. In January 1972 facilities of the Kuwait Oil Company, which is partially US-owned, were damaged by a bomb blast.

Other bombing attacks against US-owned oil operations in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf states were planned by the fedayeen. In 1970, for example, the fedayeen attempted to mine a US oil tanker in Lebanon. US officials and private citizens in Jordan and Lebanon have been specifically cited as tar-gets in Arab terrorist plans.

From the Arab guerrillas’ point of view, the Munich operations against the Israeli Olympic teams was a success and encouraged them to persist in employing terrorist tactics. The Munich incident dramatized the Palestinian cause. It also demonstrated the lengths to which the Arab terrorists will go. There have been numerous reports of fedayeen terrorist plans during the past few weeks, including one report that the Fatah’s Black September Organization had added US embassies throughout the world to its list of targets. Although the Black September Organization has been responsible for most of the recent Arab terrorist activity, including the Munich attack, rival fedayeen groups may also attempt to draw public attention by conducting dramatic operations. Thus the likelihood has increased that terrorist actions will be carried out against both official and private US interests over the next several months.

WESTERN EUROPE

During May of this year, unexploded bombs were found in the Paris offices of Pan American Airways and Trans World Airlines. These incidents were probably linked to attacks made at the same time against official US facilities in France. In late 1971 [less than 1 line not declassified] one anti-war group in Paris had compiled a list of American firms and subsidiaries in preparation for a “campaign” of unspecified nature against the firms’ alleged involvement in Vietnam.

In Milan, Italy, a series of attacks was carried out against US commercial enterprises on 3 June 1972. Five bombs were exploded next to buildings occupied by American firms—the Honeywell-Italia offices in the central city, the Honeywell plant and computer facilities on the outskirts of Milan, a Bank of America branch office, and the IBM office. In none of the incidents was the damage extensive. Leaflets left at the scene indicated that the attacks were the-work of local anti-war groups. The bombings appear to have been a one-time protest; no other incidents have occurred since then.

Only two incidents directed against US business firms in Spain have been reported in the past few years. In May of this year the Pan American Airways office in Barcelona was slightly damaged during a “lightning raid” by some 300 youths shouting anti-war slogans. In May 1970 student marchers caused minor damage to the Sears Roebuck store in Barcelona during demonstrations against US activities in Cambodia. In the Netherlands, only one serious attack against a US business firm has occurred in recent years—in May 1970 when Dutch anti-war demonstrators fire-bombed the Honeywell building in Amsterdam. At the same time, First National City Bank, Pan American Airways, and several other US businesses had the walls of their buildings painted with anti-American slogans and received bomb threats. Bomb threats were received by several US companies this summer, but no explosives were found. Similar minor incidents have occurred in West Germany during recent years. Usually the perpetrators were leftist students or other radicals engaged in anti-war marches or other demonstrations.

ELSEWHERE

In the Far East and Africa there has been no evidence of involvement by anti-American elements in organized terrorist attacks against US business. What little anti-US violence has occurred has usually been directed at US official installations. Thus far it has not been within the modus operandi of those anti-US groups that exist in Japan and other Far East countries to use bombs. Harassment activities occur, of course, but the violence that accompanies these activities is generally relatively mild, involving rock-throwing or fist-fighting. The occasional small-scale violence that has been focused on US companies in some African countries has apparently been spontaneous and probably vandalism rather than the result of planning by extremist groups.

In the Soviet Union and other Communist Eastern European countries, any activity directed against US interests would almost automatically be government-sponsored or controlled. In the past there have been occasional officially staged or condoned demonstrations around US embassies in some of these countries, but no physical attacks against US business. One exception occurred in Yugoslavia in 1970, when small groups of extremist students engaged in a spontaneous demonstration against the US presence in Southeast Asia. Yugoslavia is the only Eastern European country that has a terrorist problem. The ustashi—remnants of World War II Croatian fascists—have carried out attacks against Yugoslav installations at home and abroad over the past 18 months, but thus far have not attacked US facilities. Since most of their financial support comes from emigres in the US, it seems unlikely that the ustashi would jeopardize this source of funds by attacking US firms or official installations.

INTERNATIONAL LINKS AMONG TERRORIST GROUPS

The bombings and other acts of violence carried out against American firms overseas have been local phenomena rather than part of any international conspiracy. There is no available evidence that extremist groups in Latin America have planned to conduct coordinated operations against US businesses. Nor does there appear to be any close relationship between Arab terrorist organizations and Latin American extremists who have attacked US companies in Latin America. The sole exception is the fedayeen organizations, which collaborate closely.

It seems likely that the fedayeen organizations, especially the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, will attempt to expand their present limited connections with other terrorist groups. The main effort at expansion probably will come in the Mideast and Western Europe and, to a much lesser degree, in Latin America. It is unlikely, however, that these contacts will result in a formal international network of terrorist organizations in the foreseeable future.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicated that the President saw it. Tab B was attached but not published.

112. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 112. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 21, 1972.

Subject:

Terrorism Items in the United Nations General Assembly

Our efforts to obtain urgent action on one of the items related to terrorism at the United Nations General Assembly received a setback October 20. The First Committee voted (54-40 (US) with 20 abstentions) a Czechoslovak-sponsored amendment which would have draft articles on the protection of diplomats referred to the 28th (1973) Assembly “with a view to the final elaboration of such a Convention by the General Assembly.” There is some slight consolation in a Soviet expression of readiness to work with us to improve the resolution in the plenary by placing added emphasis on the need to conclude a convention at the 28th session.

We had been pressing a Canadian draft which would have convened a plenipotentiary conference in early 1973 to adopt a convention. Arab opponents of any action on terrorism issues had pushed two resolutions (Mauritania and Mexico) which would have buried the issue.

The key element in our setback was the inability of the United States and co-sponsors of the Canadian resolution to achieve any significant support among the Africans and Asians. A “compromise” amendment which would have called for a plenipotentiary conference in August was put forward by the Afghans and the Yugoslavs. In spite of our backing, this effort fell apart: when supporters of the Mauritania and Mexican amendments withdrew their amendments, threw their weight behind the Czechoslovak amendment, and induced the Yugoslavs and, to a lesser extent, the Afghans not to press their “compromise.”

We will now concentrate our efforts on mustering support for a resolution which would advance the prospects of a convention on terrorism. we have concluded that the optimum tactic is to seek approval of a working group which would work on the text of a draft convention for action by the 28th (1973) Assembly and agree to a second working group which would meet the Arab insistence that the underlying causes of terrorism be “studied.”

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr. Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives. RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by De Palma, Bettauer, and Meyer. M.J. Habil signed for Eliot.

113. Memorandum From Fernando Rondon and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 113. Memorandum From Fernando Rondon and Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 25, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Terrorism: United Nations Action

The memorandum from State at Tab A informs you of UN General Assembly action on two draft conventions: one on terrorism, the other on the protection of diplomats.

1. Terrorism Convention

About November 1, the General Assembly is expected to take up Secretary General Waldheim’s agenda item on terrorism. It is State’s hope that a resolution will be adopted instructing a UN working group to come up with a draft convention on terrorism for action by next year’s General Assembly. As presently conceived, the Convention on Terrorism would punish or extradite those who commit specified acts of terrorism, i.e., murder, kidnapping, when those acts are committed

-- outside the terrorist’s state of nationality;

-- outside the territory of the state at which the terror is directed, i.e., the Munich Olympic murders;

-- within the territory of the state at which the terror is directed but against third country nationals, i.e., the Lod Airport killings.

In other words, the treaty would seek to circumscribe the export of politically motivated terrorism but not “domestic” terrorist acts committed in countries where, for example, “wars of liberation” are taking place.

There appears to be only a 50-50 chance for favorable UN action on this item. As on all terrorist items, the Arabs and Africans are the principal stumbling blocks. However, State hopes to get by the Arabs by proposing that a second UN working group also look at the root causes of terrorism, an action the Arabs want as a means to discuss the Palestinian situation. This would allow the first group to concentrate exclusively on drafting a treaty.

2. Convention on Protection of Diplomats

In his speech to the Assembly of September 25, Secretary Rogers urged completion this year of a draft treaty providing for the prosecution or extradition of those who attack or kidnap diplomats. Notwithstanding the plea, on October 20, the UN’s Legal Committee opted instead to refer the matter to next year’s Assembly. Any earlier consideration was blocked by the Arabs and Africans.

The President is signing the Montreal Sabotage Convention this week. It requires extradition or prosecution of anyone who endangers the safe flight of aircraft by damaging the aircraft or by damaging air navigation facilities. In connection with that signing, the President will issue a statement referring to the two Conventions discussed above which are now before the UN and urging prompt action on them by the UN.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Confidential. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Saunders and Young. Tab A is published as Document 112.

114. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 114. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, November 1, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Status of USG Actions Against Terrorism

This memo will bring you up to date on action taken since the Presidential September 25th directive to mount an all-out campaign against politically motivated international terrorism. In addition to the Cabinet Committee chaired by Secretary Rogers and its supporting Working Group headed by Armin Meyer, three other interagency action groups are refining plans to protect against, or react quickly to, acts of terrorism.

-- All of our diplomatic missions abroad have been given detailed guidance on how to protect our personnel and missions from terrorist acts.

-- Jurisdictional responsibilities within the USG are being worked out so that government agencies can respond quickly, effectively, and in full cooperation should an act of terrorism occur in the U.S. The FBI will play the predominant role in immediately assuming responsibility. 75 FBI agents recently met at Quantico to review methods for forestalling and reacting to acts of terrorism,

-- Procedures have been devised to give foreign diplomats and special guests added protection while in the United States. The recently passed H.R. 15883 makes acts of terrorism against foreign diplomats and specified guests a federal offense, thereby strengthening the Government’s hand to deal with such acts. 10-day transit visas have been suspended and visa applicants are very carefully screened against lists of known or suspected terrorists. Several have been spotted by this process and kept out of the country.

-- Intelligence collection—in cooperation with other governments—has increased dramatically and has been instrumental in anticipating and forestalling acts of terrorism.

-- Contingency plans are being developed and improved, in consultation with foreign governments, for meeting acts of terrorism: U.S. Government agencies have developed practical procedures to be informed immediately and coordinate immediately in a swift response to acts of terrorism involving the USG here and abroad.

State has been in touch with foreign Embassies (including those of Israel, West Germany, and Jordan) vulnerable to terrorist attack to plan how our governments can react quickly together should acts of terrorism occur.

There are areas where progress has been disappointing: -- The response in the UN to our efforts against terrorism has generally been poor due to the opposition of the Arab states and the African states which oppose any action that will inhibit African liberation movements.

-- Also, little progress has been made in devising workable sanctions against states which do not cooperate in checking terrorism, although there is a possibility that ICAO, now meeting, can develop machinery for air boycotts against non-cooperating states.

Secretary Rogers will shortly report to the President on the Cabinet Committee’s programs and progress. Though the Senior Working Group has met six times, the Cabinet Committee has met only once in a kick-off session.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the first page of the memorandum reads: “OBE.”

115. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 115. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, November 7, 1972.

Subject:

Actions to Combat International Terrorism

In the six weeks since your creation of the Cabinet Committee to Combat Terrorism much has been accomplished in the areas of coordinating intelligence, establishing precautionary measures, developing contingency plans, seeking congressional support, and securing international cooperation. Much remains to be done, and will be done, but substantial progress has been made.

Coordinating Intelligence. Mindful that prior information is the most effective defense against international terrorism, we have: -- Alerted all foreign reporting posts of the urgency our government attaches to combatting terrorism and urged them to give high priority to collecting and reporting terrorist intelligence.

-- Established a procedure- for evaluating the increased flow of information and providing regular reports to the Committee.

-- Arranged the installation of secure teletypes between the Immigration and Naturalization Service and all involved agencies, thus speeding the flow of information.

Precautionary Measures. Visa, immigration and customs procedures have been tightened, as have been measures for protecting likely targets for terrorist attacks. We have: -- Suspended at least until January 1, 1973, the regulation allowing transit through the United States without visa. This suspension applies to every traveller on a non-discriminatory basis. In the past, approximately 600,000 visitors per year were allowed to spend up to 10 days crossing the United States without prior approval or screening. This loophole has been closed.

-- Screened over 6,500 visa applications of individuals not personally and favorably known by our embassy personnel abroad. Of these applications: 4 have been refused entry to the United States including a known leader of an international terrorist organization, and 14 others are under study at this time for possible refusal.

-- Temporarily increased the coverage of the Secret Service and Executive Protective Service to include: 15 additional foreign dignitaries; 15 additional fixed posts at Washington diplomatic missions; 23 additional UN missions in New York City.

-- Together the Secret Service and EPS have, through overtime and cancelled leave, provided augmented protection equivalent to the service of 525 additional men.

-- Alerted all post offices and likely targets of the increased letter bomb activities. Of the more than 80 letter bombs known to have been mailed internationally, 6 have been intercepted in the United States by alert customs and postal employees and citizens. None have caused injury except one which exploded prematurely while being examined by a suspicious postal clerk.

Contingency Planning. If in spite of all our efforts an act of international terrorism should occur within the United States, we are preparing to deal with it as swiftly and as effectively as possible. We have: -- Agreed that whenever federal jurisdiction exists the FBI will be fully responsible for responding to international terrorist acts perpetrated in the United States. All federal Departments and Agencies have indicated their readiness to assist in every appropriate way. Mechanics for prompt response to requests for equipment and men to operate such equipment are being worked out. Should troops be necessary, your authority would be required and obtained in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding between Justice and Defense (April 29, 1969) for the use of troops in an insurrection.

-- Appointed an Emergency Watch Group which, along with the Working Group of the Cabinet Committee, will be immediately assembled at the Department of State to provide guidance, coordinate action, and communicate with foreign governments which may be involved.

-- Initiated discussions with selected diplomatic missions in Washington to plan specific responses to terroristic threats.

-- Developed detailed contingency plans for responding to terrorist acts against United States diplomatic missions or installations abroad.

Congressional Support. The Cabinet Committee has fully supported the actions by Congress which have strengthened federal authority for dealing with terrorism, including: -- Senate advice and consent. to ratification of the Montreal Convention to protect civil aviation from sabotage and other acts of violence and destruction.

-- Congressional enactment of PL 92-539 making federal offenses of certain crimes against an additional 140,000 foreign officials and official guests who were not covered previously.

-- To provide guidance for the effective implementation of PL 92-539, the FBI has brought together 50 of its senior agents from throughout the country. Meanwhile, the implications of this new law are being brought to the attention of all responsible authorities at the federal, state and local levels.

International Action. The United States has continued to press for international conventions, including those on the protection of diplomats, and effective enforcement of existing treaties designed to assure safety in civil aviation and to prevent the spread of international terrorism. At the United Nations, Ambassador Bush and I have discussed these subjects with many foreign ministers and, although there is continuing reluctance on the part of some nations to support our stand, we will continue to press for swift and vigorous international action. Meanwhile, at an International Civil Aviation Organization Council meeting on November 1 a resolution was passed by a 17 to 1 vote providing for the convening of a world diplomatic conference on air security August 21-September 11, 1973.

Future Work. While much has been accomplished by the Cabinet Committee, combating terrorism is a continuing campaign. We shall keep you informed of our progress.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Armin Meyer with concurrence from Sisco.

116. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Attorney General Kleindienst 116. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Attorney General Kleindienst1

Washington, November 13, 1972.

Dear Dick:

My purpose is to ask your views on how this Government can be most effective in combatting and preventing the promotion and practice of terrorist violence by Yugoslav emigre groups within the United States, to encourage your continued efforts to counter such activities, and to ask you to undertake a new investigation of these activities.

We want to be sure that the United States is doing everything possible to prevent the use of our country as as staging ground for terrorism, both to assure our continued good relations with Yugoslavia and to meet the urgent objectives set in the President’s directive establishing the Cabinet committee to Combat Terrorism on September 25.

We have always been concerned about the dangers of terrorist activities by such emigre groups within the United States, but the recent escalation of emigre terrorism worldwide has heightened our concern. Yugoslav emigre groups have been responsible for the assassination of the Yugoslav ambassador in Stockholm in January 1971; for the bombing of a Yugoslav passenger aircraft on an international flight in January 1972, killing all but one of the passengers and crew; for the hijacking of a Swedish airliner to Madrid in September, 1972; for the infiltration into Yugoslavia of an armed band of 19 men in June 1972 and for the ensuing deaths of 13 members of the Yugoslav police and army; and for numerous other acts of violence and killing, particularly in the Federal Republic of Germany and inside Yugoslavia.

As you know, and as I’m sure Ambassador Granfil indicated in your recent meeting, the Yugoslav Government is concerned that these attacks have been supported and sometimes instigated from within the United States. It has also expressed reservations about the adequacy of our efforts to prevent this. On August 21, the Yugoslav Government submitted a detailed memorandum expressing its particular concerns about specific individuals and groups within the United States whose activities it regards as threateninng.

While this memorandum may not substantiate that violations of U.S. law have occurred, I strongly feel that it requires us to place a high priority on investigation and other appropriate action to assure that the United States is not being used as a base for terrorism. I would, therefore, appreciate your undertaking further investigation and study of such activities to determine if United States laws are being violated by Yugoslav emigres, or whether additional legislation might be desirable. For example, if it appears that funds raised here are being channeled into terrorism abroad, we might wish to consider legislation to prohibit this.

We hope that you can let us have your views as soon as possible about these problems. It would be helpful to us initially if we could inform the Yugoslav Government that the Department of Justice has the activities of Yugoslav emigre groups under investigation.

With best personal regards,

Sincerely yours,

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. No classification marking. Drafted by Director of Eastern European Affairs Richard G. Johnson and John R. Crook (L/EUR) on October 27 with concurrence by Russell, Brower, Baker, Armin Meyer, and Stoessel. An August 21, 1972, memorandum from the Yugoslavian Government was attached but not published.

117. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 117. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 1, 1972.

SUBJECT:

The Terrorist Threat to United States Business Interests Abroad

To assist the Cabinet Committee on Terrorism, CIA has assessed the terrorist threat to U.S. business enterprises overseas. The principal conclusions, summarized below, are of interest: -- While terrorist attacks have been a persistent problem for a decade, at worst they have been a minor problem in most countries.

-- U.S. official installations overseas continue to be subjected to harassment and attack more frequently than U.S. private interests.

-- The most dangerous immediate threat to U.S. business abroad now stems from Arab extremists seeking the destruction of firms they regard either as symbols of U.S. “imperialism” or as sources of significant support to Israel.

-- Once the war in Vietnam is concluded, terrorist groups may direct

-- their energies — hitherto spent on anti-war activities — against symbols of U.S. economic imperialism.

-- Indications are that no sharp global upsurge of attacks against U.S. private interests abroad is at hand.

-- There is no evidence of an international terrorist conspiracy specific-ally directed against U.S. business interests although various international terrorist groups cooperate on specific actions.

Area by area, the threat to our business interests is: -- Western Europe: Despite the substantial U.S. investment in West European countries, physical attack on American companies have not been numerous or significant.

-- Middle East and Africa: Very little terrorism in this region has so far been directed against U.S. firms despite the proximity of the nations of the area to the Arab-Israeli conflict. However, our oil installations are vulnerable and rumors persist that they will be targets for terrorist acts.

-- Western Hemisphere: Violence against U.S. firms is declining, but —depending on local political issues — could return to earlier higher levels or become more troublesome than in the past.

-- Far East: In no country of this area is terrorist activity against our business establishment great, although local political events could lead to some increase of violence. In Hong Kong, Singapore, and Tokyo, the security atmosphere is now congenial to American firms.

In short, while greater terrorist activity against U.S. business establishments is likely in some countries or regions—depending on the local political situation—we have no reason to expect at this time a general increase worldwide of such activity.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 310, Cabinet Committee on Terrorism. Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum reads: “OBE.”

118. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 118. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, December 11, 1972.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT - Evening Report

Terrorism Item in UN General Assembly - The UN’s Legal Committee today approved a disappointingly weak resolution on terrorism 76-34(US) with 16 abstentions. The resolution sponsored by a group of “non-aligned” countries expresses “deep concern over increasing acts of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives” but only asks nations to submit proposals for further action to the UN Secretary-General by June 1, 1973, and creates an ad hoc committee to study them.

We supported the Italian draft which would have asked the International Law Commission to draw up a draft convention on international terrorism for adoption by the time of the next General Assembly.

The Legal Committee’s action will be seen as a rebuff to U.S. efforts, after the Munich tragedy, to obtain UN action against terrorism. Ambassador Bennett had reiterated our strong belief that the United Nations should be up to the task of acting constructively on this urgent problem affecting so many nations and areas of the world. Nonetheless despite extensive efforts to find a compromise, we were unable to surmount African concern that action against terrorism would impinge on national liberation movements.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164.

119. Telegram 5526 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 119. Telegram 5526 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

New York, December 13, 1972, 0052Z.

Subj:

Terrorism

Ref

USNATO 5341

1. Text as adopted set forth below. There were no last minute amendments.

2. Voting line up contained USUN 5495.

3. Begin text.

Qte The General Assembly,

Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism which are occurring with increasing frequency and which take a toll of innocent human lives.

Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures to effectively prevent their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as quickly as possible.

Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;

2. Urges states to devote their immediate attention to finding just and peaceful solutions to the underlying causes which give rise to such acts of violence;

3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial and racist regimes and other forms of alien domination and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of the United Nations;

4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and terrorist acts by colonial racist and alien regimes in denying peoples their legitimate right to self-determination and independence and other human rights and fundamental freedoms;

5. Invites states to become parties to the existing international conventions which relate to various aspects of the problem of international terrorism;

6. Invites states to take all appropriate measures at the national level, with a view to the speedy and final elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3;

7. Invites states to consider the subject matter urgently and submit observations to the Secretary-General by 1 June 1973, including concrete proposals for finding an effective solution to the problem;

8. Requests the Secretary General to transmit an analytical study of the observations of states under paragraph 7 to the ad hoc committee to be established under paragraph 9;

9. Decides to establish an ad hoc committee consisting of 40 members to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly, bearing in mind the principle of equitable geographical representation;

10. Requests the ad hoc committee to consider the observations of states under paragraph 7 and submit its report with recommendations for possible cooperation for the speedy elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the Twenty-Eighth Session of the General Assembly;

11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the ad hoc committee with the necessary facilities and services;

12. Decides to include the item in the provisional agenda of the Twenty-Eighth Session of the General Assembly. Unqte.

Bush

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Unclassified; Immediate. Repeated to the Department of State.

120. Telegram 5582 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 120. Telegram 5582 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, December 15, 1972, 0221Z.

Dept pass all diplomatic posts

Subj:

Legal Committee-Terrorism Item

Summary: From beginning the attitude of Africans was fundamental to prospects of favorable vote for meaningful action on international terrorism. Arabs successful in convincing Africans they had something to fear from exercise from point of view of national liberation movements. Our efforts to convince the Africans to contrary unavailing and non-aligned solidarity carried the day against any meaningful expressions of community views on international terrorism or steps to carry the matter forward. US action in tabling convention and resolution on first day was generally considered abrupt and impetuous. Israeli actions to heat up exercise in Sixth Committee, and failure of delegations such as France, Sweden and the USSR to stand firm were contributing factors to the final result. The final result was a weak expression of community attitudes toward international terrorism and a machinery for future work which is geared for little or no progress and may cause actual harm through redirection and emphasis on Southern African problems.

1. Secretary-General acted properly in bringing matter of internationial terrorism before UNGA. He did so in aftermath of Munich which made hyper-sensitive Arabs react on suspicion that matter aimed solely at them. Had he waited until next year to act argument would probably have been made that there had been no appalling incident of Munich magnitude in recent months therefore why the worry. Mistake SYG made was his failure to consult with any delegations, particularly African, before he moved.

2. As soon as item tabled Arabs very effectively played upon African sensitivities regarding liberation movements in Southern Africa. Although SYG, US, and others made clear they were not talking about activities of individuals fighting for self-determination in Southern Africa, African fears once aroused were never quieted.

3. Whether item could have been inscribed by plenary without the red-herring amendment proposed by Baroody is difficult to say, but it would have been a close question. Baroody’s amendment was adopted with strong African support. Once it was adopted the entire focus of the item was all but fatally distorted.

4. The next blow to the item was the US effort to exercise constructive leadership. We had a draft resolution and draft convention which we rightly believed demonstrated that it was possible to take meaningful action without jeopardizing the activities of African freedom fighters. Our tabling of the resolution and the convention before the Sixth Committee had even begun discussing its order of work violated normal procedures and was in fact counterproductive. At no time did we attract any support by our action in tabling this material at the beginning of the session although individual members of African and Asian delegations admitted our approach was basically sound.

5. Our efforts prior to the discussion of the item to separate the Africans from the Arabs who clearly wished to take no action were unavailing. When the discussion of the item began in the Sixth Committee such chances for success as remained were diminished by the approach taken by Amb. Tekoah (Israel). His flamboyant statement helped turn what had been on the whole the beginnings of a responsible discussion of the question in part into a heated political controversy as to who did what to whom and when in the Middle East.

6. Although we continued to try and explain to the Africans why they had nothing to fear from the item and stressed our willingness to accept reasonable language on self-determination we were never able to make any significant inroads. Had we not had the 25 percent problem to work on with greater priority, we would have been able to make still greater efforts with Third World countries but it is doubtful whether the outcome would have been substantially different.

7. We had the assistance of a number of Western delegations in seeking to work out a viable approach to the problem. The Italian proposal was not an ideal vehicle as drafted, but it nevertheless represented a responsible effort on the part of a number of serious states with broad geographic representation except for Africa to find a way. The Africans declined to participate in the Italian effort to produce a text as they shied away from participating in the efforts of members of the Legal Committee such as Gonzalez-Galvez (Mexico). gonzalez-galvez is an experienced negotiator and compromiser of some stature within the legal community. We convened meetings of all groups in an effort to find a middleway. The Africans refused to take part in this effort and in the face of African absence delegations such as India and Yugoslavia with ambitions to lead the Third World refused to continue the effort. It was fellowship rather than leadership.

8. Last minute efforts by Stavropoulos (UN legal counsel) to convene meetings were likewise unproductive because nonaligned group had become hostage of Arab interests led by Algeria. No member non-aligned group evidenced any willingness at these meetings consider middle-ground proposals once Algeria turned them down. We concentrated our main efforts in this group on finding some machinery for future work on the problem which could reasonably be expected to produce a draft convention for the 28th GA. The Arabs forced the Africans to reject even inclusion of the concept of “international legal measures” in the mandate of a single ad hoc committee to be established. It is possible one could get plenary to vote such language into the resolution, but it is highly improbable it would significantly affect the course of the committee’s work. Corridor efforts to strengthen expression of the community’s reaction to international terrorism were likewise unavailing. Some form of condemnation might be forced into the resolution at the last moment but it would have to be carefully circumscribed (pros and cons of such an effort discussed septel.)

9. Repeated efforts at all levels to separate Africans from Arabs totally unavailing. Individually and collectively a number of African states indicated unhappiness with position into which Arabs were driving them but they were simply unwilling to participate in any effort or take any measures to separate themselves from the Arabs. The extent of the pressure the Arabs were able to bring was demonstrated by the refusal of the Khmer rep delegates to vote on the resolution because they had been threatened with Arab and African reprisals on GKR credentials at 28th GA if they voted for anything but non-aligned resolution. Threats to other wavering delegations were reported. The Africans would neither initiate nor participate in the preparation of any language which the Arabs indicated was unacceptable.

10. The Soviets talked strong at the outset about working with US for a constructive result but lost their nerve and capitulated to the non-aligned when the going got rough and it became clear the Arabs would be seriously displeased by continued Soviet pressure. The Soviets were rudely rebuffed by Algeria and others and lost considerable dignity in their frantic efforts to end up on the winning side. The Chinese sat it out, said little and voted with the winning side. Their sympathies with the Arabs were never in doubt. The French took a cynical attitude toward the exercise and were never a significant factor; the extent of their contribution was to weaken Western efforts by their obvious lack of concern. The majority of the Latin American group was helpful but not in an organ1zed or effective manner.

11. The malaise which led to this unsatisfactory result involved effective Arab pressures combined with Third World unhappiness with Western positions on a number of other issues and general mistrust of Western motives. The effect was to produce a paranoid preoccupation with non-aligned solidarity keyed to the lowest possible denominator of the group, ie the position of the extreme Arabs such as Algeria and Iraq. The group system produced a result in which the whole was less than the sum of the parts.

Bush

Note by OC/T: Not passed all diplomatic posts

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential.

121. Telegram 227601 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 121. Telegram 227601 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, December 16, 1972, 1825Z.

NATO for Boyd

Subject:

UNGA-Terrorism

1. Department reluctantly agrees that we should participate on terrorism committee. Given text of res and its parliamentary history we are not sanguine that there is substantial possibility that committee will produce meaningful report or even that we will be able to have appreciable influence on its content. However, we fear non-participation might be misconstrued as decline in US interest in problem and consider this aspect determining.

2. In communicating our decision to participate to WEO group, Japan and like-minded LA’s you should stress our disappointment over lack of any clear multilateral expression of deep international concern over problem of terrorism and of determination to act in cooperation against it. You should explore with them their attitude toward possibility of separate statement or declaration at appropriate time by like-minded countries which would clearly indicate a joint will to act on this problem regardless of the inability of the UN and the committee to move constructively.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 23-8. Confidential; Routine. Repeated to London, Paris, Rome, and NATO. Drafted by Armitage and cleared by De Palma.

Chapter 2. U.S.-Cuba Hijacking Agreement, 1969-February 1973Chapter 2. U.S.-Cuba Hijacking Agreement, 1969-February 1973

122. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, February 7, 1969.

Kissinger summarized and commented upon an attached memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to the President that noted the potential dangers from the growing number of airline hijackings to Cuba. Rogers informed the President of U.S. diplomatic efforts to prevent hijacking to Cuba.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information.

123. Memorandum From Viron P. Vaky of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 23, 1969.

Vaky informed Kissinger that the Cuban Government had announced a tough new anti-hijacking law and suggested that it was a gambit to improve relations with the United States.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it on September 26. The wire service story was attached but not published.

124. Letter from Secretary of Transportation Volpe to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, October 21, 1969.

Volpe urged Rogers to take advantage of the Cuban Hijacking Decree, which Volpe saw as a significant move and a possible means of obtaining the return to the United States of those who hijacked U.S. aircraft to Cuba.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. No classification marking.

125. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, October 31, 1969.

Rogers recommended that the President send a note to the Cuban Government informing it that the United States was prepared to return hijackers on a reciprocal basis except in cases of political asylum.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Confidential. Copies were sent to S/S, ARA, and L. The note and background memorandum were attached but not published.

126. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, November 12, 1969.

Kissinger informed the President that Secretary of State Rogers was recommending that the United States send a note to the Cuban Government on the hijacking problem. Kissinger agreed with Rogers’ reasons for doing so.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval on November 13. Tab A is Document 125. Tabs B and C were attached but not published.

127. Letter from Secretary Rogers to Secretary of Transportation Volpe

Washington, November 17, 1969.

Rogers informed Volpe that he shared his concerns about Cuba’s proposed anti-hijacking law and reported that the Department of State had decided on an approach to Cuba after seeking the approval of President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Confidential. Drafted by Mark B. Feldman (L/ARA) on November 6 and 12, and cleared by Feehan and Loy. The memorandum is Document 125. Attached but not published was the proposed note.

128. Telegram 199293 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland

Washington, November 28, 1969, 18222

The Department provided background information for the Swiss Government on Cuban Law 1226, quoting the text as well as clarification from Cuban Ambassador Alarcon’s speech at the UN. The telegram spelled out U.S. goals in any hijacking agreement and included the text of a diplomatic note to be delivered to the Cubans by the Swiss Ambassador to begin negotiations for a possible agreement on hijacking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Priority;Exdis. Drafted by Park F. Wollam and Robert F. Funseth (ARA/CCA) and Hurwitch; and cleared by Frederick Smith Jr., Deputy Administrator for Security and Consular Affairs, Loy, Stevenson, Feldman, and Vaky.

129. Telegram 3810 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland

Washington, January 9, 1970, 2215Z.

The Department of State thanked Ambassador Fischli for transmitting Premier Castro’s response to the U.S. diplomatic note and requested that he pass “precisely and fully” the views of the United States to Cuban Foreign Minister Roa. The Department indicated its willingness to use Cuban Law 1226 as a basis for negotiation of a hijacking agreement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Feldman on January 8; cleared by Stevenson, Hurwitch, Funseth, and U. Alexis Johnson; and approved by Charles H. Meyer.

130. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, May 28, 1970.

Kissinger sent the President a memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers asking for approval to present a draft memorandum on hijacking to the Cuban Government. Kissinger agreed with the Department of State arguments in favor of the action, and Nixon approved dispatching the attached note and a proposed memorandum of understanding.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Box 780, NSC Files, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval on June 11. Tabs B-C were attached but not published. Kissinger informed Rogers of the President’s decision in a June 12 memorandum and stated that any press releases or backgrounders regarding the issue should be coordinated with the White House in advance. (Ibid.)

131. Telegram 96818 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland

Washington, June 19, 1970, 1833Z.

The telegram transmitted the text of a diplomatic note to the Cuban Government on the proposed hijacking agreement. It also included a proposed memorandum of understanding.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Funseth and Feldman on June 16; cleared by Loy and Salans; and approved by Hurwitch.

132. Telegram 209449 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland

Washington, October 15, 1970, 1744Z.

The telegram transmitted the text of a diplomatic note to be delivered by Swiss Ambassador Fischli to Foreign Minister Roa on the proposed Cuban Hijacking Agreement. In a background to the message, the Department of State agreed with Fischli that Cuba was stalling, and that this new message was a U.S. attempt to exert maximum pressure on Cuba.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Priority;Exdis. Drafted by Funseth and Feldman; cleared by Stevenson, Hurwitch, Kissinger and Rein; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson.

133. Memorandum from Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 22, 1970.

Nachmanoff sent Kissinger for his approval a proposed Department of State telegram to Bern for transmittal to Cuba requesting a response to the U.S. note and the draft memorandum of May 28 (Document 130).

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval. Tabs B and C were attached but not published.

134. Memorandum from the Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs (Feldman) to the Assistant Legal Adviser of Administrative and Consular Affairs (Malmborg)

Washington, July 22, 1971.

This memorandum records details of Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Meyer’s testimony before an Executive Session of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and reports the committee’s primary concern was why the United States could not accept a anti-hijacking agreement based on the entirety of Cuban Law 1226. Concerns of Senator Fulbright were also detailed.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential. Drafted by Feldman. Copies were sent to Hurwitch, Salans, Funseth, and Leahy.

135. Memorandum of Conversation between Secretary Rogers and Swiss Ambassador Schnyder

Washington, November 16, 1972.

Rogers asked Schnyder to forward a message on completing a U.S.-Cuban hijacking agreement to Swiss Ambassador Masnata in Havana. Rogers emphasized that general U.S. policy toward Cuba would remain unchanged.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Hurwitch and approved in S on November 17. Rogers informed the President of his conversation with Schnyder that evening. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164)

136. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary Meyer to Secretary Rogers

Washington, November 20, 1972.

Meyer reported that the Cuban Government was ready for early talks on hijacking and other serious crimes.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Joseph Norbury (ARA/CCA) and cleared by Hurwitch. Rogers informed the President of this response on November 22. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164)

137. Memorandum from Secretary Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, November 27, 1972.

Rogers informed the President of details of the first Swiss-Cuban meeting on the proposed Cuban Hijacking Agreement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Confidential.

138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, December 3, 1972.

Kissinger sent the President a memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers informing the President that Rogers intended to respond to the Cuban draft agreement on hijacking. Kissinger provided background to the negotiations for the agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Confidential (GDS). Sent for information. In a December 1 memorandum to Kissinger recommending that he send this memorandum to the President, William J. Jorden of the NSC staff noted that Rogers “help[ed] draft” the U.S. draft memorandum. (Ibid.) Tab B was attached but not published.

139. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, December 12, 1972.

Hurwitch sent Rogers the preliminary reaction of the Cubans to the possibility of returning hijackers as part of the proposed U.S.-Cuban hijacking agreement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Hurwitch. Rogers approved the recommendation but changed the language to read: “That Ambassador Masnata be instructed to suggest that one procedure that might be considered would be extradition under the 1904 treaty.” The memorandum of the meeting with the Canadians was attached but not published.

140. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, December 21, 1972.

Meyer forwarded a report from Swiss Ambassador Masnata in Havana on his discussion with Cuban Vice Foreign Minister Anillo on the proposed hijacking agreement.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Norbury. Rogers informed the President of the Masnata-Anillo discussion that evening. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74D 164)

141. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) and Acting Legal Adviser (Brower) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, January 25, 1973

Meyer informed Rogers that Swiss Ambassador Masnata reported that the Cubans were ready to accept the latest U.S. proposal on the hijacking agreement with two changes in the draft. Meyer suggested that the United States accept one change and that the Cuban Government agree to accept the U.S. language on the other.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Hurwitch and Feldman. Rogers wrote “OK” and initialed the memorandum. He also asked Eliot: “Is this acceptable to the Justice Dept?”

142. Memorandum From Serban Vallimarescu of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)

Washington, February 13, 1973

Vallimarescu informed Scowcroft that the United States and Cuba had reached an agreement on hijacking and attached a copy of the final text. He then summarized the agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Confidential. Sent for information.

122. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 122. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, February 7, 1969.

Subject:

Aircraft Hijacking

Secretary Rogers has submitted the attached memorandum describing the steps the State Department is taking to deal with the problem of aircraft hijacking.

We seem to be making progress in obtaining Cuban Government cooperation in two areas: 1. They have indicated their willingness to accept limited numbers of Cubans who wish to return to Cuba from the US.

2. They are willing to permit passengers to return to the US on the hijacked plane if the crew, airlines, and US authorities will accept full responsibility. (The passengers of a hijacked Colombian plane were permitted to return on the same plane yesterday, after the Colombian authorities assumed responsibility for their safety).

However, it is probably going to be difficult to reach agreement with the Cubans on the one step that might have some deterrent effect, i.e., returning hijackers of commercial aircraft to the country of aircraft registry to face criminal prosecution. The Cubans have said they do not consider it possible to undertake a bilateral agreement “under present circumstances”, and Castro recently has implied that Cuban measures to return hijackers may depend on our actions to prevent Cubans from departing Cuba illegally via the Guantanamo Naval Base.

I think you should be aware of one historical aspect of this problem which may prove embarrassing to us. In 1961, when there were several cases of ships and planes seized by Cubans escaping to the United States, we did not respond to a Cuban note proposing a mutual agreement to return the persons responsible for those actions to the country of registry of the ship or plane. In effect, we refused to consider essentially the same proposal we have now made to the Cubans.

Attachment

Washington, February 6, 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject: Hijacking of Aircraft

Hijacking of aircraft to Cuba is an increasingly serious problem. Most of the hijacked aircraft have been U.S. planes, but aircraft from Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and Peru have also been involved. So far this year, nine U.S. aircraft and three from other countries, all commercial airliners, have been taken to Cuba. This compares with seventeen U.S. and nine non-U.S. aircraft hijacked in 1968. A few of these were non-scheduled and private planes, but most were commercial airliners. There were seven successful hijackings of U.S. aircraft and three of other countries in the period 1961-67. Most of the recent hijackers have been U.S. citizens, rather than Cubans.

None of these incidents has as yet involved us in a serious international problem. Aside from the inconvenience and cost involved in each incident, however, there are two kinds of problems that could arise: a) an accident with loss of life; and

b) an incident in which we are unable to obtain the return of the aircraft or the passengers and crew. (So far, the Cubans have been meticulous about returning relatively promptly hijacked aircraft, passengers and crew. However, they could change their attitude, or, if the habit spreads, we could have a hijacking of a U.S. aircraft to some less cooperative place, such as North Korea.)

Given the growing seriousness of the problem and the increasing public and congressional concern about it, I thought it desirable that you be advised of the steps the Department has taken with respect to the international aspects of this problem, both bilaterally and multilaterally: 1. Bilateral

We have made two bilateral approaches to the Cubans through the Swiss: a. We suggested last July that we use the return leg of the refugee air lift plane to return to Cuba those Cubans that want to go back to Havana, and that the Cuban Government agree to permit them re-entry into Cuba. In November we provided the Cuban Government with a list of names of Cubans in the U.S. who had indicated to us their desire for repatriation. Most of the hijackers are not Cubans, but some are, and a repatriation arrangement might be helpful, at least psychologically.

b. We presented a note to the Cubans through the Swiss in December proposing an arrangement for the return of hijackers of commercial aircraft and expressing our willingness to make this reciprocal. One of the most effective means of deterring further hijackings would clearly be the prosecution of hijackers, and a gap in our efforts to combat the problem has been the fact that Cuba, at present, does not return hijackers to the country of aircraft registry. Nor, to our knowledge, are they tried for hijacking in Cuba.

We have just received through the Swiss a Cuban reply dated February 1 to both approaches. The Cuban note is measured and responsible in tone, indicates that the Cubans are concerned themselves about the problem, and provides some hope for some small practical steps that could ease the problem: --The Cuban Government stated that it could not approve unrestricted entry for all Cubans who might wish to return from the U.S. because this could result in relatively large numbers of returnees and present serious problems re housing and employment. Nor did they wish to permit return of individuals who violated Cuban law in departing the country illegally. They are prepared however, to receive limited numbers and to give consideration to any list of names given them.

--Recognizing concern expressed over the Cuban practice of requiring the hijacked plane to return without the passengers and the latter to be flown back separately, the Cuban Government stated its willingness to permit passengers to return to the U.S. on the hijacked plane provided the crew, the airlines and U.S. authorities consider this feasible and safe, and take the responsibility.

--The Cuban note stated that the Cuban Government does not consider it possible “under present circumstances” to undertake bilateral commitments to return hijackers. However, if hijackings are repeated at their present rate, the Government of Cuba would “consider the adoption, on its own account, of such measures as it might deem appropriate to settle the matter adequately and fairly.” We take this to mean the possibility of publicized prosecution of hijackers in Cuba or unilaterally returning or expelling them.

We plan an immediate response to the Cuban reply to pin down arrangements on the first two points—which will settle some practical problems—and to express our hope that the Cubans will give continued consideration to either the return or prosecution of hijackers as a means of deterring further incidents.

At the time the Swiss Ambassador received the Cuban note he also talked to Castro himself. In that conversation, as reported by the Ambassador, Castro expressed his concern over the hijackings, “especially since most of the hijackers are not completely normal people.” He also expressed his concern that many of the Cubans who hijacked planes were persons who fled the country illegally, especially through Guantanamo.

We had given some thought to a direct approach to Castro through some unofficial intermediary such as James Donovan. However, in view of the Cuban reply just received, indicating reluctance to proceed at the moment with negotiated bilateral understandings we have decided to defer further consideration of this tactic for the time being. We will weigh its desirability again in the future if the problem’s intensity is sustained or if more propitious signs for it are received.

2. Third Party. a. We asked the Director General of IATA, the International Organization of Airlines, to talk to the Cubans about the general problem. He did so in Havana in January. He was given no encouragement, and nothing significant developed from the conversation. But the Cuban authorities did state they considered this a “first talk” and would be prepared to discuss the problem further.

b. We have also asked the President of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a U.N. specialized agency, to talk to the Cubans. He has not yet received a response to his request to discuss this matter.

c. We have asked both the Canadians and Mexicans to discuss the general problem with the Cubans--not on our behalf but in terms of it being an international problem. The Canadian Ambassador has a request pending with the Cuban Foreign Minister for this purpose. The Mexicans do not believe the moment propitious for them to make a general approach, but they have requested extradition of hijackers of Mexican planes—unsuccessfully so far.

3. Multilateral.

We have two major multilateral efforts in progress: a. The first involves the “Tokyo Convention,” which deals principally with crimes aboard aircraft and only secondarily with hijacking. It would require the country where a hijacked plane lands to return the airplane to the country of its registry and to permit the passengers and crew to continue their journey. That convention is not in effect since it requires 12 ratifications before it becomes effective, and only 8 have so far ratified. President Johnson sent this convention to the Senate for its advice and consent in September 1968. I would hope that the U.S. would ratify it soon, and that thereafter it would quickly become effective. While I doubt that Cuba will ratify soon, this is an important convention in that it establishes an international code of conduct that would be helpful if we ever have an incident in which either the airplane, the passengers, or the crew is detained.

b. The U.S. has proposed a protocol to the Tokyo Convention that would require that a country return the hijacker to the country where the hijacked aircraft is registered for trial. There will be a meeting on this protocol in Montreal on February 10, under the auspices of ICAO. There are two important aspects to this protocol: (1) It is limited to incidents involving the hijacking of a commercial aircraft carrying passengers for hire. We would not want to get involved with individuals who steal a raft or a small aircraft to escape political persecution or the like.

(2) Our proposal provides that the traditional right of asylum would not apply to hijackers covered by the protocol. Our feeling was that the risks to safety are so great that they outweigh this traditional consideration.

We are aware that conceivably we might have to return a hijacker who does plead that he is escaping political persecution. Nevertheless, we felt that without this exception to the asylum rule, the protocol would not be effective.

I am advised that there appear to be very limited possibilities of preventing hijacking at the source, e.g. by screening devices or procedures before the aircraft is boarded or by over-powering hijackers in flight. The Federal Aviation Agency and the Department of Transportation, with whom we maintain constant communication and coordination regarding the overall problem of hijacking, are, I understand, informing you further with respect to these areas.

As you can see, dealing with this matter on the domestic and international fronts has proved to be both difficult and frustrating. We will continue, however, to deal with the problem as a matter of urgency.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information.

123. Memorandum From Viron P. Vaky of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 123. Memorandum From Viron P. Vaky of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 23, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Cuba’s New Anti-Hijacking Law—A Significant Development

September 23, 1969

On September 19 Havana announced a new anti-hijacking law and has given it heavy publicity. This now appears to be a major gambit by Cuba, not only with respect to the hijacking situation but perhaps in terms of relations with us as well.

The law provides, in brief, for the prosecution or extradition of persons hijacking aircraft or ships, or otherwise violating immigration regulations. Extradition of offenders would take place, however, only on the basis of reciprocal bilateral treaties that would still preserve Havana’s right to offer political asylum. The decision to grant or refuse asylum is to be determined by Cuban immigration authorities. Thus, in effect, Havana would still determine whom it might extradite whatever arrangements are negotiated.

The preamble rejects multilateral agreements by international agencies such as the OAS and UN, and is heavily larded with anti-US propaganda. The law also covers all illegal movement in or out of the country rather than just hijacking. It specifically refers to Guantanamo “fence jumpers. ”

Thus, while apparently responsive to the hijacking problem, the law does not in fact make very many real concessions beyond the publicizing of an unfavorable view of hijacking, which in itself may discourage some potential hijackers.

Publication of the law probably had two purposes: -- To respond to growing international criticism by taking an apparently forthcoming position, and

-- To undercut the OAS policy of diplomatic isolation by inviting treaty negotiations on extradition of hijackers. This kind of invitation, in fact, places the onus on those countries which have been victimized by air piracy.

It may have had still a third purpose. It may have been aimed directly at us in an effort to use what is in effect an invitation to reach a negotiated agreement with them on something that bothers us a great deal to test our posture and see what can be developed. That this may be some gambit of this kind is further suggested by the attached wire service account of what seems to be a planted story with the St. Louis Post-Dispatch correspondent in Havana. The story quotes Carlos Rafael Rodriguez as suggesting a new relationship with the U.S. and Latin America is possible and as inviting us to join in furthering a new modus vivendi and in mutual Cuban-American steps toward improved relations. It quotes the hijacking law as an opportunity.

Whatever is up the Cuban sleeve, it seems to me they have made a definite probe in our direction, and we must consider carefully how or whether to respond both in terms of hijacking and relations generally. State had been planning to explore this situation, but I have asked them to send us urgently a memo for the President which would analyze and sketch what we could do, so that we could get the President’s view of the problem and approval of a course of action.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it on September 26. The wire service story was attached but not published.

124. Letter from Secretary of Transportation Volpe to Secretary of State Rogers 124. Letter from Secretary of Transportation Volpe to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, October 21, 1969.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

We have noted with interest the Cuban announcement on 19 September of the adoption of a hijacking decree.

The substance of the decree has been carefully studied by the FAA Task Force on Deterrence of Air Piracy and by my staff. It is our opinion that the issuance of this decree should be viewed as a significant move on the part of the Government of Cuba toward the return to the United States of certain persons who have hijacked United States aircraft to Cuba.

We urge the Department of State to explore to the fullest extent possible the means by which Cuba’s announcement may be translated into actions resulting in the return of hijackers. We recognize the difficulties created by the modifying conditions contained in the Cuban announcement. However, we view with guarded optimism the fact of the announcement itself and believe this presents an opportunity to enter into discussions, through appropriate channels, regarding acceptable conditions for obtaining the return of aircraft hijackers.

We stand ready to assist you and your Department in any manner which you feel may be helpful to your efforts in this and in the several other areas in which you are working to prevent aircraft hijacking.

Sincerely,

John Volpe

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. No classification marking.

125. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 125. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, October 31, 1969.

Subject:

Cuban Hijacking Decree.

Recommendation:

That you approve the dispatch of the enclosed note to the Government of Cuba informing that Government that the United States is prepared on a basis of reciprocity to return hijackers of Cuban ships and aircraft except in the case of U.S. nationals or when we determine to grant a hijacker political asylum.

Approve _______ Disapprove __________

Discussion:

The purpose of this note is to follow up on the Cuban hijacking decree of September 19 which suggests that Cuba may be prepared to return hijackers to the United States and other countries which are willing to agree bilaterally with Cuba to reciprocate. It is our belief that the return of hijackers from Cuba for prosecution in the United States would be the most effective deterrent to future hijackings; the announcement of an agreement with Cuba to return hijackers should have strong deterrent effect. The return of refugee-hijackers to Cuba would cause problems in the United States, but we expect that most hijackers coming from Cuba would be entitled to political asylum. In the exceptional case of a common criminal who uses hijacking to escape justice, we should be prepared to reciprocate in order to achieve the return of hijackers to the United States. A full discussion of the Cuban decree and an analysis of this problem is enclosed.

This note has been discussed with the Attorney General and he agrees to the use of deportation, or exclusion procedures under the immigration laws for this purpose.

An understanding with Cuba on the return of hijackers would not alter the status of our relations with the Castro Government. There are many precedents for discussions and agreements with governments in the absence of diplomatic relations. The 1955 arrangement with Communist China for the exchange of civilian prisoners and the 1962 Agreement on the Neutrality of Laos are examples. Article 74 of the proposed Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties states the accepted principle of international law that even “the conclusion of a treaty does not in itself affect the situation in regard to diplomatic or consular relations. In 1965 the United States and Cuba concluded a formal agreement for the establishment of the refugee airlift in a memorandum of understanding set forth in an exchange of notes between the Swiss Embassy in Havana and the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Relations. The proposed note, which is not drafted in the form of an agreement as such, would also be communicated to the Cuban Government by note of the Swiss Embassy in Havana. Although an agreement with Cuba might cause apprehension on in some quarters that we intend to regularize relations with Cuba, we believe an agreement on hijacking generally would be understood to be limited to that subject and would be favorably received in most sectors of U.S. and Latin opinion. A favorable response would be enhanced if we move promptly.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Confidential. Copies were sent to S/S, ARA, and L. The note and background memorandum were attached but not published.

126. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 126. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant For National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, November 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Note to Cuban Government on Hijacking

In the memorandum at Tab A, Secretary Rogers asks that you approve the dispatch of a note to the Cuban, Government stating that the United States is prepared, on a basis of reciprocity, to return hijackers of Cuban ships and aircraft except in the case of US nationals or when we determine to grant political asylum.

The note is intended to follow up on the Cuban hijacking decree of September 19, which offered to return hijackers—political asylees excepted—on a basis of strict reciprocity with states entering into an agreement with Cuba to that effect.

The Secretary believes that the hijacking situation has reached serious proportions and that we should take every step we can to resolve it. He believes that sending the proposed note might lead to an arrangement that would help deter future hijackings.

The Secretary’s memorandum argues that: --The return from Cuba of hijackers for prosecution in the United States would be the most effective deterrent to future hijacking we can achieve; announcement of an agreement with Cuba to return hijackers would have a strong deterrent effect.

--An understanding with Cuba on hijacking would not alter the status of our relations with the Castro Government. There are many precedents for discussions and agreements with governments in the absence of diplomatic relations. A prime example is the 1965 agreement with Cuba itself establishing the refugee airlift. The 1955 agreement with Communist China for the exchange of civilian prisoners and the 1962 agreement on Laos are other examples.

--Chances that such an action would be misunderstood as portending an intention to regularize relations with Cuba are small. A hijacking agreement would be readily understandable—and explainable—as a specific thing limited to that subject. Such an agreement, in fact, is likely to be received favorably in many sectors of the US, the industry and the Congress because of its promise to end the vexing problem of hijacking.

--While the reciprocal obligation to return hijackers to Cuba might be criticized domestically, as a practical matter most hijackers coming from Cuba are most likely to be entitled to political asylum. In the exceptional case of a common criminal who uses hijacking to escape justice we should be prepared to reciprocate in order to achieve the return of hijackers to the US and to establish precedents for the international community.

--The proposed note has been discussed with the Attorney General who agrees to the use of deportation or exclusion procedures under the immigration laws for this purpose.

The text of the proposed note is at Tab B. It is not drafted in the form of an agreement as such. We would, however, be prepared to proceed with a more direct memorandum of understanding—as was done in the 1965 refugee airlift understanding—if that is necessary to reach agreement. Background on the situation and the text of the Cuban decree is at Tab C.

I concur in the Secretary’s recommendation because I think the opportunity to find a solution to the very troublesome hijacking problem is sufficiently promising that we should not miss it. I also agree that the adverse implications or consequences are likely to be minimal.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the dispatch of the note at Tab B to the Cuban Government through the Swiss Embassy in Havana.

Approve ______ Disapprove ________ See Me ______

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval on November 13. Tab A is Document 125. Tabs B and C were attached but not published.

127. Letter from Secretary Rogers to Secretary of Transportation Volpe 127. Letter from Secretary Rogers to Secretary of Transportation Volpe1

Washington, November 17, 1969.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

I have your letter of October 21 on the subject of the recent Cuban hijacking decree, and I appreciate your offer of assistance in the resolution of the hijacking problem.

I share your view that the issuance of the Cuban decree should be viewed as a significant move on the part of the Government of Cuba that may provide an opportunity to work towards the return of hijackers to the United States for prosecution. As you point out, however, there are a number of potentially serious problems in the Cuban decree. After careful study, we have decided upon an approach to the Government of Cuba that we believe is the most feasible course of action in this situation, and we have asked the President for his approval. You may wish to convey to the President the views you expressed to me in your letter of October 21.

For your personal information, I am enclosing a copy of my memorandum to the President and a copy of the note I would propose to send to the Government of Cuba. In view of the delicacy of the matter, we must give these documents an extremely limited distribution.

Sincerely,

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12. Confidential. Drafted by Mark B. Feldman (L/ARA) on November 6 and 12, and cleared by Feehan and Loy. The memorandum is Document 125. Attached but not published was the proposed note.

128. Telegram 199293 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland 128. Telegram 199293 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland1

Washington, November 28, 1969, 18222

Subject:

U.S. Proposal to Cuba on Hijacking

1. (Begin FYI and Background for Federal Political Department and for Ambassador Fischli):

On September 16, 1969 the GOC issued Law No. 1226 declaring that it was considered necessary quote to adopt measures to put an end to the climate of insecurity created in air and ocean navigation by the diversion by force of ships and planes from their normal routes and activities, and to adapt the application of such measures to the attitude assumed by other States on bases of equality and reciprocity unquote. The law made it clear, as did Cuban Ambassador Alarcon’s speech at the UN on October 8, that the GOC would not enter into any multilateral negotiations for the elimination of hijacking, but would consider only bilateral arrangements on the basis of strict reciprocity. The law also provided that hijackers are criminally liable under Cuban criminal laws and may be returned to the affected State upon the official request of that State.

2. The USG has long been concerned over aerial hijacking incidents which have the high potential for causing a serious air disaster with loss of lives. It is our belief (and hope) that a well-publicized understanding between the USG and Cuba to return hijackers for prosecution would have a substantial deterrent effect upon future hijacking incidents. We therefore wish to send the note stated below to the GOC stating that the USG is prepared to return to Cuba, upon request of the GOC, persons diverting Cuban ships or planes by force to the US on the basis of reciprocity and with the same exceptions for nationals and cases of political asylum established in the Cuban law.

3. While we recognize that the Cuban law is much broader than what we have proposed in that it applies to all persons entering or leaving Cuba in violation of regulations and to Cuban ships and planes that may be taken by theft or bribery, we are deliberately limiting our proposal to hijackers. Obviously, the USG will not agree to return other persons simply because they left Cuba illegally, whether through Guantanamo or some other route. Although we cannot be sure that Castro is indeed prepared to return hijackers or whether he may set conditions we cannot meet, we believe the seriousness of the hijacking problem requires us to take advantage of any possible opportunity for ameliorating the situation.

4. His Excellency, Alfred Fischli, Swiss Ambassador in Havana is fully cognizant of previous USG initiatives with the GOC on the hijacking problem and the GOC response to them. In taking this most recent initiative, on our behalf, we request that Ambassador Fischli keep in mind that the USG has the following goals: (a) achieve a well-publicized understanding with Cuba which hopefully would in itself act as a substantial deterrent against future hijackings; if for some reason, GOC objects to publication of notes we would consider other suggestions for publicity necessary to achieve deterrent effect; (b) while we are prepared to enter into a signed bilateral agreement we prefer less formal arrangements which would reflect that Cuba and the United States have adopted parallel positions on this grave problem. An affirmative reply from Cuba to our note would be acceptable. We would prefer to publish both notes. (End FYI and Background for Federal Political Department and Ambassador Fischli).

5. In delivering the note, we request that Ambassador Fischli stress orally to the Cubans that the USG: (a) views the problem of hijacking as being most serious; (b) welcomed the Cuban Government’s initiative to deter hijacking by its adoption of its Law 1226; (c) believes that a well-publicized understanding between the United States and Cuba that hijackers risked being returned for punishment would in itself act as a substantial deterrent to future acts of hijacking to the mutual advantage of both governments; (d) has taken this initiative to communicate with the GOC on Law 1226 in order to assure the GOC that the USG believes that US policy with respect to return of hijackers parallels that of the GOC; (e) is prepared to act on a basis of equality and strict reciprocity.

6. We request that the Ambassador of Switzerland, Alfred Fischli, be instructed to deliver the following note to the GOC.

BEGIN TEXT OF NOTE

The Government of the United States of America has taken note of Law Number 1226 issued by the Government of Cuba on September 16, 1969 declaring:

Quote The Cuban Revolutionary Government considers it necessary to adopt measures to put an end to the climate of insecurity created in air and ocean navigation by the diversion by force of ships and planes from their normal routes and activities, and to adapt the application of such measures to the attitude assumed by other States on bases of equality and reciprocity unquote.

In addition to punishment under the criminal laws of Cuba (Article 7), it is the understanding of the Government of the United States of America that Law 1226 contemplates the return of persons committing such acts to the State affected if they are claimed by that State in conformity with the law, reserving for the Government of Cuba its jurisdiction over Cuban nationals, and the right to grant political asylum. It is the further understanding of the Government of the United States that Law 1226 provides that hijackers are to be returned solely to those States that agree bilaterally to apply the same policy for the benefit of Cuba on a basis of equality and strict reciprocity.

The Government of the United States wishes to confirm that it shares the determination of the Government of Cuba to adopt measures to deter the diversion by force of ships and planes from their normal routes and activities. The United States is prepared, upon request, to return to Cuba persons committing such acts against Cuban ships and planes, on a basis of equality and reciprocity as specified in Law 1226, in accordance with the procedures available under United States laws and regulations. Accordingly, the Government of the United States hopes that the Government of Cuba will act affirmatively on requests by the United States for the return of hijackers of United States ships and planes. It is our belief that the return of hijackers for prosecution will have a substantial deterrent effect that would help to achieve the objective of Law 1226 to put an end to the climate of insecurity that has been created in air and ocean navigation. END TEXT

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, AV 12 US. Confidential; Priority;Exdis. Drafted by Park F. Wollam and Robert F. Funseth (ARA/CCA) and Hurwitch; and cleared by Frederick Smith Jr., Deputy Administrator for Security and Consular Affairs, Loy, Stevenson, Feldman, and Vaky.

129. Telegram 3810 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland 129. Telegram 3810 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland1

Washington, January 9, 1970, 2215Z.

Refs:

(a) State 199293

(b) Bern 3683

(c) Bern 3738

Subject:

Castro’s Response to US Proposal on Hijacking

1. Dept wishes to express its appreciation to Ambassador Fischli for his presentation U.S. proposal and for providing us with his assessment of the provisional nature of Fidel Castro’s cryptic reply—an assessment with which we agree.

2. We believe we should respond to GOC request for clarification in order to avoid giving GOC any pretext to reject US offer or an excuse for delaying action. Accordingly, unless Federal Political Department has objection, we request that Ambassador Fischli be instructed to pass precisely and fully the following US views orally to FonMin Roa.

3. The USG notes PriMin Castro’s assurance that the GOC is ready to negotiate with the USG. For its part, the USG is prepared, as previously stated to FonMin Roa by Ambassador Fischli, to reach a firm understanding with the GOC on this matter as soon as possible. We are hopeful that a well-publicized understanding between the GOC and the USG for the return of hijackers of ships and aircraft would have a substantial deterrent effect on hijacking. Unless such a step is taken, we believe the risk of a tragic accident with loss of life remains a dangerous possibility. We believe that the US proposal as previously outlined is clear, but perhaps the following restatement of it will be helpful. The United States is prepared, on the basis of equality and reciprocity as specified in Cuban Law 1226 of September 16, 1969, upon the request of the Government of Cuba, to return to Cuba persons who by force or threat of force divert ships and planes of Cuban registry from their normal routes and activities and bring them to the United States; the U.S. would also apply reciprocally the same exceptions specified in the Cuban law of September 16, 1969 for cases of political asylum and for nationals of the US.

4. The USG is prepared to provide any further clarification that the GOC may request, in order that a mutually satisfactory arrangement relative to this serious problem can be achieved as quickly as possible. END

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Feldman on January 8; cleared by Stevenson, Hurwitch, Funseth, and U. Alexis Johnson; and approved by Charles H. Meyer.

130. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 130. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 28, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Note to Cuban Government on Hijacking

In the memo at Tab A, Secretary Rogers asks your approval to present a draft memorandum of understanding on hijacking to the Cuban Government. Last November you authorized the Secretary to inform the Cuban Government that we would be prepared to enter into an agreement for the reciprocal return of hijackers (Tab C). Cuba replied to our initial approach by stating that it was disposed to work out an agreement. The Secretary is not very sanguine that an agreement is possible, and views the Cuban reply as more of an effort to return the ball to our court without committing Cuba. However, he recommends that we now forward a draft memorandum of understanding in an effort to pin down an agreement, because we should pursue the matter so long as there remains any hope of resolving this vexing problem.

Failure to follow up would give Castro the opportunity to say that the US is unwilling to settle this problem. If we reply with a concrete proposal we would demonstrate that we have gone to considerable and serious effort to deter hijacking; if we conclude an agreement, it would be to our advantage; if Castro backs away, we could charge Castro is insincere.

The text of the memorandum of understanding proposed by the Secretary is appended at Tab B. It states merely that each government will upon request return hijackers of planes or ships to the other, except that each government reserves the right not to return its own nationals or persons to whom it grants political asylum.

I agree with the Secretary’s arguments and recommend that you approve his recommendation.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve the dispatch of the note and proposed memorandum of understanding on hijacking attached at Tab B.

[The President initialed his approval on June 11.]

Tab A

Washington, May 15, 1970

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject:

Hijacking Agreement with Cuba

Recommendation:

That you approve the dispatch of the enclosed note to the Government of Cuba which proposes to that Government the text of a specific Memorandum of Understanding with respect to hijacking.

Approve _________ Disapprove __________

Background:

On December 8 the Cuban Government replied to our proposal for an understanding on the return of hijackers in the following terms: “The Revolutionary Government of Cuba states that it is disposed to work out an agreement with the Government of the United States on hijackers of aircraft and other similar acts referred to in Cuban law 1226, published on September 16, 1969, which shall constitute for Cuba, the legal basis of the said agreement.”

This general reply does not add much to the Cuban law of September 16, 1969, which in itself contemplates bilateral agreements, but it does state that the Cuban law is applicable to the United States. No doubt Castro made this reply to return the ball to our court without committing Cuba. Both Mexico and Canada, despite persistent efforts, have been unable to reach firm agreement with Cuba on the hijacking issue. Considering Cuba’s trade and other relations with these countries, we are not hopeful that the United States will do better. Moreover, in a major speech on April 22, Castro cast doubt upon the sincerity of the motives of the Cuban Government when it announced its willingness to enter bilateral agreements on hijacking. That speech states that governments wishing to enter into hijacking agreements with Cuba must abide by the Cuban law “article by article without removing a single comma.” The Cuban law includes provisions relating to illegal emigration from Cuba, which Cuba could not expect the United States to accept.

Nevertheless, it would serve our interests to offer to enter into a specific understanding with Cuba on hijacking. One reason is our public posture. Cuba has now responded to our December 8, 1969 note, that you had approved, by repeating its apparently forthcoming position. If we fail to make a significant reply, Castro will have the propaganda advantage. If we reply with a concrete proposal, we could demonstrate effectively that we have gone to considerable and serious effort to deter hijacking. We would be in a position to expose Castro’s insincerity on the hijacking question if he fails to pursue an agreement seriously. More important, however, we should take all reasonable steps to stop hijacking. So long as there remains any hope of actually reaching some firm agreement, we should pursue the matter seriously. If no progress can be made, I would not plan to continue to forward proposals indefinitely.

If Cuba should suggest that as a means of reaching agreement on hijacking we cease using Guantanamo as a port of exit for Cubans seeking to come to the United States, a possibility hinted at in Castro’s speech, we should reject the suggestion for we would then be required either to hold refugees at the base or return them to the Cuban authorities. Neither option is feasible. If we sought overtly to discourage Cubans seeking freedom from entering the base, it could be tantamount to our building a “Berlin Wall.” In rejecting such terms, we could treat the suggestion as “evidence” that Cuba is not seriously interested in a hijacking agreement.

The possibility of concluding a formal agreement with Cuba was contemplated in my earlier memorandum to you on this subject. Failure to forward the Memorandum of Understanding would leave us in a situation in which Castro could say that he has repeated his offer to reach agreement with the United States on this sensitive problem, and that we had not responded.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Box 780, NSC Files, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval on June 11. Tabs B-C were attached but not published. Kissinger informed Rogers of the President’s decision in a June 12 memorandum and stated that any press releases or backgrounders regarding the issue should be coordinated with the White House in advance. (Ibid.)

131. Telegram 96818 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland 131. Telegram 96818 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland1

Washington, June 19, 1970, 1833Z.

Subject:

U.S. Reply to Cuban response to U.S. proposal for anti-hijacking agreement.

Ref:

State 199293 and 3810 to Bern

1. There follows below text of a note replying to the responding Cuban note, dated April 6, 1970, to the U.S. proposal for an anti-hijacking agreement with Cuba which the Embassy should request the Federal Political Department to instruct the Swiss Embassy in Havana to deliver to Foreign Minister Roa.

2. Embassy should also request the FPD to inform the Swiss Embassy in Havana that the substance of the proposal does not go beyond that which we communicated to the Cuban Government through Ambassador Fischli in Havana on December 5 (State 199293) and clarified on January 14 (State 3810). The substance of the reply and the employment of a “Memorandum of Understanding” as the instrument of reply were discussed with Ambassador Fischli during his visit to Washington, May 13-15.

3. Begin text of note:

Quote The Government of the United States of America has taken note of the disposition of the Cuban Revolutionary Government as expressed in its Note to the Embassy of Switzerland in Havana, dated April 6, 1970, to work out an agreement with the Government of the United States concerning the return of hijackers based on Cuban law 1226 of September 16, 1969. It is the understanding of the United States Government that the Cuban Government is in accord that an agreement between the two governments for the return of hijackers should be given wide publicity to achieve the maximum deterrent effect.

The Government of the United States welcomes the agreement in principle that has been achieved in this matter, and it hopes that the Government of Cuba will be prepared to conclude a firm understanding as soon as possible. Accordingly, the Government of the United States proposes for the consideration of the Government of Cuba the following exchange of notes with the Embassy of Switzerland setting forth a Memorandum of Understanding between our two governments. If the Government of Cuba agrees, the Memorandum of Understanding can be brought into effect immediately by an appropriate reply of the Foreign Ministry.

BEGIN TEXT OF PROPOSED EXCHANGE OF NOTES

“The Embassy of Switzerland presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Relations and, in its capacity as representative of the interests of the United States of America in Cuba, has the honor to refer to recent conversations which have taken place between the Embassy and representatives of the Government of Cuba with respect to the adoption of measures to deter the hijacking of aircraft and other similar acts.

The Embassy also has the honor to set forth below the text of the English and Spanish language versions, which shall be equally authentic, of the Memorandum of Understanding agreed upon in those conversations:

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN THE EMBASSY OF SWITZERLAND IN HAVANA, REPRESENTING THE INTERESTS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA IN THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA, AND THE FOREIGN MINISTRY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF CUBA CONCERNING THE HIJACKING OF AIRCRAFT AND OTHER SIMILAR ACTS

1. The Government of the United States of America and the Government of Cuba recognize that in order to avoid a tragic accident it is necessary to adopt measures to put an end to the climate of insecurity created in air and ocean navigation by the diversion by force of ships and aircraft from their normal routes and activities, and that such measures should be adopted on a basis of equality and reciprocity.

2. Each Government therefore, upon request, will return to the other, in accordance with the procedures established under the laws of the requested state, persons who by force or threat of force hereafter divert ships or aircraft registered by the requesting state from their normal routes and activities and bring them to the requested state.

3. Each Government reserves the right not to return (a) its own nationals and (b) persons to whom it grants political asylum.

The Embassy has the honor to propose that, if the Memorandum of Understanding set forth above is acceptable to the Ministry of Foreign Relations, this Note and the Ministry’s reply concurring therein shall constitute an agreement between the Government of the United States and the Government of Cuba which shall enter into force as of the date of the Ministry’s reply.” End quote.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Funseth and Feldman on June 16; cleared by Loy and Salans; and approved by Hurwitch.

132. Telegram 209449 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland 132. Telegram 209449 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Switzerland1

Washington, October 15, 1970, 1744Z.

Subject:

Proposed Hijacking Agreement with Cuba

Ref:

Bern 2535 and Cuban Note to Swiss Embassy Havana, dated September 29, 1970

1. Embassy should request Federal Political Department to instruct Ambassador Fischli in Havana to deliver the following note to Foreign Minister Roa, in reply to the Cuban note of September 29, 1970 re U.S. proposal for an anti-hijacking agreement.

2. Begin quote The Government of the United States of America refers to the declaration of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba as expressed in the note of the Foreign Ministry of Cuba to the Embassy of Switzerland of September 29, 1970, that it is willing to discuss with the Government of the United States of America an agreement for the return of hijackers in accordance with the provisions of Cuban Law 1226 of September 16, 1969, and that the Government of Cuba is willing to sign an agreement immediately on the basis of that law. This declaration, as we understand it, reiterates the position expressed by the Revolutionary Government of Cuba in its note to the Embassy of Switzerland of April 6, 1970 that it is prepared to work out an agreement with the United States. The Government of the United States of America, as it has previously communicated, welcomes this declaration and hopes that the Revolutionary Government of Cuba will be prepared to conclude a firm understanding as soon as possible.

3. At this point, it seems useful to review the steps taken by the United States by which it has consistently indicated its willingness to treat the issue within the context of Cuban Law 1226 and by which it has consistently the Revolutionary Government of Cuba on this matter indicated its willingness to arrive at an agreement with Cuba. The Government of the United States of America took the initiative in communicating with the Revolutionary Government of Cuba a year ago when on December 5, 1969 it proposed reciprocal action by the two governments for the return of hijackers of ships and planes on the bases specified in Cuban Law 1226. The Government of the United States of America took this initiative because it believes that a well-publicized understanding with the Revolutionary Government of Cuba for the return of hijackers would have a substantial deterrent effect on hijackings, and because it is concerned that unless such a step is taken, the risk of a tragic accident remains a dangerous possibility. When the Revolutionary Government of Cuba requested clarification of the United States proposal, the Government of the United States of America provided that clarification on January 14, 1970 and stated that it was prepared to provide any further clarification in order that a mutually satisfactory arrangement relative to the serious problem of hijacking could be achieved as quickly as possible. On April 6, 1970 the Revolutionary Government of Cuba indicated that it was willing to work out an agreement with the United States concerning the return of hijackers based on Cuban Law 1226, but it made no specific comment in the terms of the United States proposal.

4. In order to advance this serious matter to a rapid conclusion, the Government of the United States of America prepared a Memorandum of Understanding which was presented to the Revolutionary Government of Cuba by the Embassy of Switzerland in its Note No. 108-IE of July 11, 1970. The proposed Memorandum of Understanding, based upon Cuban Law 1226, provides that each government, upon request, will return to the other, in accordance with the procedures established under the laws of the requested state, persons who by force or threat of force hereafter divert to the requested state ships or aircraft registered in the requesting state, each government reserving the right, as specified in Cuban Law 1226, not to return its own nationals and persons to whom it grants political asylum. The Government of the United States of America is still awaiting the comments of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba on that proposal.

5. The Government of the United States of America remains concerned that some day an aerial hijacking may result in a serious air disaster with a tragic loss of lives, and it maintains the strong belief that a well-publicized understanding between the United States and Cuba to return hijackers for prosecution would have a substantial deterrent effect upon hijacking that might avert such a disaster. The United States Government has welcomed the indications that the Revolutionary Government of Cuba shares this concern, and for this reason hopes that the Revolutionary Government of Cuba will now be prepared to move beyond general statements of principle to conclusion of an agreement. The Government of the United States of America would, therefore, appreciate a response to its proposed Memorandum of Understanding, which was based directly on Cuban Law 1226. The Government of the United States of America would, of course, be willing to discuss any specific changes in the text of the proposed Memorandum of Understanding that the Revolutionary Government of Cuba may wish to suggest.

6. More than one year has passed since Cuba promulgated its Law 1226 and stated its willingness to enter into bilateral agreement with other governments to deter hijackings, and more than one year has passed since the Government of the United States took the initiative to propose that the two governments enter into such an agreement. Meanwhile, the danger remains that innocent persons may became victims of an aerial disaster that might have been avoided if Cuba and the United States had made an agreement that would warn potential hijackers to expect to be prosecuted for their criminal actions. End quote.

7. Background for Ambassador Fischli: Department concurs in your estimate that latest Cuban reply is another attempt to gain time and avoid any blame for continuation of current situation in which the two governments have still not reached agreement. As in past, we do not intend permit Cubans enjoy this position and foregoing is intended to maintain maximum pressure for serious negotiations and to recall the record of United States initiatives and persistent attempts to reach an agreement in face of steady Cuban stalling. As you know, Department has recognized from the outset that Cuban law is much broader than what we proposed in that it applies to all persons entering or leaving Cuba in violation of Cuban regulations, and to Cuban ships and planes that may be taken by theft or bribery. We deliberately limited our proposal to hijackers as we are in no rpt position to agree to return other persons simply because they left Cuba without permission, whether through Guantanamo or some other route. End background for Ambassador Fischli.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Priority;Exdis. Drafted by Funseth and Feldman; cleared by Stevenson, Hurwitch, Kissinger and Rein; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson.

133. Memorandum from Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 133. Memorandum from Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 22, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Clearance of Cable Containing Note to the Cuban Government on Hijacking Negotiations

Attached at Tab A is a proposed telegram to Bern for the Swiss Ambassador in Havana containing a note to the Cuban Government which: --Notes and welcomes the Cuban declaration of willingness to discuss a hijacking agreement, contained in a note received September 29, 1970 (Tab B);

--Reviews our efforts to arrive at an agreement with the Government of Cuba on the disposition of persons (other than those claiming political asylum) who perform aerial and maritime hijacking;

--Recalls the draft Memorandum of Understanding, based on Cuban Law 1226, delivered to the Cuban Government by us last July to which they have thus far failed to respond;

--Emphasizes our concern that so long as the present situation continues there is a risk of an aerial disaster resulting from an attempted hijacking with consequent loss of life to innocent persons;

--Requests a response to our draft Memorandum of Understanding of last July (cable at Tab C).

This proposed cable was drafted and ready for transmission last October when the Costa Rican airliner was hijacked and it was decided to hold it until the outcome of that incident was clear. You will recall that the Castro Government took a punitive attitude toward Costa Rica in this case, apparently due to Castro’s anger over statements of Costa Rica’s President Figueres, and held the plane longer than has been usual. The Cubans also levied excessive charges for alleged repairs to the aircraft. The incident has since been resolved.

The proposed action at this time is not based on any thought that the Cubans are more willing to come to terms now than they have been in the past, but is intended to keep them under pressure and not allow them the luxury of retaining the initiative with hollow declarations.

There is some urgency about getting the cable off now because Swiss Ambassador Fischli is leaving his post for reassignment about January 1 and may not be replaced for several months.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve clearance of the cable at Tab A.

Approve _______

Disapprove ________

[Kissinger initialed his approval.]

Tab B

70 DEC 23 AM 10:52

The Federal Political Department has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that on September 29, 1970, Mr. Roa, the Cuban Minister of Foreign Affairs, delivered to the Ambassador of Switzerland in Cuba the note transcribed below, which is in reply to the July 11 note from the Embassy of Switzerland containing a draft Memorandum of Understanding concerning the hijacking of airplanes and ships: “In compliance with instructions from the Revolutionary Government of Cuba, I have the honor to address myself to Your Excellency in your capacity as Representative of the interests of the United States of America in our country in order to give the following reply to the Swiss Embassy’s note No. 108-IE dated July 11, 1970:

“The Revolutionary Government of Cuba is willing to discuss an agreement with the Government of the United States of America in accordance with the bases contained to Cuban Law No. 1226, promulgated September 16, 1969. This law, as is known, covers not only the hijacking of airplanes but: also of vessels of all types, and other offenses and forms of piracy which violate international rules and international law.

“If the Government of the United States harbors the intention of seriously and definitively facing up to this problem, the Government of Cuba is willing to sign an agreement on the matter immediately, on the terms mentioned above.

“It is essential to specify that the Cuban Government would not accept or respect any international agreement relating to the hijacking of planes that did not specifically include all the offenses set forth in the law enacted for that purpose.

“Lastly, the Government of Cuba does not concede any special importance to publicity about the negotiations for the said agreement.

“We should, however, be wiling to have the matter made known if that implies a willingness on the part of the United States Government to discuss the problem on the bases contained in the aforementioned Cuban law, with a genuine intent to arrive at an agreement and not as a mere move for psychological effect.

I avail myself of the opportunity, Mr. Ambassador, to renew to you the assurance of my highest consideration.”

During a lengthy discussion, conducted by both sides with deliberate cordiality, Ambassador Fischli tried in vain to ascertain what changes Cuba would like to make in the American draft. To the Ambassador’s repeated questions, however, Mr. Roa merely said that “the bases contained in Cuban law” must be understood to mean only the articles of that law, and not its introductory “whereas” clauses, etc.

According to the Ambassador of Switzerland, this is clearly another step to gain time and yet not have to assume, in the eyes of other countries, the responsibility for prolonging the present unpleasant situation.

Mr. Roa added that he regretted the exaggerated and premature publicity which had been given to the negotiations in the United States. If an agreement is ever concluded, it should be published by both sides simultaneously and in a concerted manner.

The Department avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Embassy the assurances of its high consideration.

Bern, September, 1970

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval. Tabs B and C were attached but not published.

134. Memorandum from the Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs (Feldman) to the Assistant Legal Adviser of Administrative and Consular Affairs (Malmborg) 134. Memorandum from the Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs (Feldman) to the Assistant Legal Adviser of Administrative and Consular Affairs (Malmborg)1

Washington, July 22, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking - Fulbright Hearings

In executive Session July 20 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee received testimony from Assistant Secretary Charles Meyer on our hijacking negotiations with Cuba. A copy of that testimony is attached for your information. The principle concern of the Committee on this matter was to understand why the United States Government could not enter into an agreement with Cuba covering all of the crimes enumerated in Cuban Law 1276 as proposed by Cuba. We explained that the Law is not limited to the hijacking of ships and aircraft. It covers a number of other offenses relating to ships and aircraft plus the crime of entry into or departure from Cuba in violation of Cuban regulations. We stated that the United States is not prepared to recognize as criminal conduct departure from Cuba without the consent of Cuban authorities. None of our extradition treaties recognize such a crime. We do not recognize the right of States to confine their population against their will; the right to leave is a recognized human right. Although we noted that the Cuban Law, and our proposal, contemplates exceptions for political asylum, no Senator specifically asked why that exception did not solve our problems.

At one point Senator Fulbright quoted from the DOT testimony in public session and suggested that ratification of the Hague Convention would be meaningless without Cuba and would mislead they American public to believe something was being done about hijacking. I answered that point by stressing: (1) the increasing incidence of hijacking of United States aircraft to countries other than Cuba; (2) the serious foreign policy problems that can arise from the hijacking of non-United States aircraft elsewhere in the world such as the Middle East; (3) and the value of the international consensus against hijacking expressed in the Hague Convention, including the possibility that it might influence Cuban behavior in relation to hijacking.

From the comments of Senator Fulbright and other Senators it would appear that the Committee will report the Convention with a favorable recommendation, but the Committee report will draw attention to the deficiencies of the Convention. The Chairman also indicated he plans to initiate a resolution calling for a revision of United States Cuban policy. Thus the Committee tactic may be to argue that normalization of relations with Cuba is necessary, inter alia to achieve Cuban cooperation on hijacking.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12 US. Confidential. Drafted by Feldman. Copies were sent to Hurwitch, Salans, Funseth, and Leahy.

135. Memorandum of Conversation between Secretary Rogers and Swiss Ambassador Schnyder 135. Memorandum of Conversation between Secretary Rogers and Swiss Ambassador Schnyder1

Washington, November 16, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Hijacking

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

Amb. Felix Schnyder, Embassy of Switzerland

Mr. Olivier Exchaquet, Minister, Embassy of Switzerland

Mr. Robert Hurwitch, Deputy Assistant Secretary

Bureau of Inter-American Affairs

The Secretary asked Ambassador Schnyder to forward the attached message to Swiss Ambassador Masnata at Havana as soon as possible. The Secretary explicitly separated the question of a possible bilateral agreement on hijacking from any change in U.S. policy toward Cuba. He stated that U.S. policy toward Cuba remains unchanged. The Secretary also said that the U.S. agreed with Prime Minister Castro’s view that the negotiations should be conducted through the Swiss. He said that we were not considering dealing directly with Cuba on this matter but were wondering whether some other mechanism through the Swiss would not accelerate the process of reaching an agreement on the subject.

Attachment

Washington, November 16, 1972

MESSAGE FROM STATE DEPARTMENT TO AMB. MASNATA

The Department of State requests that you seek the earliest possible appointment with Foreign Minister Roa to deliver the following message orally:

The United States Government has welcomed the Government of Cuba’s desire to reach an agreement with United States on hijacking, as indicated in its Note of October 30, 1972, by Prime Minister Castro’s remarks on this subject to Swiss Ambassador Masnata on November 11, 1972, and by the Government of Cuba’s statement of November 14, 1972. The Government of the U.S. agrees that this important matter should be urgently addressed by both governments and wishes to inform the Government of Cuba that it is prepared to negotiate an arrangement regarding hijacking and other serious crimes which may be committed in the future.

Accordingly, the Government of the U.S. is willing to discuss such a bilateral agreement promptly. It is prepared to consider favorably any arrangements and location for such talks that would expedite agreement and awaits the Government of Cuba’s views.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Hurwitch and approved in S on November 17. Rogers informed the President of his conversation with Schnyder that evening. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164)

136. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary Meyer to Secretary Rogers 136. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary Meyer to Secretary Rogers1

Washington, November 20, 1972.

Cuba Ready for Early Talks on Hijacking and Other Crimes

The Cuban Government replied on November 18 to our message of the previous day concerning talks on hijacking and other serious crimes, reconfirming its desire for a bilateral agreement on this subject. The reply suggests that conversations be held in Havana between Cuban Government and Swiss Embassy officials. Cuban Foreign Minister Roa, who gave the reply note to Swiss Ambassador Masnata, said the Cuban side would be ready to begin discussions by the middle of this ‘week and planned to present a draft agreement during the discussions.

Roa also handed Masnata a note rejecting the U.S. request for return of the Southern Airways hijackers on the ground that they committed offenses at the airport under Cuban law and would be tried accordingly. (A separate information memorandum is being sent on this note). The Roa-Masnata meeting occurred two hours before receipt by the Cuban Government of our formal extradition requests in both recent hijacking cases.

A translation of the Cuban reply on hijacking talks is attached.

Attachment

Translation of Cuban Government Note to Swiss Embassy Havana-November 19, 1972

(Complimentary introduction and close omitted)

The Government of Cuba looks with equal pleasure on the disposition of the Government of the United States to reach an agreement on hijackings of aircraft and other offenses, in response to the Cuban note of October 30.

The Cuban side is ready to take the appropriate steps in this connection. The conversations can be held in the city of Havana between officials of the Government of Cuba and the Embassy of Switzerland as representative of the interests of the United States in our country.

In the course of next week the Government of Cuba is prepared to establish the pertinent contacts for this purpose with officials of the Embassy of Switzerland in order to begin immediately to discuss said agreement.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Joseph Norbury (ARA/CCA) and cleared by Hurwitch. Rogers informed the President of this response on November 22. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164)

137. Memorandum from Secretary Rogers to President Nixon 137. Memorandum from Secretary Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, November 27, 1972.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT - Evening Report

Cuban Proposal for Hijacking Agreement - We have received a report of the first Swiss-Cuban meeting on a hijacking agreement which took place in Havana Saturday. The Cuban side tabled a draft agreement which provides for stiff punishment by the receiving country of persons who seize or divert planes or vessels. Return of the offenders is neither required nor referred to. The obligation of prosecution does not apply in the case of political asylum, which is very narrowly defined. The Cuban draft also contemplates punishment by each party of persons who use its territory to prepare or carry out acts of violence against the territory of the other party or aircraft or vessels going to or from the other party’s territory. With respect to refugees, it merely provides that each country will apply its own laws strictly to persons coming from the territory of the other party.

The Cuban proposal appears somewhat more acceptable than the Cuban position in 1969-70 on this subject. We tentatively plan to use it as a framework for further Swiss-Cuban discussion and are considering proposing various amendments to it for the next meeting.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Confidential.

138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 138. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, December 3, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Secretary Rogers to See Swiss Ambassador to Cuba on Monday to Hand Him U.S. Draft Proposal on Hijacking

Secretary Rogers has sent you a memorandum (at Tab A) informing you that he has asked the Swiss Ambassador to Havana to come to Washington on Monday, when he intends to give the Ambassador, for transmittal to the Government of Cuba, the U.S. response to the draft agreement on hijacking proposed by Cuba. Tab B is the text of the U.S. response to the Cuban draft. Briefly the background is the following:

After the last incidents involving hijackers of a clearly criminal nature, the Cuban Government issued a statement indicating its willingness to enter negotiations with the U.S. on the air piracy problem. In response the U.S. indicated its willingness to hold discussions through the Swiss but stressed that this represents no change in our overall policy toward Cuba. At the first meeting between Cuban and Swiss officials in Havana on November 25, Cuban officials presented a draft agreement, a translation of which is attached for your information at Tab C.

Previous attempts at negotiating an agreement with the Cubans on this problem have foundered over Cuban insistence that any such agreement also cover the return of illegal exiles, including those already in the U.S., and prohibition of any acts of piracy against Cuban territory by émigré groups. The present Cuban draft proposal continues to cover these points but provides for exemption from the provisions of the agreement for cases of political asylum.

The major differences in the draft the U.S. will propose are:

--to agree to give serious consideration to extraditing hijackers instead of prosecuting them in the country in which they land;

--to rule out retroactive action against acts of piracy thereby protecting Cuban émigrés in the U.S.;

--to stiffen the sentence for aircraft piracy;

--to return any funds or property obtained illegally.

Bill Timmons has no objection to the proposed agreement but recommends State consult with the leadership of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Foreign Relations Committee in Congress before public announcement of any final agreement. John Dean’s office also sees no problem with the proposed draft agreement. The Justice Department concurs in the draft.

Tab A

Washington, December 2, 1972

MEMORANDUM

FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject:

Cuba - Hijacking

For several years the United States has been attempting to interest the Cuban Government in a reciprocal agreement for the return of hijackers. Cuban agreement to return or to prosecute hijackers could represent a major deterrent to future hijackings. Following the two recent cases in which one person was murdered and a plane was nearly lost, Castro has expressed interest in an arrangement dealing with hijackers of ships and aircraft and certain other crimes of interest to Cuba.

There is attached the response to the draft agreement proposed by Cuba that I intend to forward to the Government of Cuba through the Swiss in Havana. To facilitate agreement we have followed the Cuban text as closely as possible, but certain changes were necessary to eliminate lesser offenses and to conform with United States laws. While Cuba proposed only that each party prosecute hijackers reaching its territory, we have suggested in keeping with our worldwide policy, an option to return or prosecute them.

Under this arrangement, the United States would promise no more than to apply its own laws. The understanding could be included in an exchange of notes between the Swiss Embassy in Havana and the Cuban Foreign Ministry. No treaty or implementing legislation would be necessary. The Department of Justice concurs in this draft.

In view of the difficulties of communicating with Havana, I have asked the Swiss Ambassador who represents our interests there to come to Washington on Monday.

William P. Rogers

Attachment

The Embassy of Switzerland presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Relations and, in its capacity of representative of the interests of the United States in the Republic of Cuba, has the honor to refer to the recent talks between the Embassy and representatives of the Government of Cuba regarding airplane hijackings and other offenses.

The Embassy also has the honor to set forth below the English and Spanish texts, which shall be equally authentic, of the Memorandum of Understanding agreed to in the said conversations:

Memorandum of Understanding on Airplane Hijackings and other offenses

The Government of the Republic of Cuba and the Government of the United States of America, on the basis of equality and strict reciprocity, hereby agree as follows:

Article 1. Any person who by force or threat of force hereafter unlawfully seizes, takes control of, appropriates or diverts from its normal route an aircraft or commits similar piratical acts against a vessel, that is registered under the laws of one of the parties, and reaches the territory of the other party shall either be returned to the first party or be prosecuted by the other party in accordance with its laws for crimes punishable, in the case of aircraft piracy by sentences ranging from imprisonment for not less than 20 years to death, and in other cases by sentences up to life imprisonment, according to the circumstances and seriousness of the acts. In addition, the other party shall take all necessary steps to facilitate without delay the continuation of the journey of the passengers and crew of the aircraft or vessel in question with their belongings, as well as the journey of the aircraft or vessel itself with all property brought with it, including any funds obtained by extortion or other illegal means, or the return thereof to the territory of the first party; likewise it shall take steps to protect the physical integrity of the aircraft or vessel, and all property brought with it, including funds obtained by extortion or other illegal means, and the physical integrity of the passengers and crew and their belongings, while they are in its territory as a consequence of or in connection with the acts to which this Article refers.

Article 2. Each party shall investigate and prosecute strictly in accordance with its laws any person who within its territory hereafter conspires to promote, or prepares, or takes part in an expedition carried on from its territory that carries out acts of violence or depredation against aircraft or vessels of any type or registration coming from or going to the territory of the other party, or who within its territory hereafter conspires to promote, or prepares, or takes part in, an expedition carried on from its territory that carries out such acts or similar unlawful acts in the territory of the other party.

Article 3. Each party shall apply strictly its own laws with respect to any person, particularly those having committed common crimes, who, coming from the territory of the other party, enters its territory, violating its laws as well as national and international requirements pertaining to immigration, health, customs, and the like.

Article 4. The country exercising its responsibility with regard to the perpetrators of the acts described in Article l may take into account the mitigating circumstances in cases in which the perpetrators were being sought for strictly political reasons and were in real and imminent danger of death, without a viable alternative for leaving the country, provided there was no extortion or physical injury to the passengers, members of the crew, or other persons having responsibility with respect to the aircraft or vessel used. In any case involving such extortion or injury and in cases where the perpetrators had previously committed serious crimes of violence in the territory of one party, the party to whose territory they flee shall give serious consideration to returning the perpetrators to the territory of the party from which they came for prosecution under its laws.

Final Provisions:

This Agreement may be amended or expanded by decision of the parties.

This Agreement shall be in force for five years; it may be renewed for an equal term by express decision of the parties.

Either party may inform the other of its decision to terminate this agreement at any time while the agreement is in effect by written denunciation submitted six months in advance.

The Embassy has the honor to propose that, if the agreements described in the Memorandum of Understanding set forth above are acceptable to the Ministry of Foreign Relations, this note and the Ministry’s reply concurring therein shall constitute acceptance by the Government of the United States and the Government of Cuba of the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding, which will enter into force on the date of the reply.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Confidential (GDS). Sent for information. In a December 1 memorandum to Kissinger recommending that he send this memorandum to the President, William J. Jorden of the NSC staff noted that Rogers “help[ed] draft” the U.S. draft memorandum. (Ibid.) Tab B was attached but not published.

139. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) to Secretary of State Rogers 139. Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Hurwitch) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, December 12, 1972.

Subject:

Hijacking Agreement with Cuba

Attached for your information is a report from the Swiss on their December 9 meeting with the Cuban negotiators. Also attached is a memorandum of last night’s meeting with the Canadian Embassy officials.

The Cuban preliminary reaction to the possibility of returning guilty parties is interesting in that they inquired about procedures rather than reject the option. This reaction provides us with an opportunity to probe Cuban interest in activating the 1904 extradition treaty. This opportunity could be explored when Ambassador Masnata next meets with the Cuban negotiators by instructing him now to do so, or it could wait until after his report of the full Cuban reaction to our proposal at the next meeting. In light of the Canadian and Mexican forward movement, I think we should place Ambassador Masnata in the position to probe the Cuban position on the extradition treaty at the next meeting as well as to clarify some of the other (minor) points the Cuban negotiators made.

Recommendation

That Ambassador Masnata be instructed now to probe at the next meeting the Cuban position on reactivating the extradition treaty as well as clear up some of the minor questions the Cuban negotiators have raised.

[Rogers approved the recommendation, but changed the language to read: “That Ambassador Masnata be instructed to suggest that one procedure that might be considered would be extradition under the 1904 treaty.”]

Approve ____________
Disapprove _________

Attachment

December 11, 1972

Message from the Swiss Embassy in Havana

The second meeting between the Embassy of Switzerland in Havana and the Cuban authorities, in connection with the negotiations for an agreement on hijacking place on Saturday, December 9, 1972, at 11:45 a.m.

The Ambassador of Switzerland handed over to Vice Minister Anillo the original text of the American draft, as he received it from Secretary of State William P. Rogers, as well as the SD’s non-official Spanish translation for legal reasons together with a Verbal Note of the Embassy.

On this occasion, Ambassador Masnata underlined the fact that the American draft is based on the Cuban proposal of November 25, 1972, and that the modifications proposed by the U.S. authorities have been made exclusively for legal reasons.

Ambassador Masnata explained the reasons why the U.S. Government wishes to conclude an “Executive Agreement” (Memorandum of Understanding) instead of an agreement which would be subject to the Senate approval.

The Ambassador mentioned that the distinction made between hijacking of an aircraft and hijacking of a vessel was based upon the same distinction made by the U.S. internal legislation. Ambassador Masnata also drew the attention of the Cuban authorities to the alternative solution of returning the hijackers to the first country or trying them in the second.

Vice Minister Annuli and Mrs. Olga Miranda showed particular interest in the following questions:

QUOTE

1. The difference in the penalties depending on whether air or sea piracy is involved, and the fact that no minimum penalty has been provided for sea piracy.

2. They asked for details about procedure in the case of return of the guilty parties.

3. They were bothered for a moment by the wording “in the case of air piracy” and “and in other cases” used with reference to penalties in the first sentence of Article One. I had the impression that Annuli was a little concerned by the fact that boats were not explicitly referred to.

4. In Article Three, they also were bothered by the addition of common crimes but they seemed able to swallow it after my explanations.

5. Finally, they dwelt on what they called in Spanish the valor (status, weight, force, importance) of the agreement, asking in particular if the hijacking agreement would have the same valor as the 1965 Memorandum on refugees. We ended with the understanding that it was less a matter of a gradation in juridical force between one agreement and another than it was a question of form. Our interlocutor wanted to know if the hijacking agreement would take the same form as the 1965 Memorandum. In order not to prejudice the decision of the State Department, and in accordance with my conversations with Mr. Hurwitch, I replied that for the moment the question was still open and the two parties would have to reach an understanding on this subject. I asked Anillo if he had a suggestion to make and he quickly replied in the negative. UNQUOTE

The Cuban authorities will propose the date of a third meeting upon completion of their study of the American counterproposals.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Hurwitch. Rogers approved the recommendation but changed the language to read: “That Ambassador Masnata be instructed to suggest that one procedure that might be considered would be extradition under the 1904 treaty.” The memorandum of the meeting with the Canadians was attached but not published.

140. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) to Secretary of State Rogers 140. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, December 21, 1972.

Hijacking Negotiations with Cuba

Attached is a translation of a report received from Swiss Ambassador Masnata in Cuba on an informal meeting he held with Cuban Vice Foreign Minister Anillo December 20 at the latter’s request. Anillo told Masnata the U.S. counter-proposal on hijacking is still under review by Cuban lawyers and that when this review is completed a formal meeting will be called. Anillo observed that the differences between the two sides did not appear to be insurmountable.

Attachment

AIDE-MEMOIRE

The Cuban Vice-Minister of External Relations Mr. Anillo Capote received the Swiss Ambassador in Havana on Wednesday, December 20 at 11:30 a.m., in a very relaxed courteous way, in order to inform him that the American counter-proposals on the subject of an agreement concerning air and sea piracy were still being studied.

The lawyers must particularly examine all the implications. As soon as this study is finished, the Cuban Government will prepare its reply and call the third meeting.

In answer to the question whether the third meeting could take place next week, Vice Minister Anillo, not wanting to commit himself, repeated that the meeting would take place as soon as the Cuban reply is ready. In this connection, the Swiss Ambassador does not know if the results of the study which the lawyers are undertaking will first have to be submitted to the Prime Minister, who is presently in Moscow.

The Vice Minister nevertheless confirmed that a basis for an arrangement existed and that the differences did not appear insurmountable.

The Swiss Ambassador having asked whether the Cubans had already made a decision on the possibility of choosing between the return of a hijacker and prosecution on the spot, Vice-Minister Anillo replied that this question fell within the study of the proposal as a whole. The Ambassador therefore deemed it premature in these circumstances to raise the question of extradition procedure, with or without reference to the 1904 Treaty.

The Ambassador took advantage of this meeting to stress that the United States considers the crimes specified in Article 1 of the American counter-proposal as serious crimes, in spite of the absence of a minimum penalty, and that moreover American legislation mentions only a small number of crimes for which a minimum penalty is provided.

He also considered it appropriate, at this stage and in view of the study by the Cuban lawyers, to specify that if the United States had had to take account of its laws in preparing its counter-proposal, it did not intend to ask that the Cuban Government modify its own laws. This declaration visibly caught the attention of Vice Minister Anillo.

The Ambassador is not in a position to judge whether the delay in the conversations is really due to the aforementioned legal study or to other reasons, nor whether the absence of the Prime Minister is going to bring about an additional delay. There is possibly a combination of different factors, but the Ambassador has no particular reason to doubt the bona fides of the Cuban Vice-Minister of External Relations, who gave the impression of taking the entire matter seriously and who spoke without passion.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Norbury. Rogers informed the President of the Masnata-Anillo discussion that evening. (Ibid., President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74D 164)

141. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) and Acting Legal Adviser (Brower) to Secretary of State Rogers 141. Information Memorandum from Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs (Meyer) and Acting Legal Adviser (Brower) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, January 25, 1973

Cuban Hijacking Agreement

At a meeting late yesterday afternoon, the Cuban negotiators informed Ambassador Masnata that, Cuba is prepared to accept the latest U.S. proposal provided the U.S. agrees to two changes in Article 1: elimination of the word “forcefully” in the first paragraph and the phrase “except in the case of minor offenses” in the second paragraph.

We suggest for your consideration that we reply to the Cubans that although we attach considerable importance to both items, we are prepared in the spirit of compromise and in the mutual interest of arriving at an early agreement to accede to the Cuban proposal that the word “forcefully” be eliminated if Cuba agrees that the phrase “except in the case of minor offenses” be retained. We are at your disposition to discuss this further.

We regard the speed—less than a week—with which Cuba has replied to our proposal as indicating the continuing high priority it attaches to this question.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, AV 12. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Hurwitch and Feldman. Rogers wrote “OK” and initialed the memorandum. He also asked Eliot: “Is this acceptable to the Justice Dept?”

142. Memorandum From Serban Vallimarescu of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) 142. Memorandum From Serban Vallimarescu of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1

Washington, February 13, 1973

SUBJECT:

Hijacking Agreement with Cuba

The U.S. and Cuba have reached agreement on the text of an agreement on hijacking. Attached for your information is a copy of the agreed text. (Tab A)

The most recent hijacking incidents involved hijackers of a clearly criminal nature, and the Cuban Government thereafter issued a statement indicating its willingness to enter negotiations with the U.S. on the air piracy problem. In response we indicated our willingness to hold talks through the Swiss Embassy in Havana but stressed that this represents no change in our overall policy toward Cuba. The first meeting between Cuban and Swiss officials was held in Havana November 25. The Cubans presented a draft agreement at that meeting. Subsequent meetings negotiated the text which has now been approved.

Previous attempts at negotiating an agreement with the Cubans on this problem foundered over Cuban insistence that any such agreement also cover the return of illegal exiles, including those already in the U. S., and the prohibition of any acts of piracy against Cuban territory by émigré groups. The approved proposal does deal with the Cuban concerns but rules out retroactive action, thereby protecting Cuban émigrés already in the U.S. It also provides for exemption from the provisions of the agreement for cases of political asylum. It covers the hijacking of both aircraft and vessels. In brief, the parties agree to: --give serious consideration to extraditing hijackers instead of prosecuting them in the country in which they land;

--provide for the continued protection and ongoing travel of passengers, aircraft and the like which have been diverted;

--provide for the return of funds or property obtained illegally;

--try, in accordance with national laws, any person or group who conducts acts of piracy against the territory of the other country;

--hold open the possibility of granting political asylum in some cases where no financial extortion or physical injuries are involved.

The agreement is to be in force for five years and may be extended for an additional five years if both parties so agree. It may be terminated with six months written notice by either party.

The agreement will probably enter into force by means of an exchange of notes which would be handled through the Swiss and Czech Embassies in Havana and Washington respectively. Cuba is conducting talks on the hijacking problem also with Canada and Mexico.

Tab A

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ON HIJACKING OF AIRCRAFT AND VESSELS AND OTHER OFFENSES

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Cuba, on the bases of equality and strict reciprocity, agree: FIRST: Any person who hereafter seizes, removes, appropriates or diverts from its normal route or activities an aircraft or vessel registered under the laws of one of the parties and brings it to the territory of the other party shall be considered to have committed an offense and therefore shall either be returned to the party of registry of the aircraft or vessel to be tried by the courts of that party in conformity with its laws or be brought before the courts of the party whose territory he reached for trial in conformity with its laws far the offense punishable by the most severe penalty according to the circumstances and the seriousness of the acts to which this Article refers. In addition, the party whose territory is reached by the aircraft or vessel shall take all necessary steps to facilitate without delay the continuation of the journey of the passengers and crew innocent of the hijacking of the aircraft or vessel in question, with their belongings, as well as the journey of the aircraft or vessel itself with all goods carried with it, including any funds obtained by extortion or other illegal means, or the return of the foregoing to the territory of the first party; likewise, it shall take all steps to protect the physical integrity of the aircraft or vessel and all goods, carried with it, including any funds obtained by extortion or other illegal means, and the physical integrity of the passengers and crew innocent of the hijacking, and their belongings, while they are in its territory as a consequence of or in connection with the acts to which this Article refers.

In the event that the offenses referred to above are not punishable under the laws existing in the country to which the persons committing them arrived, the party in question shall be obligated, except in the case of minor offenses, to return the persons who have committed such acts, in accordance with the applicable legal procedures, to the territory of the other party to be tried by its courts in conformity with its laws.

SECOND: Each party shall try with a view to severe punishment in accordance with its laws any person who, within its territory, hereafter conspires to promote, or promotes, or prepares, or directs, or forms part of an expedition which from its territory or any other place carries out acts of violence or depredation against aircraft or vessels of any kind or registration coming from or going to the territory of the other party or who, within its territory, hereafter conspires to promote, or promotes, or prepares, or directs, or forms part of an expedition which from its territory or any other place carries out such acts or other similar unlawful acts in the territory of the other party.

THIRD: Each party shall apply strictly its own laws to any national of the other party who, coming from the territory of the other party, enters its territory, violating its laws as well as national and international requirements pertaining to immigration, health, customs and the like.

FOURTH: The party in whose territory the perpetrators of the acts described in Article I arrive may take into consideration any extenuating or mitigating circumstances in those cases in which the persons responsible for the acts were being sought for strictly political reasons and were in real and imminent danger of death without a viable alternative for leaving the country, provided there was no financial extortion or physical injury to the members of the crew, passengers, or ether persons in connection with the hijacking.

FINAL PROVISIONS:

This Agreement may be amended or expanded by decision of the parties.

This Agreement shall be in force for five years and may be renewed for an equal term by express decision of the parties.

Either party may inform the other of its decision to terminate this Agreement at any time while it is in force by written denunciation submitted six months in advance.

This Agreement shall enter into force on the date agreed by the parties.

Done in English and Spanish texts which are equally authentic.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 780, Country Files, Latin America, Cuba, Vol. II. Confidential. Sent for information.

Chapter 3. U.S. Policy Towards International Production and Trafficking in Illegal DrugsChapter 3. U.S. Policy Towards International Production and Trafficking in Illegal Drugs

143. Memorandum from the Assistant to the President (Moynihan) to Attorney General Mitchell

Washington, September 18, 1969.

Moynihan argued that the United States could cripple international heroin trafficking in 1-2 years through diplomatic initiatives with economic inducements. He also argued that the U.S. foreign policy establishment had never taken heroin trafficking seriously.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Ehrlichman, Chris Miller, and Haig. Moynihan’s memorandum to the Attorney General was not attached.

144. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Attorney General Mitchell

Washington, September 29, 1969.

The President directed Rogers and Mitchell to study the problem of international trafficking in heroin.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SOC 12-5 US. Confidential. In a September 30 memorandum to Kissinger, the President’s Assistant Ehrlichman stated: “The President has decided to fully implement Pat Moynihan’s proposal to attack the heroin problem. This means taking a hard line with France and Turkey.” (Ibid.)

145. Memorandum from Alexander Haig of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 5, 1969.

Haig informed Kissinger that President’s Assistant for Urban Affairs Moynihan wanted to set up a special project group in the White House to deal with international heroin trafficking.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. No classification marking. Kissinger wrote the following note on the memorandum: “Where do we stand? If no action, let’s take it over.”

146. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Richardson and Attorney General Mitchell to President Nixon

Washington, October 20, 1969.

In response to the President’s request, Richardson and Mitchell submitted under a covering memorandum an 18-page analysis of international trafficking in heroin, current methods to suppress it, and additional recommendation actions.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SOC 11-5 US. Confidential. Redrafted by Levitsky (S/S).

147. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, October 24, 1969.

Rogers reported that he had appointed Harry Schwartz as his Special Assistant for Narcotics Matters.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot File 74 D 164. Secret.

148. Memorandum For the Record

Washington, October 24, 1969.

In a meeting of senior officials, the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger re-affirmed the President’s conviction that heroin trafficking must be stopped at the nation’s shores. Administration officials considered the joint report from Secretary of State Rogers and Attorney General Mitchell and reported on their current efforts. The group constituted themselves as a Task Force under Department of State leadership.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information.

149. Memorandum For the Record

Washington, November 4 1969.

The memorandum communicated the record of first meeting of the Task Force on Heroin Trafficking.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 357, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information. Drafted by Downey. Tab A was attached but not published.

150. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Urban Affairs (Moynihan) to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, November 6, 1969.

Moynihan was critical of the task force report on heroin prepared by the Department of State, and suggested that he be sent as an envoy to the Presidents of France and Turkey.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Moynihan added a postscript noting that “Turkey was co-pilot’ with USA on air pollution” in the NATO Committee on Challenges of Modern Society and that “Ingersoll should accompany me.” Haig wrote the following note at the bottom of the page: “Haig discussed w/Moynihan 6 Nov. He agrees with HAK psn that he not be US negotiator or Rep & that we pursue as outlined. AH”

151. Telegram 188129 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, November 6, 1969, 0004Z.

The Department transmitted a message from President Nixon to Turkish Prime Minister Demirel that expressed concern about international heroin trafficking and its domestic effects within the United States.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Schwartz, Cash, and Charles R. Hartley (NEA/UR) on November 4; cleared by Rockwell and Kissinger; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, Brown (S/S) and Kissinger.

152. Telegram 191974 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma

Washington, November 14, 1969, 1737Z.

The telegram transmitted an oral message for the Burmese Minister of Foreign Affairs regarding President Nixon’s concern about international narcotics trafficking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS ASIA SE. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok and Vientiane. Drafted by William W. Thomas, Jr. (EA) on November 7, cleared in EA, S/NM, and AID, and approved by Schwartz.

153. Telegram 7775 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, November 17, 1969, 1120Z.

Ambassador Handley reported that he had delivered the President’s message to Turkish Prime Minister Demirel and presented him with a proposal to eradicate poppy production. Demirel agreed to study the problem.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

154. Telegram 7825 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, November 19, 1969, 1111Z.

Ambassador Handley proposed a strategy for the United States to secure Turkish cooperation in the elimination of opium production.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

155. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council staff to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, November 19, 1969.

Sonnenfeldt provided an account of what had been accomplished since the Heroin Traffic Task Force meeting and requested that Kissinger convene another meeting of the Task Force.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation on November 21. The memorandum to the Deputy Attorney General was attached but not published.

156. Letter From French President Pompidou to President Nixon

Paris, November 21, 1969.

Pompidou responded to Nixon’s message on curbing international opium trafficking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. No classification marking. Nixon and Pompidou apparently did not discuss narcotics when the French President visited Washington March 23-26, but Rogers and French Foreign Minister Shuman did on February 25, 1970, see Document 164.

157. Telegram 16094 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bankok, November 26, 1969, 1225Z.

The Embassy reported on the Thai Government’s commitment to the eradication of narcotics trafficking and also analyzed the obstacles hindering the Thai effort.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO DRUGS 17 THAI. Confidential. Repeated to Rangoon and Vientiane.

158. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, December 27, 1969.

Kissinger recommended that Nixon receive the Turkish Ambassador after receiving the Turkish Government’s response to Ambassador Handley’s next approach.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for action. According to a notation Kissinger made on the memorandum, the President approved the recommendation.

159. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, January 5, 1970.

Kissinger characterized French cooperation on the heroin trafficking problem as “outstanding” following the Nixon-Pompidou exchange of messages and provided examples of improved cooperation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information.

160. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, January 7, 1970.

Kissinger relayed the President’s approval of the Department of State’s plan to ask the Turkish Government to destroy its present opium crop in return for financial inducements. Kissinger notified the Department that Assistant to the President Haldeman’s assistant, EGIL KROGH, would now supervise U.S. Government efforts to eliminate Turkey’s illegal opium production.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS 17 US-TUR. Confidential.

161. Telegram 0378 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, January 21, 1970, 1000Z.

Ambassador Handley described a meeting with Turkish Prime Minister Demirel on opium production and conveyed President Nixon’s concerns about heroin addiction in the U.S.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris.

162. Telegram 1682 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, February 13, 1970, 1045Z.

The Embassy in France provided guidance on the problem of heroin trafficking in France in advance of the visit to Washington of French President Pompidou.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUG S FR. Confidential. Pass to BNDD and Moynihan.

163. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 26, 1970.

In a meeting with French Foreign Minister Schumann, Secretary of State Rogers emphasized President Nixon’s strong personal interest in narcotics control.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House and began at 11:45 a.m. Drafted by Long.

164. Telegram 1466 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, March 12, 1970, 1530Z.

Ambassador Handley criticized tactics used by the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs that he believed imperiled cooperation with the Turkish Government on destruction of the opium crop.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis.

165. Telegram 42685 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, March 24, 1970, 1015Z.

The Department instructed Ambassador Handley to put into effect a plan to collect Turkey’s opium output to prevent diversion to the heroin market.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Paris for Cusack. Drafted by Hartley and Schwartz on March 20; cleared by Davies, Cash, Ingersoll, AID, and William Watts of the NSC staff; and approved by Richardson.

166. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 1, 1970.

The memorandum recorded the conversation between Secretary of State Rogers and Turkish Ambassador Esenbel on control of the Turkish opium crop.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS 17 US-TUR. Confidential. The meeting was held in Rogers’ office at 3 p.m. Drafted by Cash.

167. Telegram 1957 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, April 2, 1970, 1115Z.

Turkish Prime Minister Demirel told Ambassador Handley that the Turkish Government could not plow under the current opium crop because it would lead to civil disturbance and create public support for more planting.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris.

168. Memorandum From Helmet Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 5, 1970.

Sonnenfeldt provided Kissinger with talking points for a meeting of the Heroin Task Force and included a recommendation by President’s Assistant for Urban Affairs Moynihan to replace Ambassador Handley if Turkey planted an opium crop in the fall.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it. Tab B is Document 167. Tabs C and D were attached but not published.

169. Telegram 68968 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, May 6, 1970, 2246Z.

Under Secretary of State Richardson told Ambassador Handley that the Department of State was “on the spot” to produce results on suppression of the Turkish opium crop.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Schwartz, cleared by Eliot, and approved by Richardson.

170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Richardson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 19, 1970.

Richardson reported that the best strategy was to pursue Turkish opium suppression in a multilateral setting and that the matter should be raised at an ad hoc meeting of the CCMS.

Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential. Copies were sent to Finch and Moynihan.

171. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 8, 1970.

Downey provided a briefing memorandum and talking points for Kissinger to use at an upcoming Heroin Task Force meeting.

Source: Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Sent for information. Tab A is Document 170. The covering memorandum of May 21 from Sonnenfeldt to Kissinger was attached but not published. Tab B was not attached. Tab C was attached but not published.

172. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 10, 1970.

Downey transmitted to Kissinger under a covering memorandum a summary record of the June 9 Heroin Task Force meeting.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential; Sensitive. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Saunders. Kissinger wrote the following note at the bottom of the page: “ What conclusion did you reach or may I not know? HK.”

173. Briefing Memorandum from the Deputy Legal Adviser (Salans) to the Acting Secretary of State (Johnson)

Washington, July 7, 1970.

Salans provided under cover of a briefing memorandum a detailed proposal for a new international convention to deal broadly with the opium problem, which would supplement the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 that relied on voluntary cooperation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. No classification marking. Drafted by G. Jonathon Greenwald (L/NEA) and cleared by Schwartz and Rodger P. Davies.

174. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 10, 1970.

Sonnenfeldt and Saunders urged Kissinger to re-assert personal control over the international anti-narcotics effort because of the possibility of serious disruption of the U.S.-Turkish relationship.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation on July 14. Tab A was telegram 108993 to Ankara, July 9 (Ibid., Box 663, Country Files, Middle East, Turkey, Vol. II), Tab B was a letter from Johnson to Kennedy, June 29, scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, Eastern Mediterranean and Eastern Europe, 1969-1972, volume XXIX. Tab C was not attached.

175. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, July 28, 1970.

Rogers reported that Ambassador Handley met with Congressional leaders to discuss proposed legislation that would allow the President to cut off AID funds to any country that failed to cooperate fully on narcotics control.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret.

176. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, August 4, 1970.

Intelligence note on the problem of drug abuse to be considered at a special UN meeting in Geneva.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-1973, SOC 11-5 ECOSOC. Confidential. Drafted by John J. Donovan (INR/SGR).

177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, August 6, 1970.

Rogers reported that Ambassador Handley and other Department of State officials met with Congressman Vanik to discuss his proposed amendment to the Trade Bill that would give the President authority to impose a trade embargo on countries that permitted trafficking in poppy-derived drugs.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret. Eliot signed for Rogers.

178. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 17, 1970.

Ambassador Handley and President Nixon discussed U.S.-Turkish relations, especially the Turkish Government’s opium control program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. Drafted by Saunders.

179. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, August 18, 1970.

Saunders suggested that a summary of conclusions reached at the Heroin Task Force meeting of August 17 should be distributed to ensure a uniform interpretation of the administration’s goals and policy.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Confidential. Sent for action. The memorandum was unsigned. There is no indication that Kissinger approved or disapproved the recommendations. Tab B was attached but not published.

180. Action Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (DePalma) and the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, September 8, 1970.

The memorandum concludes that it would be more practical to work through existing international bodies and to amend the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs rather than to propose a new convention and establish a new UN agency for control of opium production and heroin trafficking.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret. Drafted by Stephen M. Boyd (L/NEA), cleared in IO, BNDD, S/NW, NEA/TUR, and L/T, and approved by Johnson on September 15.

181. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Staff (Davis) to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot)

Washington, September 10, 1970.

Davis reported that President Nixon approved the sale of 500,000 tons of PL-480 wheat to Turkey without linking it to an opium production control program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. A notation on the memorandum indicates Davis signed the original.

182. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, October 29, 1970.

An Intelligence Note entitled “United Nations: U.S. Initiatives on Narcotics Front Progressing Despite Minor Obstacles.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan.

183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, November 19, 1970.

Johnson reported that the ECOSOC Council had approved a U.S. resolution calling for the establishment of a voluntary UN fund for drug abuse control.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5 ECOSOC. Unclassified. Tabs A and B were attached but not published. A copy was sent to Moynihan.

184. Telegram 47398 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma

Washington, March 19, 1971, 0434Z.

The Department instructed the Embassy to underline the U.S. commitment to containing international narcotics trafficking through periodic conversations with the Burmese Government.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS BURMA. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William F. Beachner (EA/TB); cleared in EA, in substance with BNDD, S/NM, and Defense; and approved by Wilson. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Phen, Saigon, Vientiane, Hong Kong, and CINCPAC.

185. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh)

Washington, March 25, 1971.

Saunders provided Krogh with an assessment of the new Turkish Government’s attitudes and capabilities on reducing the flow of illegal opium from Turkey. He also transmitted an account of progress on U.S. efforts to control opium production in Turkey.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 663, Country Files, Middle East, Turkey, Vol. II. Secret; Noforn. Sent for information. Concurred in by Downey. On March 12 Demirel resigned under pressure from military forces upset by Turkey’s political instability. Turkish President Sunay designated Nuhat Erim to form a new government.

186. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)

Washington, April 13, 1971.

Because of some Pentagon officials’ reluctance to confront the issue of drug use among servicemen in Vietnam, Krogh suggested the formation of a joint White House working group to deal with the problem.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Secret. Sent for action. There was no indication that Ehrlichman approved or disapproved of the recommendation. Tab A was not attached.

187. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, April 30, 1971

Intelligence Note entitled: “United Nations: US initiative to strengthen Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan.

188. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, April 30, 1971.

Intelligence Note entitled: “Turkey: Waiting for the New Government’s Opium Program.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Gene R. Preston (INR).

189. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon

Washington, May 8, 1971.

Haig provided details of a proposal by Secretary of the Treasury Connally to preemptively purchase the Turkish opium crop. Also included is the May 7 memorandum from which Haig derived his information.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. Sent for information. On April 27 the President sent Kissinger a memorandum that read: “Moynihan’s idea of buying the entire Turkish opium crop is one that seems intriguing. I realize that there are problems here, but would you have a check made to see what, if anything, could be done. Connally seems to like the idea, provided it does not have other foreign policy implications which would mitigate against it.” (Ibid., Box 341, HAK/President Memoranda,1971)

190. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 28, 1971.

Helms sent Kissinger information on how the CIA planned to distribute sensitive intelligence on narcotics in Southeast Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to Rogers, Laird, Mitchell, Moorer, Sullivan, Ingersoll, and Rossides. The attachment is Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

191. Summary of a Meeting

Washington, June 3, 1971, 8 to 9:50 a.m.

During the meeting, President Nixon emphasized to civilian and military members of his administration his concerns about narcotics addiction.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. No classification marking. Appendix A, the list of participants, is taken from the President’s Daily Diary. (Ibid., White House Central Files)

192. Telegram 100799 from the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, June 8, 1971, 1802Z.

The Department endorsed the idea of another meeting between Ambassador Handley and Turkish Prime Minister ERIM. The telegram also transmitted the text of a personal message to Erim from President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Geoffrey Ogden (NEA/TUR), cleared by, Wellman, and NEA/TUR, in substance by Sisco, and approved by Davies. The account of Handley’s discussion with Erim is in telegram 3489 from Ankara, May 18, and is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, Eastern Mediterranean and Eastern Europe, 1969-1972, Volume XXIX.

193. Memorandum for the President’s File from the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh)

Washington, June 14, 1971.

Krogh provided an account of a meeting among the President, senior Cabinet officers, and U.S. Ambassadors from relevant countries on international narcotics trafficking and the problems of heroin addiction.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Special Files, President’s Office Files, Box 85, Memoranda for the President. No classification marking. The meeting lasted from 10:10 to11:45 a.m.

194. Telegram 108468 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts

Washington, June 17, 1971, 2213Z.

Secretary of State Rogers alerted all posts to President Nixon’s comprehensive Congressional message on the drug problem, and to results of the June 14 meeting with the President.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Repeated to Rome for FODAG and Paris for NESCO. Drafted by Betty C. Gough (IO/HDC), cleared by Herz, Wellman, and Eliot, and approved by Rogers.

195. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 18, 1971.

Hoskinson informed Kissinger of a disagreement between the Departments of State and Treasury over the President’s $50 million program for a Turkish opium buy-out.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Downey. Hoskinson did not initial the memorandum. Connally’s letter was not attached.

196. Telegram 110121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, June 19, 1971, 2040Z.

In a personal message to Ambassador Handley, Secretary of State Rogers provided instructions for a meeting with Turkish Prime Minister ERIM based on a meeting with the President.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Ogden; cleared by Davies, Sisco, Robert L. Pugh (NEA/TUR), and Richard Kennedy; cleared in substance with Ingersoll, Hardin, Williams, Wellman, and Connally; and approved by Rogers.

197. Telegram 4337 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, June 23, 1971, 1030Z.

The Embassy reported in detail on a key meeting with Prime Minister ERIM on the opium issue. ERIM agreed to U.S. conditions on eradication, purchase, and anti-opium legislation in return for U.S. assistance to affected Turkish farmers.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

198. Telegram 113716 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, June 24, 1971, 2257Z.

In a personal message for Ambassador Handley, Secretary of State Rogers instructed him to keep the pressure on Prime Minister ERIM. Rogers noted, however, that the United States was not prepared to provide compensation for assumed losses from illicit production.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Ehrlichman, Mitchell, and Connally; and approved by Rogers.

199. Telegram 4439 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, June 26, 1971, 2245Z.

Ambassador Handley reported to Secretary of State Rogers that a private conversation with Prime Minister ERIM had resulted in a realistic approach to opium control. He urged the Department to follow through immediately.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.

200. Telegram 4441 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, June 27, 1971, 0635Z.

Ambassador Handley reported that a final deal on opium control had been negotiated with Prime Minister ERIM.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.

201. Telegram 116137 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, June 28, 1971, 0114Z.

The Department laid out the exact terms of Ambassador Handley’s agreement with the Turkish Government over opium control in order to avoid any potential misunderstanding.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate, Exdis. Drafted by Pugh; cleared by Davies, Sisco, Connally, and Saunders; cleared in draft with Williams and in substance with Ingersoll and Wellman; and approved by Rogers.

202. Intelligence Report

Washington, July 1, 1971

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive

203. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, undated.

Kissinger reported that a major breakthrough had been achieved with the Turkish Government on opium control in exchange for U.S. financial assistance and a public message from Nixon. A draft presidential statement was attached.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Outside system. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval. The attached statement was released on July 30 and is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1971, pp. 789-790.

204. Intelligence Report

Washington, July 9, 1971

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive.

205. Unattributed Memorandum

Washington, undated

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive.

206. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 23, 1971.

Nachmanoff discussed the alleged involvement of Panamanian Government leaders in international narcotics trafficking. He recommended that the Bureau of Narcotic and Dangerous Drugs accept an invitation to send a mission to Panama to discuss narcotics trafficking, but to do so after coordination with other relevant agencies.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive, Eyes Only. Sent for action. Tabs A and I were attached but not published. Kissinger instructed Nachmanoff to see Haig and suggested that he check with Ehrlichman’s staffers to determine how they preferred to handle the issue.

207. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 28, 1971.

Haig reported that President’s Assistant Ehrlichman had formed a Cabinet committee, chaired by Secretary of State Rogers, on the international drug problem. Haig added his concerns that the Department of State would not be able to mediate between the quarreling factions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Confidential. Haig did not initial the memorandum, and there is no indication of Kissinger’s decision, but see Document 208.

208. White House Press Release

Washington, September 7, 1971.

The press release contained a memorandum from President Nixon to Secretary of State Rogers that named the members of the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. No classification marking. Printed from a copy that indicates Nixon signed the original.

209. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, September 23, 1971.

Kissinger submitted a bi-weekly report on the narcotics problem in Southeast Asia to the President.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 358, Narcotics IV. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President did not see it.

210. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 24, 1971

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive.

211. Circular Airgram CA-4945 from the Department of State to all NEA Diplomatic and Consular Posts

Washington, November 1, 1971.

The Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs circulated a concept paper with proposals for an anti-narcotics program for the region.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by James H. Broughton (NEA/RA) on October 28, cleared by Davies, and approved by Stanley D. Schiff (NEA/RA).

212. Telegram 212605 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, November 23, 1971, 2114Z.

The Department transmitted the text of a letter from President Nixon to General Ne Win to be delivered by Ambassador Annenberg to the Burmese representative in London.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 729, Country Files, Europe, United Kingdom, Vol. VII. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Wellman, cleared by Dexter, and approved by Gross. Repeated Priority to Bonn and Rangoon.

213. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig)

Washington, December 8, 1971.

Krogh informed Haig that neither the Soviet Union nor China would respond to a U.S. call for an international “Manhattan Project” designed to end drug abuse.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret. Tab A was attached but not published.

214. Telegram 19761 From the Embassy in the Republic of Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 22, 1971, 1055Z.

The telegram reported a conversation between the Ambassador and Vietnamese President Thieu on the status of the Vietnamese anti-narcotics and anti-smuggling campaign.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok and Seoul. The Embassy requested that the Department pass to CINCPAC for POLAD. The text of the aide mimoire is in telegram 587 from Saigon, January 13, 1972. (Ibid.)

215. Memorandum From John H. Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 28, 1972.

Holdridge reported on the almost “shockingly cooperative” attitude of General Ne Win towards anti-narcotics cooperation with the United States.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret. Sent for information. Haig was the original recipient, although he redirected this memorandum to Kissinger. Tab A was attached but not published.

216. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 29, 1972.

Eliot reported that India would play a pivotal role in amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Confidential. David Passage signed for Eliot.

217. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts

Washington, February 9, 1972.

The Department provided the text of a message from President Nixon to all U.S. Chiefs of Mission on the subject of international narcotics control.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Text received from the White House; cleared by Hurwitch, Fessenden, Robert P. Myers (EA), Andre J. Navez (AF), IO/HDC, and Davies; and approved by Wellman. The time of transmission is not indicated. Repeated to USUN New York, the U.S. Mission in Geneva, and Paris for NESCO.

218. Letter From President Nixon to Pakistani President Bhutto

Washington, February 10, 1972.

At the Department of State’s suggestion, Nixon sent Bhutto a letter asking for cooperation on narcotic problems and introducing Nelson Gross, the Department of State Coordinator for International Narcotic Matters, who was to visit Pakistan and South Asia.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 760, Presidential Correspondence File, Pakistan, President Bhutto. No classification marking. Rogers sent the President a draft of this letter under cover of a February 5 memorandum. (Ibid.)

219. Telegram 1366 From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Islamabad, February 11, 1972, 1100Z.

Senior Advisor Gross reported on his discussion concerning narcotics with Pakistani President Bhutto.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7/NM. Confidential. Repeated to Kabul, Tehran, and the consulate at Karachi.

220. Airgram A-2333 From the Department of State to all Diplomatic and Consular Posts

Washington, March 7, 1972.

The airgram transmitted to all posts contains the text of Senior Adviser to the Secretary and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters Gross’ Congressional testimony.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-1973, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Lawrence and approved by Wellman.

221. Airgram A-3078 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts

Washington, March 28, 1972.

The airgram transmitted Rogers’ statement on the adoption of amendments to the UN 1961 Single Conventionon Narcotic Drugs plus additional background information.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman on March 27 and cleared by Gross. The press statement was attached but not published.

222. Memorandum From Richard R. Peterson to the Open Forum Panel

Washington, April 21, 1972.

Peterson recommended for debate a number of changes to strengthen narcotics control operations within the structure of the Department of State.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. No classification marking.

223. Airgram A-4489 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts

Washington, May 3, 1972.

In a question-and-answer format, the Department summarized the opium control situation in Turkey.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman, cleared by Ogden, and approved by Gross.

224. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Treasury Schultz

Washington, June 20, 1972.

Rogers discussed the funding of anti-narcotics trafficking initiatives.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Malcolm Lawrence (S/NM) and Ogden, and cleared with Davies, Gross, AID, A/NM, and Dexter.

225. Airgram A-8787 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts

Washington, August 28, 1972.

The Department provided posts with up-to-date information on international narcotics control efforts.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman on August 23, cleared by S/PRS, and approved by Gross.

226. Circular Telegram 162821 From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Posts

Washington, September 7, 1972.

The Department of State reported that Secretary of State Rogers had approved a conference in Washington for senior-level officers responsible for narcotics matters abroad.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Wellman on September 6; cleared in substance with Krogh; cleared with ARA, EA, AF, EUR, NEA, and IO; and approved by Gross. Repeated Priority to Rabat, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli, Kabul, New Delhi, Tehran, Islamabad, Ankara, Mexico City, Panama City, Bogota, and La Paz.

227. Memorandum From the Secretary’s Special Assistant for Narcotic Matters (Gross) to the Director of the Office of Asian Communist Affairs (Jenkins)

Washington, October 4, 1972.

Gross reported on approaches made to the People’s Republic of China on narcotics control.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret; Nodis. The memorandum was cleared in IO and by Boyd. The attachment was drafted by Boyd and cleared by Bevans. A copy was sent to L/EA. Talking points related to the PRC’s accession to the Single Convention and Amending Protocol opened for signature on March 25 were attached but not published.

143. Memorandum from the Assistant to the President (Moynihan) to Attorney General Mitchell 143. Memorandum from the Assistant to the President (Moynihan) to Attorney General Mitchell1

Washington, September 18, 1969.

As you know, enroute to and from the Brussels meeting on the Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society, I stopped over in Istanbul and Paris to discuss the problem of the heroin traffic with agents of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. You and I had discussed the possibility of getting into this subject via the new committee. However, the atmosphere in Brussels was not one in which to launch such a subject with any confidence, and I decided not to try. It may be once the committee is established and the concerns of the allies are somewhat allayed we can move into the area of law enforcement. But for the moment I return with the judgment that it is possible to launch a major initiative on the drug problem on a straight bilateral basis.

My impression would be that if the United States moves with energy and determination we could cripple the heroin traffic in the course of twelve to twenty-four months.

But first a caveat. It seems to me a useful practice in government to note when one is dealing with a problem government seems unable to solve. You may recall that long memorandum I sent you February 11 on the subject of organized crime. (I attach a copy, as I doubt you even saw it at the time.) I began by noting that the essential organizations either formed or became capitalized during prohibition. And added: “Thirty-five years and thirteen Attorney Generals later it would not appear that the United States government has brought about any serious diminution in the activities, far less the affluence of the criminal syndicates.”

This is apparently especially true with respect to the heroin traffic, which has been largely in the hands of criminal syndicates. For a half century the Federal government has prohibited the traffic, but has been unable to enforce its prohibition. (I may also add it has frequently deluded itself on that point. Just after the 1964 election I made a big effort to persuade the administration to take on the subject seriously. A meeting was convened by Moyers, where the suggestion was shot down by Katzenbach who assured us that the traffic was just about dried up in New York City and really was coming under control. You may note he is now head of an emergency committee on the subject set up by Mayor Lindsay who demanded on Tuesday that the Federal government become more involved with the New York City problem.) The point is that government has failed. There must be a reason for this, although we don’t know what it is. That being the case, it is necessary to approach any new effort with limited expectations of success. Nonetheless, I do think we may be in a position for a tremendous breakthrough.

My analysis rests on two points, which I take to be so elemental that we have not grasped their importance.

Point one. Heroin is grown in Turkey.

Something like 80-85% of the heroin entering the United States originates as opium in Anatolia, and is processed into morphine in Turkey. This is not only the major source of heroin, but apparently one of the few possible sources for the high grade drug. Ergo: stop the growing of opium in Turkey.

Point two. Heroin is manufactured in France.

The Turkish morphine is apparently processed in small clandestine laboratories in the Marseilles area and transhipped to the United States. Ergo: close down the clandestine laboratories.

* * * *

I knew this well enough before my trip, but I return with a quite new conviction that the United States is in fact in a position to do both those things.

Opium growing is a classic peasant industry. The quality product is the work of intensive cultivation by small landowners pursuing an ancient art. The same process produces Swiss cheeses and Burgundy wines. If it were to cease, it would be hard to start up elsewhere. Someone would try, and it would happen, but the system would be seriously disrupted. And this is the point. As best I can tell Turkey has no intrinsic interest in the continued cultivation of the opium poppy. At present something like 110,000 licensed producers (sic) produce some 175 tons a year. In Ingersoll’s estimate, about two-thirds of this goes into legal channels, producing some $1.4 million in income. (And an actual loss to the government which supports the price.) The illicit remainder brings something like $3 million. In round figures, $50 a farm!

Surely the answer is simply to buy Turkey out of the business.

Some years ago we began an imaginative A.I.D. program to provide for crop substitution over a five-year period designed to put an end to opium production. They have accepted that goal in principle. However, as best I can tell they are nowhere near to closing down, and may never really do so unless we simultaneously make it worth their while to do so, and make it very much against their interests not to do so.

Obviously the Turkish economy (and the low level officialdom) benefit from the drug traffic at levels higher than the straight payments to farmers, but even so it is not a lot of money. There are a lot of things Turkey wants more.

The situation in France is somewhat different. Frenchmen clearly make fortunes out of heroin. But Paris doesn’t benefit much, if at all, and it is Paris that makes decisions about such matters. Moreover, there have recently been a few deaths in France from overdoses of heroin, and the press has been making a national scandal of it all. So much that the Minister of the Interior made an announcement last week of additional forces, etc. (A relative term. They have 20 men working in narcotics. Lindsay on Tuesday asked you for an additional 600 in New York alone.) I accept the French Sureté at face value: if they really wanted to close down the clandestine laboratories, I assume they could do so. Until now they have not wanted to do so, and the United States has made no serious effort to persuade them otherwise.

* * * *

What is needed is a major diplomatic initiative, accompanied by economic inducements, and if need be, sanctions designed to get Turkey and France out of the drug business.

The problem is, as I wrote to you in my memorandum of February 11, that the foreign policy establishment of the United States has never regarded the heroin traffic as serious. But it is serious. It has become a threat to the social stability of the United States. I am convinced the State Department can be made to see this, if the President so desires. What we must do, as I wrote February 11, is “to make clear to the governments involved that in our view to acquiesce in the traffic is to be an accomplice to it, and that henceforth we will regard this as a hostile act.” By which I mean hostile: that which is rarely forgiven, never ignored: that which normally brings immediate retaliation.

I envisage a process somewhat as follows: A high level, confidential mission should be sent by the President of the United States to the Presidents of Turkey and France. This should be a friendly mission, the ultimate object of which would be an exchange of letters announcing new arrangements that will make everyone look good. The mission should come prepared with offers of cash assistance to the Turks, and maybe even to the French, but also with the message from the President that we are deadly in earnest. The details of the arrangements to be proposed are obviously best worked out between the Department of Justice and the Department of State. Once done, it can be put before the President.

Several final points.

While in Istanbul I was summoned to see the Foreign Minister, Ihsan Sabri Caglayangil. We had a long, cordial meeting designed mostly, I gather, to send assurances to the President the regime really does want to stay with the West, and that those in opposition are a tiny minority. (Who knows?) He did hope nothing happened at NATO that would give rise to charges of interference in internal affairs-at least until the election on October 12.

I met with two of your agents, Salmi in Turkey, Cusack in Paris. Both splendid men.

Lastly, I would offer the thought that if we do not disrupt the heroin traffic now, it is likely shortly to drift into the hands of middle-class Americans, and may become unstoppable.

Daniel P. Moynihan
Assistant to the President

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Ehrlichman, Chris Miller, and Haig. Moynihan’s memorandum to the Attorney General was not attached.

144. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Attorney General Mitchell 144. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Attorney General Mitchell1

Washington, September 29, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Study of Means to Stop International Traffic in Heroin

The President is convinced that the problem of narcotics addiction in the U.S. has reached proportions constituting a threat to our national stability. Most narcotics are grown and processed in foreign countries and smuggled into the U.S.; this is particularly true of heroin. Under these circumstances, the President considers that any country facilitating, or in any way contributing to, international traffic in heroin is committing an act inimical to the United States.

He has directed that you study this problem on an urgent basis and recommend as soon as possible an action program that will make emphatically clear to those countries growing opium poppies that their non-medicinal cultivation must be stopped; and to those countries manufacturing finished heroin that their illicit laboratories must be closed. It would appear that the chief offenders in each category are Turkey and France, respectively.

In your study you should consider methods of positive persuasion, including financial incentives for cooperation on the control of heroin traffic, as well as those of retaliation, in the event that any country refuses to cooperate in this program. You may assume that the action program you recommend, if approved, will be implemented with the full authority of the President.

You should constitute an ad hoc working group to fulfill this directive immediately. Your recommendations should be submitted to the President no later than October 15, 1969.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SOC 12-5 US. Confidential. In a September 30 memorandum to Kissinger, the President’s Assistant Ehrlichman stated: “The President has decided to fully implement Pat Moynihan’s proposal to attack the heroin problem. This means taking a hard line with France and Turkey.” (Ibid.)

145. Memorandum from Alexander Haig of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 145. Memorandum from Alexander Haig of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 5, 1969.

You should know that Pat Moynihan feels strongly that we should set up a project group here in the White House to handle this problem. I have held him off pointing out that State and Justice are to have their proposals to us by the 15th of October. However you may want to call Moynihan personally since he feels so strongly about this project and might believe that you are slighting it.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. No classification marking. Kissinger wrote the following note on the memorandum: “Where do we stand? If no action, let’s take it over.”

146. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Richardson and Attorney General Mitchell to President Nixon 146. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Richardson and Attorney General Mitchell to President Nixon1

Washington, October 20, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Request for a Recommendation on the Heroin Problem

In response to your memorandum of September 22, 1969 and Dr. Kissinger’s subsequent memorandum of September 29, we submit the enclosed paper which analyzes the heroin problem, informs you what has been done about it so far with respect to other countries and makes certain recommendations on further steps that should be considered by you and the Executive Branch.

As this preliminary analysis indicates, to achieve substantial progress in reaching a permanent solution of this highly complex problem will require not only coordinated efforts with a number of other countries but also parallel efforts within the United States. The program in the United States will involve increased surveillance and controls and, equally if not more importantly, a greatly expanded and coordinated program of rehabilitation for the approximately 100,000 or more addicts who will pose serious social and economic problems as their sources of supply are diminished and eliminated.

Thus the interrelated international and national ramifications involve a number of agencies in the Executive Branch, including the Department of State, the Department of Justice, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and the Department of the Treasury.

The Secretary of State will intensify the diplomatic efforts outlined in the paper. However, we suggest that his memorandum be regarded as an initial presentation and that a high-level Task Force under White House direction be established to consider the problems in greater depth and to present to you a more refined, long range program, integrating both the international and the national aspects.

Elliot L. Richardson
Acting Secretary
John N. Mitchell
Attorney General

Enclosure

I. THE HEROIN IMPORT PROBLEM

A. DIMENSIONS

Total U.S. annual consumption of heroin is 3 tons. All of it stems from illicit imports. Heroin is derived from raw opium (made from the milk of opium poppies) converted into morphine base and then into heroin. Under the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs, seven countries are entitled legally to produce opium for their own consumption and for medicinal exports. These are Bulgaria, Greece, India, Pakistan, Turkey and the USSR.

B. SOURCES

Of the approximate 3,000 kilograms (3 tons) of heroin entering the United States annually, 80% is smuggled from France where it is clandestinely produced from opiates originating in Turkey. About 15% is smuggled from Mexico, illegally produced from illicit opium grown in that country. The remaining 5% of the heroin entering the United States is from Bangkok and Hong Kong, produced from illicit opium production in Burma, Laos, Thailand and the Yunnan Province of China.

1. Opium Production

Turkey: The source of 80% of opium production affecting the U.S. The Turkish Government has 160 agricultural technicians, 420 national police agents and 330 Jandarma Troopers (rural police) on active duty or in training for opium control. A part of Turkey’s opium is legally produced, for medicinal purposes. It is controlled in quantity and province of production by annual decrees specifying where, and how much, opium may be produced.

The Government has reduced production from 21 provinces in 1967 to 11 in 1969, and is continuing reduction with a view to total elimination by 1972. As a part of this program a crop substitution program was instituted. In September 1968 an AID Project Loan Agreement was signed which provided about $1.6 million for crop substitution, agricultural assistance in the way of scientific and experimental farm equipment, motor vehicles and communication equipment. A total of $1.4 million was provided the Turkish National Police and Jandarma to equip their reorganized and revitalized-narcotic suppression and eradication forces. This included vehicles, aircraft, weapons, communication equipment, etc. Training assistance in both agricultural and narcotic enforcement is being provided.

Mexico: The source of 15% of opium production affecting the U.S. All opium produced in Mexico is illegal. In addition, the bulk of the marijuana used in the U.S. originates in Mexico. There are upward of 250 Federal police permanently engaged in narcotics operation.

Thailand, Burma, Laos, and Yunnan Province of China: Heroin entering the U.S. produced from opiates originating in those territories is about 5% of the total. When the supply is ended from Turkey, Afghanistan and Mexico, those East Asian sources will pose a threat. Control measures now in effect in Thailand, Burma and Laos are negligible to non-existent; presumably production in Yunnan Province is illegal. There are no U.S. assistance programs in this area dealing with opium now in operation.

POTENTIAL SOURCES

Afghanistan: With the elimination of opium sources in Turkey by 1972, Afghanistan with substantial illegal opium production in remote tribal areas will pose a serious raw material threat.

Iran: This country ended opium production in 1959. In 1969 Iran resumed production of opium alleging that its citizens were the victims of Turkish and Afghan opium. If production in Turkey and Afghanistan is ended, Iran states it will again terminate all production. The United States is not now being affected by the production in Iran.

Pakistan: Produces 10 tons of legal opium annually for domestic use. Illicit production in remote tribal areas could become troublesome, but not a great threat. It does not now affect the United States but could if other source areas are eliminated.

India: India is the largest opium producer in the legal export trade. However, controls are good and diversion is kept to a minimum. What does enter the illicit traffic apparently is consumed domestically in India by several hundred thousand opium addicts. This results in very little smuggling abroad of Indian opium. No country reports a problem with Indian opium. It is unlikely to become a problem for the United States.

2. Production of Morphine Base:

This intermediate product is with very little exception produced close to the growing areas. It is produced by means of simple, portable “stills” which reduce opium to 1/15 of its original volume and weight. Programs that address themselves to ending opium production would simultaneously be directed to suppressing morphine base production. Termination of illicit sources of opium would result in elimination of illicit morphine base production.

3. Production of Heroin:

Eighty percent of the heroin affecting the U.S. is produced in France, 15% in Mexico, and 5% in Hong Kong and Thailand. Programs in Turkey and the Middle East to end opium availability in the Mediterranean basin will be the only final solution to heroin production in France and other potential producers in Europe. Heroin production laboratories are somewhat more complex than morphine base “stills” but are nevertheless very simple and highly mobile. There are now 20 police agents assigned to suppression of heroin production in France; 100 are needed. Our narcotics agents cooperate closely and effectively with the existing French force.

II. PRIORITIES FOR SUPPRESSION

A. OPIUM PRODUCING COUNTRIES:

1. Turkey and Mexico, which provide 95% of our problem, if properly motivated and provided with some technical assistance and training could stamp out illegal opium production within their borders. Afghanistan, Pakistan, Thailand, Laos and Burma have neither the incentive nor ability to reduce the present level of illicit opium production without U.S. or UN pressure and technical assistance. In the case of Thailand, Laos and Burma, the governments are so ineffective in the poppy growing regions that relatively little would be accomplished even with major U.S. assistance, which could cost about $9 million.

2. While suppression of production in major producing countries would reduce production temporarily, the vast profits, and ease of production insure that it will be started up again elsewhere. It is therefore essential that pressure, surveillance and suppression programs must be universally and continually applied to all producers supplying the illicit traffic,

3. On the basis of the 1953 Opium Protocol and 1961 Single Narcotic Convention to which they are signatories, none of the countries now supplying the illicit opium market has grounds for refusal of United States Government technical assistance to end the situations within their territories. Programs tailored to their individual political, cultural and economic needs, if skillfully presented, will in all likelihood be accepted, although ability to execute in several cases will be poor to negligible. However, in the case of several Far Eastern countries, many government officials are involved in the traffic and may be expected to hamper suppression efforts.

B. COUNTRIES WHERE MORPHINE BASE IS REFINED:

The countries in this category are the same as Section A.

C. COUNTRIES WHERE HEROIN IS REFINED:

A program in Mexico to end opium and cannabis (marijuana) cultivation would simultaneously cut off the 15% heroin imports originating in that country.

It is believed that France has the capability to provide necessary funds, manpower and some of the technical equipment to organize and implement an effective program to curtail the illicit heroin laboratories responsible for 80% of the U.S. heroin problem. Senior French Cabinet officers have recognized, however, that they are not at present operating at full effectiveness and have made it clear they are receptive to United States approaches.

Heroin is produced in Thailand and Hong Kong, the source of about 5% of the U.S. supply. Any program supported in Thailand by the U.S. to end opium production, for example by crop substitution, would also address itself to the immediate problem of heroin production in that country and could bring meaningful results in a short time. British authorities in Hong Kong confronted with an enormous problem of heroin production and use in Hong Kong manage to keep illicit export to the U.S. to a minimum. Should French sources be ended, Hong Kong could then pose a greater threat. However, should this begin to develop it is believed the British will counter it, and ask our help if needed. North Africa and Italy might also become main supply bases. Such a shift would take approximately six months. The underworld elements involved in the traffic would of course be alert to any local situation that looked attractive. It might well be possible to hamper and delay planned moves by aggressive surveillance on a country-by-country basis.

III. ACTION PROGRAM TO ENSURE EFFECTIVE FOREIGN COOPERATION

A. PHASE 1. DIPLOMATIC NOTIFICATION:

The principal target nations, France, Turkey and Mexico, are already aware of our concern with the problem and the several measures which the United States has proposed be taken to control the traffic in heroin. Recommendations for the first steps to be taken with Thailand, Burma and Laos, as well as Afghanistan and Pakistan, follow. As explained below, Turkey has already received aid in this field and talks are well along with the French and the Mexicans. The first steps recommended for Thailand, Burma and Laos are designed to inform them of your deep concern with the problem, and set the stage for acceptance by them of technical assistance. The same approach is recommended for Afghanistan and Pakistan.

France

We shall continue to press the French to implement an immediate and effective heroin laboratory suppression program.

Following up on his earlier initiatives, Ambassador Shriver raised this general subject with Foreign Minister Schumann on October 6 to assure that your urgent interest in dealing with the heroin traffic is known to the French at the governmental level and not only to the French Central Narcotics Office. Schumann was sympathetic to our desire for a greatly increased French effort to detect illicit laboratories and said that he would discuss the matter personally with President Pompidou. Ambassador Shriver also approached Interior Minister Marcellin for the same purpose and found him equally cooperative.

Mr. John Ingersoll, Director of the BNDD will hold discussions with French narcotic officials in the United States this month and will visit France in November to press the French to agree to certain actions.

Turkey

We shall press Turkey to end opium production entirely at the conclusion of the 1971 crop.

Turkey’s role in opium production was raised most recently during Turkish Foreign Minister Caglayangil’s meeting with Secretary Rogers in New York on September 27. The Foreign Minister stated that the Turkish eradication program begun in 1968 at our request “was going on as expected”. We have explained the problem to the Turkish Ambassador, who discussed it with Turkish Finance Minister Bilgehan in early October during the latter’s visit to the U.S. Further talks with the Turkish Government are obviously necessary.

Prime Minister Demirel, as head of the Justice Party, won the October 12 elections. He is now in a stronger position politically to handle the narcotics question. We propose the following courses of action:

1. Ambassador Handley will schedule a call on the Prime Minister before the end of October to express your personal concern about the heroin problem in the U.S. and to leave no doubt that the cutting off of the illegal supply from Turkey is a major factor for the U.S. in its relationship with Turkey. He will request that the Turkish Government announce in June 1970, by means of the annual decree on poppy cultivation, the termination of production after the 1971 crop is harvested.

2. Embassy Ankara will inform Turkish Foreign Ministry officials that narcotics will be a major subject for discussion when Prime Minister Demirel visits the U.S. in December.

3. During Demirel’s visit, you will have the opportunity to emphasize to him the concern you attach to curbing traffic in heroin from abroad and make a personal request that the cultivation of poppies in Turkey be terminated with the 1971 crop.

Mexico

We shall press upon Mexico, probably at the October 27 meeting, a program of agricultural and narcotic enforcement assistance to eradicate opium and cannabis. There have been six meetings with the Mexican officials on the subject since 1961, the latest on October 7-10, 1969 in Washington. A major diplomatic initiative was the unilateral undertaking of “Operation Intercept” announced on September 27 to be in effect for an indefinite date. What was not announced was that the intensive stage was planned for approximately one month. Subsequently, upon request of the Mexicans, the U.S. Government agreed to supersede “Operation Intercept” with “Operation Cooperation” which involves (1) a U.S. pledge to modify procedures to facilitate travel, (2) a Mexican pledge to intensify immediately their enforcement efforts, and (3) agreement to resume talks on October 27 to discuss measures for enhanced cooperation.

Iran

We recommend that you discuss with the Shah of Iran during his October visit your concern over Iran’s recent decision to start up opium production, after a 10-year period during which cultivation was illegal, and seek the Shahs agreement to reverse this decision. The current situation in Iran is linked by them with continued Turkish production.

Burma, Laos, Thailand

No diplomatic approach has been made, but will be made in the immediate future to make them aware of the problem, and to stimulate their acceptance of technical assistance. At an appropriate time, possibly shortly after diplomatic notification, we shall press upon them a program of technical assistance (law enforcement and crop substitution) to end illicit cultivation and traffic.

Afghanistan and Pakistan

Although Afghanistan and Pakistan do not currently pose any problem for us, a diplomatic approach will be made in the immediate future to inform them of our concern. These approaches will be designed to lay the groundwork for appropriate programs in Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The UN

We plan to make our great concern about the problem known to the January 1970 meeting of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The Commission, which is an academic rather than an activist organization, deals with the problems of, illicit traffic and is thoroughly familiar with the situation as it exists in the several countries. We will use the Narcotics Commission as a forum to urge the Turks to eliminate opium production, to encourage the French to take more positive action in reducing smuggling, and to press the Iranians to reverse their recent decision to start up opium production. We will also ensure that Laos, Burma and Thailand are invited to the January 1970 meeting where we will urge those three governments to take action as part of a world-wide effort to eliminate opium.

B. PHASE 2. TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE:

France

United States officials have already discussed with French officials the need to expand the manpower effort of the French national police. The French Central Narcotics Office and the field forces are seriously under-manned. French border and port controls must also be expanded. It will be suggested that French national police and narcotic specialists be stationed both in Turkey and the United States. We will suggest the feasibility of subsidizing French informants for information leading to seizure of opium, morphine base, and heroin in France or destined for France. The French will be urged to accept U.S. technical assistance and the results of U.S. research efforts. They will also be urged to accept a U.S. offer to train police officers in the United States or send training teams to France since the French national police do not have a narcotic enforcement school of their own. The cost of these programs to the U.S. would be about $500,000.

Turkey

In September 1966 Ambassador Hart proposed to Prime Minister Demirel that, with AID assistance, the Turkish Government consider the immediate prohibition of poppy cultivation Exchanges with the Turkish authorities continued until June 1967 when the Prime Minister informed the Ambassador of his reluctant conclusion that immediate total eradication was not politically feasible, but that Turkey would eradicate poppy cultivation over three to four years. A $3 million AID loan to Turkey was negotiated in 1968 and signed on September 6 of that year, ostensibly to assist that country to control poppy cultivation, combat smuggling, and encourage farmers to switch to more productive crops, but with the confidential assurance of eradication over three to four years.

In June 1967, following the discussions with Ambassador Hart, the Turkish Government announced in its annual decree on the planting of poppy that three provinces would be taken out of cultivation in the 1967-1968 fall and spring planting season and that seven provinces would be eliminated the following year. Both in June 1968 and in June 1969, the Government publicly confirmed the previous schedule and announced the further reduction of two provinces in each year, with seven remaining by the spring of 1971. In accordance with Demirel’s confidentially expressed intention to eliminate cultivation within four years, there would be no production after the summer harvest of 1971.

Mexico

The U.S. Government will encourage the Mexicans to improve their eradication, surveillance, enforcement and interception operations.

Between 1961 and 1966 the United States Government made available technical assistance, as well as material in the form of helicopters, light aircraft and flame throwers to help with eradication/surveillance/interception. The Mexicans are willing to accept greater technical assistance and we are prepared to provide it. We estimate it will cost about $1 million, and the program will probably be discussed at the October 27 meeting.

Burma, Laos, Thailand

It is proposed that a team of experts visit each country to determine what forms of technical assistance could be utilized and through what channels (bilateral or multilateral) it might be furnished. It is assumed that technical assistance would take the form of training officials and providing detection and enforcement equipment. We estimate that the three programs in the aggregate would cost about $6 million.

C. PHASE 3-SANCTIONS:

If the several governments refuse to cooperate, sanctions are available which could be applied if it were determined to be appropriate. The kind and degree of leverage available to us varies from case to case. Recommendations as to timing of application; and the correct degree of severity obviously hinge on the kind and extent of non-cooperation exhibited in each case.

(a) France:

The U.S. does not furnish any financial or military aid to France, and the balance of trade between us is heavily in our favor, so economic sanctions are not a realistic possibility. At this time the only step that could be taken would be to mount an “Operation Intercept”. However, we do not consider this an effective means of control, given the many routes travellers to the United States can take from France. An “Intercept” is more likely to provide retaliation than the cooperation we seek.

(b) Turkey:

We could fully or partially cut off (i) our military grant programs of $100 million annually, (ii) our AID program of $40 million annually, and (iii)PL 480 assistance which has been asked for in the amount of $19 million.

The impact would be gradually felt, but its cumulative weight cannot be measured. Such sanctions could be easily applied by administrative action. There would be no dollar costs, but rather a financial savings. However, the foreign relations costs would be serious. Retaliation by the Turks could adversely affect our base rights, the use of Turkey as an electronic listening post into the USSR, and even continued effective Turkish membership in NATO. It might even adversely affect enlisting Turkish cooperation in morphine/heroin control and suppression.

(c) Mexico:

Mexico is cooperating, within its limited resources, and is ready to receive technical assistance. What is unknown is the degree to which this cooperation will be effective. If at any time it were decided to impose sanctions due to ineffective cooperation, it could be done on very short notice

With no AID program, no military assistance and no major loan pending, the major United States leverage available would be slowing down or cutting off border commerce by another Operation Intercept. The impact would be swift and painful. Approximately $500 million a year is spent on retail trade and short-term tourism along the border in Mexico by Americans. However, it would also be self-punishing; approximately $750 million a year is spent along the border in the U.S. by Mexicans.

Application could be accomplished in a matter of days simply by shifting U.S. Government resources, most notably Customs Bureau personnel.

The cost to the U.S. of application would be within acceptable bounds and would consist mainly of U.S. Government salaries. The loss of “friendship” would be severe. Charges of “economic aggression” would also be made. There would be a loss of Mexican-American cooperation in many multilateral and bilateral, political and administrative contexts.

Prolongation of sanctions would probably force retaliation.

The most immediate Mexican retaliation would probably be to keep the border Mexicans out of the U.S. where they do their consumption shopping. Further retaliation could take some form of “punishment” against U.S. direct investment. There is $1.5-$2 billion in American investment in Mexico.

The Mexicans might very well have non-rational violent reaction to unilateral prolonged application of sanctions and breaking of diplomatic relations could be a possibility.

(d) Laos:

We could fully or partially cut off (i) our military grant programs ($150 million annually); (ii) our AID program ($50 million annually); and decrease other types of assistance provided Laos. These measures would obviously weaken the already weak Laos Government and be contrary to our policy of assisting Laos in combatting North Vietnam attacks.

(e) Thailand:

We could fully or partially cut off (i) our military grant programs ($60 million annually); (ii) our AID program ($45 million annually); and decrease other types of assistance provided Thailand. Any of these measures would antagonize the Thai Government and possibly jeopardize our military presence in Thailand.

(f) Burma:

There is no economic leverage available to use in the case of Burma; our economic aid and military aid programs are completed and no new ones are in view. Burma’s physically and politically isolated stance precludes any effective steps. We could break off diplomatic relations but this would not have much effect on Burma.

D. SUMMARY:

It will be evident from the foregoing that we expect highly cooperative efforts from Turkey, France and Mexico, and, if our programs are fully implemented, a major reduction in the import of illicit heroin.

It is also apparent that on balance we have minimum leverage on Turkey and France, with somewhat more available to us in the case of Mexico, in the somewhat unlikely event we find it necessary to apply it.

The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) estimates that reductions of the following order can be expected on full implementation of the diplomatic and technical assistance programs outlined above. Further reductions can be anticipated on implementation of the domestic program described later.

1st Year 10%-20%

2nd Year 20%-40%

5th Year 40%-60%

IV. UNILATERAL ACTION PROGRAMS TO BOLSTER INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS

A. INCREASED CUSTOMS SURVEILLANCE

Increased internal narcotic enforcement concentrating on major narcotic violators, involving as many important narcotic arrests and seizures as possible plus follow up conspiracy prosecutions involving the organized crime groups, will demonstrate United States Government determination and effectiveness within its own territory. Increased Customs control at ports and borders will also demonstrate this.

B. BNDD estimates that in theory, if fully implemented, this program and the foreign programs described previously, should reduce the existing heroin supply in the United States by approximately 80% within five years.

C. PRE-EMPTIVE BUYING

Pre-emptive buying of opium for a one or two year period in order to reduce the supply of heroin as near to zero as possible is an additional measure that should be considered. It might prove to be feasible to buy up the world supply of opium from the growers for one, and perhaps two full years. It would require careful planning and the highest degree of secrecy to execute successfully. It would almost certainly be impossible to carry out such a program for more than two growing seasons since the necessary secrecy will be impossible to maintain beyond that period, if that long. Once the pre-emptive buying operation becomes known, it would serve as a stimulus to opium production.

Purchases could be made directly from the illegal poppy growers, using the same methods, and perhaps even the same agents, who presently buy the illegal opium from the growers.

The cost of buying up the world supply of opium at the source is, because of its clandestine nature, impossible to say with any accuracy, but could vary in the range of $15 to $25 million per year. The cost would be low because the “mark up” of what will ultimately be heroin has only begun with the poppy grower.

It is expected that there would be three important results from such a program: (1) heroin would be severely limited to addicts for one and perhaps two years and the cost would skyrocket,(2) those engaged in narcotics traffic would be forced to deal with new supply contacts and be more vulnerable to detection during the period; suppressive action should be especially successful, and (3) as the supply is cut off, addicts would be more receptive to rehabilitation and care. If on further study it does not appear feasible to mount a buying program for the total supply, it may nevertheless be an effective means to deal with particular sources of supply.

D. REHABILITATION OF ADDICTS

A major reduction of the illicit heroin trade would create the need for a massive. program of treatment and rehabilitation for the approximately 100,000 heroin addicts in the U.S.

At the present, personnel and facilities to treat addicts on such a grand scale do not exist. It would probably require two years to plan such an operation, train the necessary personnel and prepare the facilities. To treat up to possibly 100,000 addicts simultaneously-as would be necessary if we succeeded in cutting off all or most heroin-would cost about $11,600 for each addict for a 21/2 year treatment period, although major cost reductions per addict would result from large scale treatment. In addition, part of the cost would be borne by state and local agencies.

While the heroin addiction problem is too complex to permit of any optimistic conclusions, it is realistic to think of curing and rehabilitating about 50% of the addicts treated, especially if suppression of the trade is largely effective for a year or two after the first years of treatment.

We recommend that the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare be asked to undertake immediately a detailed study of such a project, looking to have it in operation in two years.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SOC 11-5 US. Confidential. Redrafted by Levitsky (S/S).

147. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 147. Memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, October 24, 1969.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT-Evening Report

Narcotics-As Alex Johnson reported to the Inter-Agency Meeting held by Henry Kissinger at the White House this morning, I have appointed Harry Schwartz, a senior officer in the Department, as my Special Assistant for Narcotics Matters, in order to ensure that the Department acts effectively in coordinating and carrying out your desire for a maximum effort to get the matter of illegal narcotics imports under better control.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot File 74 D 164. Secret.

148. Memorandum For the Record 148. Memorandum For the Record1

Washington, October 24, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Traffic: Meeting of October 24

Mr. Kissinger called a meeting in the Situation Room at 11 a.m., October 24, to consider the joint report prepared by the Under Secretary of State and the Attorney General (a list of participants is attached). Mr. Kissinger opened the meeting by stressing the Presidents conviction that heroin traffic must be stopped at our shores, and also that speedy action is needed taking into account foreign sensitivities.

At the suggestion of the Attorney General, Mr. Ingersoll reviewed his cooperative efforts with the French narcotic control authorities since May. He expects to sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the Director of French Central Police during his visit to Paris in early November. Amb. Johnson discussed reasons why it is difficult to reduce opium growing, especially in South East Asia: the crop has a high cash value, is easily transported, and is grown often in areas outside effective governmental control (or with the involvement of government officials). It is difficult to offer a substitute crop which has similar qualities, and accordingly we should not be too optimistic about effective control methods. Amb. Johnson reported that Secretary Rogers this morning established a new position of Special Assistant to the Secretary (Harry Schwartz) to deal with the international aspects of the narcotics problem.

The Attorney General and Mr. Ingersoll commented that the UN efforts have not been too successful (in part due to insufficient funds), although the 1961 Convention on Narcotic Drugs has been of some help. Mr. Kissinger and Assistant Secretary (Treasury) Rossides suggested that the possibility of linking our concern with opium and heroin production to economic interests of certain countries, such as Turkey, should not be ruled out.

Mr. Moynihan commented on the historic nature of the meeting, since, until now, this issue had never been made a serious object of US foreign policy. He felt it was important to recall that the USG efforts to control narcotics had failed for fifty years. Underlining the urgency of the problem, he suggested that the narcotics trade has been in the hands of criminal elements but soon would fall to Americas middle class. The conclusion, he suggested, was immediately to stop Turkeys opium crop.

Mr. Ehrlichman stressed the President’s strong interest in early and demonstrative results, especially with respect to Turkey and France. The President is prepared to accept some risk of irritating foreign governments to achieve this national objective. Mr. Kissinger suggested that arm-twisting may antagonize governments and thus reduce the chances of successful control; it probably would be better if it were not made to appear as if they had yielded to US pressure. Following a brief discussion of how opium is exported from Laos, Mr. Kissinger asked CIA Director Helms if clandestine methods could be employed to make export efforts too dangerous. Director Helms replied affirmatively.

Mr. Kissinger recommended that the participants at the meeting constitute a Task Force, and that a working party be established under State’s leadership. The working party should prepare a report to the Task Force containing a detailed action program relating to the following: specific measures to end the Turkish opium crop no later than summer 1970; action to ensure that heroin production is eliminated in France; a diplomatic scenario should be included and fully integrated with domestic programs. The report should be in the hands of the Task Force within one week, with a view to providing a Task Force report to the President immediately thereafter. All participants agreed with Mr. Kissinger’s recommendation, and Amb. Johnson designated Harry Schwartz as the State representative on the working party. Each Task Force member will notify State of his representative for the working party. It was agreed that Defense should be included on the Task Force and working party.

Arthur Downey

Participants in Meeting Friday, October 24, at 11 a. m.

Heroin Traffic

White House

Henry A. Kissinger, Chairman

Mr. Sonnenfeldt

Colonel Haig

Arthur Downey

Mr. Moynihan

Mr. Ehrlichman

Bud Krogh, Assistant to Ehrlichman

Departments

Attorney General Mitchell

John Ingersoll, Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs

Under Secretary for Political Affairs Johnson

Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Eugene Rossides

Assistant Secretary of Health, Dr. Roger Egeberg

CIA Director Helms

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information.

149. Memorandum For the Record 149. Memorandum For the Record1

Washington, November 4 1969.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Traffic: Task Force Meeting of November 3

Due to the delay of Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Ehrlichman opened the Task Force meeting with a review of the report prepared by the Working Group (Tab A). Mr. Hess said that Mr. Moynihan was not pleased with the report. He thought, for example, that the President should be told that the Turks probably would not agree to plow under the current poppy crop, and that an assessment of what bargaining power we have with the Turks should also be included. He suggested that perhaps special envoys of the President should be employed for negotiating with France and Turkey. Ambassador Johnson and Mr. Ehrlichman thought that it was too early to assess the Turks’ reaction to our proposal. Mr. Kleindienst agreed with the reports recommendations, and stressed the need for a cooperative effort rather than heavy-handed tactics. Based on his experience in Mexico, he suggested that a permanent working level force remain in Turkey and France to ensure that the program was being carried out. Mr. Ingersoll noted that the crop substitution program would have to continue in Turkey to prevent a reversion to poppy planting after the current crop was plowed under. Mr. Rossides expressed his concern that there should not be an Americanization of the world’s drug problems, and that each country should be brought to recognize its own interest in the problem.

After a brief discussion by Dr. Egeberg and Messrs. Ingersoll and Kleindienst, it was agreed that the use of the substitute drug methadone would be an essential initial step in the rehabilitation of addicts, particularly when the heroin imports were cut off. It was also agreed that government-dispensed free heroin was not a viable alternative method. Mr. Kissinger offered the following comments: the due dates for the additional studies (smuggling, intelligence coordination and pre-emptive buying) should be advanced; it would be advantageous for Mr. Ingersoll to visit Turkey; we had adequate leverage with Iran to ensure its cooperation; and, finally, the President’s letter to President Pompidou should seek French cooperation on specific issues and not request merely general support. Messrs. Kleindienst and Rossides suggested that the teams in Paris and Ankara should be chaired by the DCM of the Embassy, as is being done in Mexico, to ensure high level Embassy participation. Mr. Sonnenfeldt noted the value of seeking a contact in the office of the French President and Turkish Prime Minister to ensure their continued interest at the level approximating the White House level of interest.

Since there is a possibility that the programs will not have proceeded satisfactorily by the time of the December and February visits, Mr. Ehrlichman suggested that we must prepare now for that contingency and have ready recommendations for stronger measures. He also thought it would be useful to study the existing treaties on opium production to determine whether there could be a basis for a proposal that if any country, currently permitted to produce opium, could be shown to have abused that right by being passive to illicit production, then that country’s right legally to produce would be forfeited. It was suggested that the Working Party report to the Task Force on that possibility.

At the conclusion of the meeting, the participants agreed to the following specific points: (1) the draft letter to Pompidou would be revised to add the suggestion that he designate a representative from his office to coordinate the heroin control efforts; (2) the letter would also be more specific with respect to the points on which we seek French cooperation; (3) an instruction to Embassy Paris and Ankara would be prepared to formalize an Embassy team to deal on a continuing basis with the problem; (4) the Justice Department will prepare a summary of current US efforts to control heroin traffic and this information will be used by the embassies in explaining the depth of US concern and activity; (5) HEW will explore further contingency planning for rehabilitation of addicts; and finally, (6) Amb. Johnson will forward to Mr. Kissinger the revised report for the President, including the texts of the letters to Pompidou and Demirel and instructions to the embassies.

The Task Force will meet again shortly after the receipt on November 15 of the reports on intelligence coordination and smuggling. The report on pre-emptive buying is due on November 30.

Arthur Downey

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 357, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information. Drafted by Downey. Tab A was attached but not published.

150. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Urban Affairs (Moynihan) to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 150. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Urban Affairs (Moynihan) to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, November 6, 1969.

The task force report on heroin is certainly the best thing the State Department has yet come forward with on this subject. They begin to see the point. But they still don’t feel it. They are not frightened by this problem. They merely have come to realize that the President is interested.

(Two days ago the leading white liberals of Washington came in to see John Ehrlichman and asked if the administration would not permanently station troops on the streets of Washington. Vraiment. Kay Graham, et. al.)

I don’t think we should work over the Task Force prose. The real issue, as I see it, is who presents the issue to the governments of France and Turkey. Ingersoll is a fine technician, but I think he would inevitably be seen as such. At the risk of presumption, I suggest that I be sent. I expect I know as much about the subject, really, as anyone around. In its larger dimensions, I am now a member of the cabinet.(!) I am an aide to the President. Pompidou and Demirel would have to take me seriously. Further, I am the U.S. representative on the NATO committee on the Challenges of Modern Society. We meet early in December. I would have good reason for being in France and Turkey either before or after that meeting. (As I was before and after the meeting of the Preparatory Committee.) Finally, the funds we transfer to Turkey-they have a right to be paid-could be in the form of CCMS connected work. For example, they dearly need help in establishing a Technology Center.

Daniel P. Moynihan

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Moynihan added a postscript noting that “Turkey was co-pilot’ with USA on air pollution” in the NATO Committee on Challenges of Modern Society and that “Ingersoll should accompany me.” Haig wrote the following note at the bottom of the page: “Haig discussed w/Moynihan 6 Nov. He agrees with HAK psn that he not be US negotiator or Rep & that we pursue as outlined. AH”

151. Telegram 188129 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 151. Telegram 188129 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, November 6, 1969, 0004Z.

For the Ambassador

Subject:

Opium Production

1. USG up to and, specifically including President profoundly concerned over damage to national welfare caused by heroin addiction and determined to take all measures necessary to curb importation of this drug into US. Since 80 percent of heroin in this country estimated to originate from Turkish opium refined in France, termination of poppy cultivation in Turkey would go long way toward stopping illicit traffic. Request therefore that you orally convey following message from President to Prime Minister leaving no doubt re importance of GOT cooperation to US-Turkish relations. (Oral approach preferable to written which could be reminiscent of 1964 “Johnson letter” and which, if leaked into press, would make success our efforts much more doubtful.)

2. BEGIN MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT: President is deeply troubled by growing problem of heroin addiction in US. As Prime Minister will appreciate, availability of this drug to our nations youth especially harmful to future of our country. Our laws and enforcement authorities alone cannot cope adequately with problem; what is needed is curbing of flow of heroin into US.

3. President realizes that Prime Minister has appreciated both necessity of curbing opium production on humanitarian grounds and declining market for legal opium. President also aware of Demirel’s commitment made to Ambassador Hart in June 1967 to eradicate poppy cultivation in three to four years and of progress being made under $3 million AID loan signed in September 1968 to restrict production. However, problem in US is sufficiently serious to have caused this Administration to take world-wide look at those areas and countries both growing opium and refining opium into heroin and to consider what further steps could be taken. Following proposal is only part of approach we are making to a number of countries, including France, which refines most of illicit Turkish production. END OF PRESIDENT’S MESSAGE.

4. We understand that nine provinces in Turkey have presently been authorized to plant poppies for harvest spring and summer of 1970 and that GOT has announced reduction of number of provinces to seven for planting in fall of 1970. When, consonant with four-year timetable, GOT announces termination of production following 1972 harvest, Turkish opium will still be available to illicit trade for another three years, and even longer if farmers have stocks at that time. Problem in US is sufficiently serious that President strongly urges Prime Minister to require farmers who have planted poppies this fall to plow under their crop and not plant again. President realizes full well this step will cause problems for Prime Minister and has authorized you to discuss with him nature of these problems as well as what USG might do to assist. Advantages of this approach would be ease of enforcement, since cultivation of poppies easy to detect and diversion of legal production into illicit channels difficult to control.

5. You are authorized to say President has no doubt that acceptance his proposal would be a real act of courage; it is precisely because of the courage for which they are famous, as well as for their many other qualities, that President has long admired the Turks.

6. You should also make clear to Demirel that President intends to pursue this subject during Prime Ministers Washington visit.

7. We would like to receive as soon as possible after your talk with Demirel your recommendation as to any US course of action which would ensure his compliance with the President’s request. FYI: We are contemplating approximately $5 million additional loan to help Turk Government compensate farmers for plowing under 1970 crops. In the meantime Mr. John Ingersoll, Director of Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs will visit Turkey late this month with view to helping you in any way in your negotiating with Turkey. END FYI.

8. We believe it most useful for Embassy to establish a Task Force on Opium Problem, headed by DCM and including BNDD representative, AID and those Turkish officials with whom you work most closely. John Ingersoll, on basis his experience other countries should be helpful to you on this matter.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Schwartz, Cash, and Charles R. Hartley (NEA/UR) on November 4; cleared by Rockwell and Kissinger; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, Brown (S/S) and Kissinger.

152. Telegram 191974 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma 152. Telegram 191974 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma1

Washington, November 14, 1969, 1737Z.

Subject:

International Traffic in Heroin

1. The problem of narcotics addition in the US has reached serious proportions. Over five percent of the heroin entering the US originates in Burma, Thailand and Laos. The President is profoundly concerned that effective measures be taken to stop the import of opium and its derivatives into the US, and has directed the Departments of State and Justice to take the necessary measures to accomplish this.

2. You should convey orally to the Minister of Foreign Affairs message along the following lines:

The President is gravely concerned about the consequences of the international narcotics traffic for the US. You should inform him that the US is discussing measures in Europe, the Middle and Far East and Latin America designed to stop this traffic by eliminating the cultivation of opium poppies and the illicit production and transport of morphine and heroin

3. Burma and its neighbors have been traditional producers of opium for many years and much of the product has been refined into heroin and found its way into the international narcotics traffic. While the US understands the problems in effective control of production in remote areas, we hope that the Burmese government, which has traditionally supported international control measures through the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs, will give the most serious consideration to intensifying efforts and devising more effective measures in cooperation with the US and other countries to eliminate this scourge. You should inform the Foreign Minister that you hope to discuss with him soon appropriate measures in which the US, his government and other governments concerned can cooperate to eliminate the narcotics traffic.

4. Report on reaction by telegram.

5. In addition to the above approach, Embassy should furnish recommendations on additional steps which might be taken to control the production and export of opium, morphine and heroin from Burma. Such steps might include the substitution of other crops for opium, financial incentives for cooperation with US authorities, US technical assistance to the Government of Burma and improved methods of surveillance and interception of narcotics shipments. You should indicate the advantages and disadvantages of your proposals.

6. While at present Southeast Asia produces only 5 percent of the heroin entering the US, incentives to increase production in Southeast Asia will grow if suppression measures are effective elsewhere. For this reason you should report any increase in poppy cultivation and new information available on narcotics movements. Instructions on this reporting are also being sent through other channels.

7. When the results of your demarche on the government of Burma and your recommendations for additional steps have been received and evaluated, further instructions will be forwarded.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS ASIA SE. Confidential. Repeated to Bangkok and Vientiane. Drafted by William W. Thomas, Jr. (EA) on November 7, cleared in EA, S/NM, and AID, and approved by Schwartz.

153. Telegram 7775 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 153. Telegram 7775 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, November 17, 1969, 1120Z.

Subject:

Opium Production

Ref:

State 188129

1. Summary: In accordance with instructions reftel, I delivered President Nixon’s oral message to Prime Minister Demirel November 15 and presented to him proposal to require farmers who have planted poppies this fall to plow under their crops and not plant again. In doing so, I emphasized damage to US national welfare caused by heroin addiction and pointed out 80 percent of heroin in US originated from Turkish opium. I stressed extreme importance this subject as agenda item between Turkey and US and asked if there were anything US could do to help Turkey in taking actions we requested. Prime Minister referred to existing agreement and to what he described as “realistic” obstacles to going further. He agreed, however, to study problem and see what else could be done. End summary.

2. Opening my presentation, I read to Prime Minister Demirel President Nixon’s message as given reftel. After doing so _ elaborated upon damage caused to US life and welfare by drug problem and our estimate that 80 percent of heroin in US originated from Turkish opium refined in France. I also stressed that our approach to Turkey was only one of steps we are taking both vis-a-vis other foreign countries and at home. I then read to Prime Minister (but did not leave copy) President’s proposal as given para 4 reftel. I said I realized what we were asking Prime Minister to do was “tough” but was required by seriousness of problem.

3. Demirel replied that he was most familiar with the subject starting from his discussions with Ambassador Hart in 1967. He knew humanistic reasons why drug addiction should be wiped out. Prime Minister stated “we have done our best.” Turkish program is “realistic one.” Turkey has cut back poppy production from eleven to nine provinces this fall. If we had told you we would eliminate production this year, it would not have been possible. Areas we have cleaned out are those in which smuggling predominated. How can we tell several hundred farmers just to forget their poppy plantings? In many places poppies are grown for their oil which is an important part of farmers’ diet. I understand President Nixon’s views. You in turn should realize our problem. We have told you the best we can do. However, I will try again. It is impossible to go to the farmers and ask them to plow under their crops, we cannot control it. The poppies will just appear illegally. Where we have prohibited production, we do have facilities for enforcing the order.

4. At this point I said that subject was of such importance that President Nixon intended to raise it during Prime Minister’s Washington visit. Prime Minister then dwelt upon Turkish efforts to keep opium out of illegal trade. He spoke about organization of police forces and border controls. For example, in some places mines were placed on border to prevent smuggling. Possession of opium in Turkey carries extremely heavy penalty and traffickers are subject to being shot by authorities. I said we fully recognize magnitude of problem for him and how difficult our request was. However I could not stress too much how important narcotics was as agenda item between Turkey and US. Impact of addiction in US forced US to give it this importance. I asked if there was anything US could do to help Turkey meet President Nixon’s request.

6. Prime Minister said problem was just one of money which farmers earned from poppies. Poppy planting was an institution, a way of life for certain farmers. During campaign while visiting Malatya area he found signs every hundred meters on road from airport saying “please don’t prohibit poppy cultivation.” Government in its eradication program is fighting habit which has existed for centuries.

7. I then informed Prime Minister of visit to Ankara of BNDD Director Ingersoll and Regional Director Cusack. They were here to provide professional advice on narcotics problem. I asked whom they might talk with in Turkish Government. Prime Minister suggested Minister of Interior and said he would be in touch with him. Conversation ended with my repeating once again importance of this subject to our relations and Prime Minister’s agreeing to study what else might be done.

8. Subsequently I found occasion describe to Munis Faik Ozansoy, Under Secretary in Prime Minister’s office, seriousness of this problem but did not mention President Nixon’s message or proposal. Ozansoy in past has monitored eradication program for Prime Minister.

9. Comment: I intend to see that everything possible is done to secure maximum Turkish cooperation in bringing halt to opium production. I agree with thought in para one reftel that publicity about our approaches to GOT would only do damage to prospects of success and therefore hope that knowledge of this entire effort, especially of Presidential message, will be carefully restricted in Washington. Prime Minister was obviously surprised by far-reaching nature of President’s request but should now be under no illusions about seriousness with which President views problem. After further discussions with Ingersoll I will submit recommendations on how to proceed.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

154. Telegram 7825 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 154. Telegram 7825 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, November 19, 1969, 1111Z.

Subject:

Opium Production

Ref:

State 188129

1. In light of my conversation with Prime Minister (Ankara 7775), BNDD Director Ingersoll’s talks with Under Secretary Ministry Interior (Ankara 7791), and Assistant Under Secretary in Prime Ministry (Ankara 7823), I am setting forth below my suggestions on how to proceed in immediate future in order to secure Turkish cooperation in eliminating opium production. This course of action was worked out with assistance of BNDD Director Ingersoll who concurs therein.

2. GOT policy decision to end poppy production immediately. In order to keep pressure on GOT to achieve this objective I propose following approaches: (A) Assuming Department agrees to my request for consultation Washington in December as requested septel, I would call on Prime Minister immediately prior to departure. I would ask Prime Minister if he had reached policy decision, saying that I knew President Nixon would want to know upon my return to Washington.

(B) I would make third call on Prime Minister immediately after my return from Washington I would say that President Nixon had instructed me to see Prime Minister again and would use even stronger language than in first two calls if this should prove necessary.

(C) Secretary Rogers would raise subject with Foreign Minister Caglayangil during bi-lateral meeting at NATO Ministerial in early December using approach given reftel.

(D) As targets of opportunity appear, similar approaches would be made by appropriate opposite numbers to any high ranking GOT officials who might visit U.S. in coming weeks or who might be encountered at international meetings.

(E) representation on same lines to turkish delegation to UN Narcotics Commission meeting January in Geneva.

Hopefully above concerted approaches will produce acceptable GOT policy decision by early January. The scenario is based on assumption Demirel visit to U.S. will not take place in next few months.

3. Formation of joint committee. Committee would have two principle tasks: (A) Drawing up specific program for immediate eradication poppy production in Turkey on basis of decision in principle by GOT to do so.

(B) Devising program for tighter enforcement measures to insure compliance and suppress illicit traffic.

Committee would consist of Turkish and U.S. officials. DCM would coordinate local U.S. efforts.

Depending on developments we might wish to press for formation of committee prior to formal governmental decision on eradication. in this case U.S. side would table concrete proposal intended to have sufficient appeal to Prime Minister to serve as inducement to favorable decision.

4. Public relations. U.S. part in entire operation should be kept “invisible.” Public knowledge of U.S. pressure or involvement would set up political currents making favorable decision by Prime Minister infinitely more difficult. On positive side, we would with assistance of BNDD, USIS, and other agencies, start effort to place articles in Turkish media discussing narcotics problem. We would hope to include professional medical studies on effects of heroin and agricultural studies on crop substitution.

5. Enforcement operations. Immediate requirement is fastest possible delivery of vehicles and other equipment we have undertaken to supply under existing program. Failure of this material to arrive on schedule gives Turks easy way to pass buck to US. Once joint committee is established, U.S. and Turkish officials could consider other equipment needs and further steps to make enforcement more effective.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. Confidential; Priority; Limdis.

155. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council staff to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 155. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council staff to President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, November 19, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Traffic

Since the last Task Force meeting on November 3, the following developments have taken place: --The President’s messages have been delivered to President Pompidou and Prime Minister Demirel;

--Prime Minister Demirel sees real obstacles to meeting our desires; moreover, his visit to the US has been re-scheduled from December to some-time after late February;

--the President has invited the 50 Governors to a conference on December 3 dealing with narcotics and foreign policy;

--John Ingersoll is returning at the end of this week from his visits to Paris and Ankara.

There was no specific agreement at the last Task Force meeting on a date for another meeting. Conceivably we do not need another meeting at this time. A status report for the President could be prepared on the basis of a report on Ingersoll’s trip and on the cables from Ankara and Paris. On the other hand, without another meeting the energy in this effort may fade. State does not seem to have picked up the ball, or at least seems more interested in letting you or Justice take all the initiatives.

On balance I think it is time to call another Task Force meeting to mark the end of the first phase and to set the course for the next. I have attached (Tab A) a memorandum from you to the Deputy Attorney General requesting that John Ingersoll submit a report to the Task Force on the results of his trip. The report would be submitted prior to a Task Force meeting which I suggest should be called for December 1 (the first available date on your schedule). By that point we will have received the studies of the working group on intelligence collection, smuggling and pre-emptive buying of opium. On the basis of these reports and studies, the Task Force should be in a position to report to the President.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you agree to convene a Task Force meeting on December 1; and

That you sign the memorandum to Mr. Kleindienst at Tab A.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation on November 21. The memorandum to the Deputy Attorney General was attached but not published.

156. Letter From French President Pompidou to President Nixon 156. Letter From French President Pompidou to President Nixon1

Paris, November 21, 1969.

TRANSLATION

Mr. President,

I thank you for the message that you sent to me through your ambassador to Paris and I wish to tell you that, like you, I very much look forward to the conversations that we will have during my visit to the United States next February.

You especially wanted to let me know, as of this moment, how preoccupied you are by the grave consequences arising from the use of narcotics, especially among young people, and that you have decided to give priority to a rapid reduction of imports of narcotics, as well as to the treatment of addicts.

I completely share your concern and your wish to protect the young people. The French Government has already undertaken a series of measures intended to reinforce the battle against narcotics.

You indicate that 80 percent of the heroin imported into the United States comes from France. On this point my information does not exactly agree with yours. To my knowledge, thanks to the efforts of our narcotics agents, the traffic has been seriously hampered in France. Moreover, the variety of means and routes of international communication have resulted in a dispersion of the places for shipment or transit in a great number of countries.

I thank you for expressing your satisfaction about the high level of cooperation that exists, which you hope to develop further, between our two competent services. You can be assured that Mr. Ingersoll, Director of the Bureau of Narcotics, who has just arrived in Paris, will receive the warmest welcome from his French colleagues. The concrete proposals that he submits will be examined with all the interest that they merit.

I agree with your wish that the governments of countries producing the plants which are the source of the drugs take, on their side, the necessary measures to stop such production.

Finally, as you have suggested, I would be very glad to include the narcotics question among the matters we will discuss during our future talks.

Please accept, Mr. President, my very cordial best wishes.

Signed: Georges Pompidou

Handwritten postscript:

I wish to add, Mr. President, my warm congratulations for the remarkable exploit that has just been achieved again by your astronauts and which through its unbelievable, apparent effortlessness, is an unforgettable success for American science.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO-DRUGS 17 US. No classification marking. Nixon and Pompidou apparently did not discuss narcotics when the French President visited Washington March 23-26, but Rogers and French Foreign Minister Shuman did on February 25, 1970, see Document 164.

157. Telegram 16094 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 157. Telegram 16094 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State1

Bankok, November 26, 1969, 1225Z.

Subject:

International Traffic in Heroin

Ref:

A. State 191972 B. Bangkok 15794

Summary and comment: As enunciated by leadership, RTG is committed to eradication of illicit narcotics traffic within the Kingdom. It faces serious problems in implementing efforts, however, most serious of which is that the northwestern mountain region, site of indigenous opium production, processing, and foreign narcotics transit, is also site of serious and growing insurgency involving some of same hill tribe population involved as primary opium producers and traffickers. It is view of all concerned that enforcement efforts against production, even if possible under present conditions, would further alienate hill tribes and increase the number of insurgents. There are, however, other approaches. We believe USG could assist RTG in eradication efforts in two principal areas (1) Reduction of opium production by introduction of substitute crops and (2) enforcement against violators of narcotics legislation. RTG will expect not merely advice from US but commitment of assets and funds as well. We assume this was anticipated by para 5 reftel A. Our initiatives would be undertaken without publicity or public disclosure. Thai are extremely sensitive over matters effecting their international image and high-ranking officials are occasionally quoted by press as denying that there is any opium production within country at all. End summary

1. Suppression of production (a) most serious and comprehensive study of Thai narcotics problem ever conducted by non-Thai was that undertaken by UN survey team Jan-March, 1967 (US member was retired FSO F.T. Merrill). Their subsequent report was transmitted by our A-987 of 5/12/67 and complementary analysis submitted with O/I letter to then Thai Country Director dated May 8, 1967. Bangkok’s A-174 of April 1, 1969 reviews RTG efforts implement UN recommendations. We believe UN report is worthy of careful restudy as possible basis for directions of US assistance to Thai in this area. (b) UN report made number of suggestions, primary of which was that new RTG agency at Cabinet or sub-Cabinet level be established to deal with all hill tribe problems. Thai have recently expressed increasing interest in this proposition (A-174. para 4.K): We believe this interest should be quietly encouraged. A review of UN report also suggests we could assist RTG to implement UN recommendations by providing soil technicians and agriculturalists who would be concerned solely with developing crops which could feasibly be produced by the hill tribes to replace opium. With regards replacement crops UN report noted “we regretfully conclude we can suggest nothing immediately encouraging,” but went on to suggest a number of possible crops (peas, vegetable seed, potatoes, pyrethrum, tobacco, tea and coffee) potentials of which, as far as we are aware, have not yet been adequately explored. We may have to consider such mechanisms as unilaterally heavily subsidizing crops with potential, or of preemptive purchase opium production until tribesmen can convert. Schedule of deescalating subsidies might in long run prove most economical approach to eliminating root cause of problem.

2. Enforcement. RTG is hampered in its enforcement efforts by under-manned, inadequately trained, sometimes corrupt, insufficiently funded and equipped narcotics enforcers who are regular police officers. BNDD Narcotics Attache and Regional Director (Wanzeck) envisions recommending to RTG that they establish an elite narcotics investigative force which would be partially trained, equipped and provided with partial rewards by USG. To accomplish such a program BNDD would need additional resident agents (whose ops would be monitored by Embassy and in liaison with Thai). Assuming the development of a clear Embassy coordinating role, we support these preliminary recommendations, which he will elaborate in reporting through his channels, as worthy of serious consideration.

3. Additional possible efforts (a) we believe thought should also be given to developing plan to stimulate RTG, RLG, and RGUB to establish mechanisms for the exchange of intelligence related to narcotics movements and traffickers with an eye towards possible joint enforcement efforts at a later date. (b) recognizing that GRC influence on “KMT” remnants resident in northwest Thailand is minimal, it would be worthy effort for Embassy Taipei to explore with GRC any means it might have to disuade KMT from participation in narcotics trafficking which is now their primary means of livelihood. This might, of course, become complicated process eventually leading to proposals for further evacuations of KMT remnants to Taiwan.

Hannah

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, INCO DRUGS 17 THAI. Confidential. Repeated to Rangoon and Vientiane.

158. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 158. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, December 27, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Opium Production in Turkey

Ambassador Handley’s visit with you on December 22 will undoubtedly assist him in his efforts to convince the Turkish Government to destroy the 1970 poppy crop prior to harvest in the spring. If this effort is not successful, as may be likely, our fallback position is to arrange for an increased legal purchase of the 1970 crop and thereby reduce by 75% the amount of opium finding its way into the illegal traffic. This pre-emptive purchase scheme would be coupled with an effort to get the Turkish Government to make poppy planting illegal following the 1970 crop.

Under Secretary Johnson has recommended that you call in the Turkish Ambassador directly to express your concern over the harmful effects of the Turkish opium production. He suggests that this would be dramatic and forceful support to our other efforts.

While such an action would add a dramatic touch, it seems to me that it might engage your prestige too much, particularly since there is little likelihood of the Turks agreeing to destroy the present crop. It might be better for you to consider calling in the Turkish Ambassador after we have received the Prime Minister’s response to Ambassador Handley’s next approach. At that time the impact of receiving the Turkish Ambassador would increase the chances of the Turks accepting our fallback position.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you call in the Turkish Ambassador after we have received the Prime Minister’s response.

Approve __________
Disapprove ___________
Prefer to see the Turkish Ambassador now ________.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for action. According to a notation Kissinger made on the memorandum, the President approved the recommendation.

159. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 159. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, January 5, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Suppression: Excellent French Cooperation

Following your exchange of letters with French President Pompidou in November, French cooperation with us on the heroin problem has been outstanding. In mid-December the first meeting of a US-French Task Force on Narcotics was held in Paris. The joint Task Force plans to meet every three months alternating between Paris and Washington. However, the next meeting is advanced to February-at French suggestion-so that gains could be recorded prior to President Pompidou’s visit. At the Paris meeting the French agreed:

--to increase their narcotics suppression staff in Marseilles and to double it in three months;

--to join in joint scientific efforts to detect laboratories;

--to have a joint training seminar this spring;

--to establish a permanent office of the French police in New York City to deal with narcotics distribution.

An additional important result of the Paris meeting was French agreement to join with us in efforts to reduce the opium problem in Turkey. In the last few days the French Government has instructed the French Ambassador in Ankara to tell the Turks about their deep concern over the illegal flow of narcotics from Turkey into France, and to advise the Turkish Government that the French support US efforts to help Turkey eliminate the poppy cultivation. To ensure better cooperation and liaison, the French Director of Central Police will visit Turkey in early January. Finally, the French Ambassador has been told to harmonize all French actions in Turkey concerning narcotics with the American Ambassador.

In short, the fact of your personal interest in this problem, as well as the general improvement in Franco-American relations, has worked to our great advantage. President Pompidou is clearly building a record of excellent cooperation with us on this problem.

I understand that Pat Moynihan is planning to give a selected press backgrounder to emphasize that your Administration is the first to have made narcotic suppression a factor of foreign policy. The timing would seem propitious: as a follow-on to your narcotics conference with the Governors, and as a partial preview to the Pompidou visit in February.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics I. Confidential. Sent for information.

160. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary for Political Affairs (Johnson) 160. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, January 7, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Opium Production in Turkey

The President agrees with your suggestion that on his return to Turkey Ambassador Handley make a renewed effort to obtain the Prime Minister’s agreement to destroy the present crop. An offer of a $5 million grant-financed commodity import program should be of assistance.

If that course of action is not successful, I concur in your further suggestion that we seek to increase legal purchases of the 1970 crop, coupled with agreement by the Turkish Government to stop poppy production after the 1970 crop. Since operational efforts involved in the pre-emptive purchase activity cut across several agencies, I have asked Mr. John Ehrlichman if he could free Mr. EGIL KROGH to supervise that aspect of efforts to eliminate Turkey as a source of illegal opium production.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS 17 US-TUR. Confidential.

161. Telegram 0378 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 161. Telegram 0378 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, January 21, 1970, 1000Z.

Paris: Pass Cusack

Subject:

Opium Production

Ref:

State 002886

1. Prime Minister Demirel received me last night (January 20) at 8:00 p.m. for discussion of the opium question. I had seen him three times in the past ten days but always in the company of a visiting American and had not myself brought up the opium question. However, when Senator Javits saw him on January 15. The Senator, as he had done earlier that day to President Sunay, spoke briefly but eloquently and effectively on the disastrous effect of heroin and narcotics addiction on the people of his state, New York. The Prime Minister replied to Senator Javits along familiar lines, saying that he had had discussions with me and earlier with Ambassador Hart and that Turkey was doing all it could to cut back on opium poppy production. Eventually, he said, there would be no production in Turkey.

2. I opened the discussion with an account of my conversation with the President on December 22. I told the Prime Minister that President Nixon wanted him to know that he considered Turkish-American relations of the highest importance and was very pleased to hear my account of their present state. But the President and his associates had expressed their great concern about the effect of opium production in Turkey on the quality of life in the US and their deep disappointment that the Turkish Government had not been able to take more drastic action to eliminate production. The situation as I saw it in Washington had clearly changed from what it had been when Ambassador Hart had first discussed the opium problem in the first place. The problem had become much graver and that during my visit to the US I had become more acutely aware of the intense preoccupation of Americans at all levels with the problem of narcotics. The relationship between crime and narcotics addiction was clearly evident and drastic measures were being taken to cope with the problem. Secondly, the present administration had decided to make the narcotics question, particularly the production and illegal import of opium, a major foreign policy objective. I gave the Prime Minister a copy of the clipping the President had given me from the New York Times of December 22 which pathetically recounted the story of the 50 youths in New York who had spent the day caroling in memory of the 210 teenagers who had killed themselves from overdoses of heroin in New York City that year. I also gave him a clipping from a recent edition of the Herald Tribune telling of the death in New York City of 900 people last year from narcotics as well as a clipping on Mr. Manfredi who died while attending a White House meeting on the narcotics question. I also gave him a copy of the book “Violent Crime-The Challenge to our Cities” autographed by Dr. Moynihan. I said to him that as a government servant who had spent some of the best years of his life as information officer, this was the first time I had given out a book of this kind which certainly did not show the US at its best.

3. Having decided that on the basis of what the Prime Minister had said to Senator Javits that something new was needed, I told him that I was authorized to offer the Government of Turkey a $5 million program grant for commodity imports to assist in the financial cost of destroying the crop that was now in the ground. The Prime Minister, who had been listening with the greatest attention and who seemed to me to be quite obviously impressed by the evidence of heightened importance given to the narcotics question by the US, said that Turkey was an ally of the US and wanted to do everything possible to help U.S. in this serious matter. He said “let us think of what we can do.” He thought that plowing under the present crop, from the standpoint of political and technical practicality, was virtually impossible, and he again reviewed some of his political problems. He also said that he did not think it was a question of money but of finding some new way to tackle the problem. He wanted me to let the President know that he would take a new look at the problem and see what could be done. He would be in touch with me later for further discussions on future courses of action.

5. Comment: I believe we made some headway at this meeting. There is no doubt that the activities of the US and French Governments, plus the recent execution by Iran of ten persons involved in opium smuggling from Turkey, as well as the USG’s high-level policy determinations, and the President’s close personal interest all combined to make the Prime Minister realize that this was indeed a new ball game. Although he did not make much of the $5 million grant offer, it could be very important to him if he decides to take the drastic step of destroying the present crop. I think I should for the moment leave it up to him to come up with some new proposals or considered reactions to last night’s discussion. If I do not hear from him in a week or two on the subject, I will take the initiative and ask for another meeting.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris.

162. Telegram 1682 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 162. Telegram 1682 From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, February 13, 1970, 1045Z.

Please pass BNDD, White House for Dr. Moynihan.

1. From the point of view of immediate results for the US, the most important thing which could come from President Pompidou’s talks with President Nixon would be French agreement to a substantial increase in resources directed to detecting illegal heroin laboratories in the South of France. We have much to be pleased about in the increased French attention to narcotics problems, in their cooperation with US in approaching the Turkish authorities, and in their general willingness to cooperate with US across the board. France has obviously become very sensitized to the narcotics problem and to a large extent this is due to Pompidou’s own efforts.

2. However, the French Government is still not devoting enough resources, men and materiel, to the detection of illegal shipments of heroin and heroin base, in and out of France, or to the detection of heroin laboratories here. There has been a very substantial increase in the number of people put to work on narcotics problems in general but almost all these people are involved in trying to control the flow of narcotics throughout France rather than the narrower problem of detecting heroin refining laboratories.

3. I suggest that the best way to get the French to devote more men and money to the detection problem is for President Nixon to request President Pompidou to do so. President Nixon can paint a very dark picture of the terrible toll drug addiction is taking in America, particularly among our youth. He could say that there is no problem whose solution is of greater importance to our future and no problem on which we need more French help. He can express our appreciation for all that the French have been doing but say that in our view there should be a tenfold increase in personnel assigned directly to detection of labs and shipments. The French now have around twenty men working on this problem in Paris and in the Marseilles district but they should have at least one hundred. Furthermore, they need to increase the technical backup for such operations by assigning cars and by setting aside a reward fund.

4. I realize that to be so specific on what another country should do is not terribly diplomatic. However, given the degree of American concern over this problem, I am sure the President can convince Pompidou that our intense concern is justified. Certainly France can afford the relatively small cost of putting more men, more money and more equipment into solving heroin detection problems. Good men can be taken from other police duties and trained for this job. Cars can be purchased and the technical equipment acquired or if necessary provided by confidential subsidies from the US. France is in a period of budgetary stringency and the answer we get today when we propose radical increases in resources for the detection of illicit heroin shipments has been that the Ministers of Finance and interior do not have the money in their own budgets for this purpose. I am convinced, however, that to a very meaningful degree Pompidou can and will be responsive to a direct approach from President Nixon and will give the necessary orders to find the needed money and men.

Shriver

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUG S FR. Confidential. Pass to BNDD and Moynihan.

163. Memorandum of Conversation 163. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 26, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Narcotics

PARTICIPANTS

France

Maurice Schumann, French Foreign Minister

Charles Lucet, French Ambassador

Jacques Senard, Chief of Protocol, French Foreign Ministry

Paul LeMerle, Director, Foreign Minister’s Staff

Jacques Leprette, Minister-Counselor, French Embassy

Madame Simone Servais, Press Advisor to the Presidency

Jean-Bernard Raimond, Advisor to the Presidency

Jean Beliard, Chief of Press and Information, French Foreign Ministry

Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil, Chief of Levant Affairs, French Foreign Ministry

Dr. Paul Levy, Counselor for Scientific Affairs, French Embassy

United States

The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Dr. Henry Kissinger, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Ambassador Emil Mosbacher, Jr., Chief of Protocol

Martin J. Hillenbrand, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Joseph J. Sisco, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Philip H. Trezise, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

Ambassador R. Sargent Shriver

Herman Pollack, Director, International Scientific and Technological Affairs

Dr. Allen Astin, U.S. Coordinator of U.S.-French Scientific Cooperation HELMUT SONNENFELDT, National Security Council

Charles R. Tanguy, Country Director for France/Benelux

Richard G. Long, Country Officer for France

The Secretary emphasized that the President takes a strong personal interest in narcotics control and considers it one of the most important problems this country faces. The Secretary said he wanted to be sure the Foreign Minister and President Pompidou fully appreciated the depth of our feeling on this matter. Bilaterally, we have talked about having French agents in New York, additional U.S. agents in France, joint seminars, and collaboration to obtain Turkish cooperation. In conclusion, the Secretary said that each of our governments should do everything possible in this field.

Foreign Minister Schumann said that the French Government appreciated the importance that the President attaches to this matter and referred to the fact that progress had already been achieved. Ambassador Shriver agreed but added that the important thing now is to increase the number of persons assigned to the problem in France. Foreign Minister Schumann replied that they hoped to enlarge the French program.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House and began at 11:45 a.m. Drafted by Long.

164. Telegram 1466 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 164. Telegram 1466 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, March 12, 1970, 1530Z.

Personal for Assistant Secretary Sisco from Handley

Subj:

Opium Production

Ref:

Ankara 1265

1. As soon as appropriate after Prime Minister Demirel receives a vote of confidence in his government, I intend to try to stir the GOT to new action on the opium question. My last conversation with Secretary General Eralp (reftel), in which I bore down very heavily, left me with the impression that we may be in actual negotiation with the GOT in the weeks ahead, assuming the political situation does not seriously deteriorate

2. It had been my understanding that the strategy worked out when I was in Washington in December and January, which involved high-level private discussions with the GOT, was still in effect. Needless to say, therefore, I was astonished to read in the press that Director Ingersoll of the BNDD had called a press conference with what could only interpreted as the objective of putting Turkey and Turkey’s Prime Minister on a public hotseat. This move was unexpected, untimely, maladroit and, in my opion, unnecessary, since I do not believe that the very sensible strategy worked out earlier has yet to run its course. The Turkish Government does, of course, have problems. These problems cannot be lightly dismissed and in fact involve parliamentary democracy in Turkey and the future agricultural pursuits of 70,000 Turkish farmers and their families.

3. As I understand it, the crop that is now in the ground will not be harvested before May. Therefore we have time for further probes with the GOT. If the Washington agencies concerned have determined that a new strategy is now required and that this involves embarrassing the GOT publicly, I would very much appreciate confirmation.

4. So far the story of the press conference has been given quite wide publicity, but there has been no editorial comment yet and possibly there will not be. On the other hand, the GOT and very especially the Prime Minister cannot help but resent this attempt to embarrass them at a time when they are fundamentally engaged in solving a serious political crisis through democratic processes. Fortunately, if I am questioned about this, I can say with the straightest of faces that I knew nothing about it, even though I doubt I will be believed.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis.

165. Telegram 42685 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 165. Telegram 42685 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, March 24, 1970, 1015Z.

Paris pass Cusack

Subject:

Opium Production

Refs:

A. State 2886; B Ankara 1265; C. Ankara 1537

For the Ambassador from the Under Secretary

1. Ref A instructed Ambassador to make renewed effort to obtain GOT concurrence to destroy opium crop now in ground. Embassy was informed that if this course of action not successful, White House had concurred in proposal for companies to initiate preemptive purchases of 1970 crop, coupled with GOT agreement to stop poppy production after 1970 harvest. In view of need to proceed without further delay with programming concerning Turkish opium production, we are updating and expanding upon instruction contained in Ref A.

2. The basic points around which and because of which we have designed our fallback position involving the greater purchases by our pharmaceutical firms are as follows: a. For years the Turkish Government has reported to the International Narcotics Control Board as the total Turkish opium production a figure which represents the total legal sales contracts for opium rather than the total production and the total production has exceeded this reported figure by a wide margin. A large proportion of the difference has gone into illicit channels, mostly to France and from there in the form of heroin to Western Europe and the United States. To give an idea of the size of the problem the Bureau of Narcotics estimates that this year, the Turks having offered 76 tons of opium to pharmaceutical firms, there may be as much as 130 tons produced in addition.

b. A large part of the problem comes from lack of adequate controls in Turkey. Instead of collecting from each farmer an amount of opium based on an estimate of yield i.e. the total production, the Turkish authorities apparently collect only that amount required to fill the orders from legitimate purchasers abroad.

c. The Bureau’s current estimate is that there are sizable opium stocks now in Turkey and that these, combined with the 1970 harvest, will be sufficient, if not diverted either by crop destruction or preemptive buying, to supply the growing heroin market.

d. It is clear to us that it is much too late to contemplate seriously the possibility of the Turks instituting for the 1970 crops more stringent controls over the allocations of acreage for poppies and the production and collection of gum opium. What we need to do now is to put into effect a plan to collect all the opium in Turkey whether these be present stocks or future production. It is obvious, therefore, that the greater the future production the harder will be our task.

3. It is imperative that the Prime Minister understand that the heroin problem in the United States is growing at a frightening rate, that this Government is determined to stop its introduction into our country, and that there is consequently no problem between our two governments as important to USG as this one. If the Government of Turkey takes the position that it cannot and will not destroy the present crops before they are harvested then we urgently seek the Government of Turkey’s effective cooperation along two lines: (1) that no more plantings be authorized including the plantings usually put in the ground in the summer and harvested in the fall and (2) the government including the TMO and the law enforcement agencies make a maximum effort to collect all the opium in Turkey for sale to our pharmaceutical firms. In this connection officials of Mallinckrodt, S. B. Penick and Merk, Sharpe and Dohm have agreed to increase their orders-previously made last fall-to a point where they will equal whatever we estimate to be the total opium available. These firms have been most cooperative in this connection but they cannot, of course, collect the opium. That can only be done by Turkish authorities.

4. If you have not yet received the appointment you have been seeking with the Prime Minister you should request one on an urgent basis stating that you do so on the urgent instructions of your Government. If the Prime Minister states he is unable to plow under the present crop you are authorized to present the fallback position described above and you are further authorized to put this position to Demirel as strongly as you consider required to gain his agreement.

5. Our currently authorized offer of $5 million grant commodity import program is to generate lira to enable GOT make payments and cover costs of destruction of current crop. Under fallback such costs not incurred. However, AID willing consider CT recommendation use assistance funds to ease economic dislocations associated with cessation of planting if this will facilitate positive GOT decision.

6. As you know, I shall be visiting Turkey on April 23 after the Chiefs of Mission Conference in Tehran and I would like to receive from you as soon as possible your best advice as to how I might advance our objectives. I am prepared to take any steps that might be useful in this regard. Specifically, I would like your opinion as to whether it might not be useful for me to describe our drug problem to President Sunay making clear to him the enormous importance we attach to suppressing the heroin trade and to enlisting his assistance.

7. This instruction has been prepared in the light of the President’s view that heroin problem is of highest priority importance.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Paris for Cusack. Drafted by Hartley and Schwartz on March 20; cleared by Davies, Cash, Ingersoll, AID, and William Watts of the NSC staff; and approved by Richardson.

166. Memorandum of Conversation 166. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 1, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Opium

PARTICIPANTS:

The Secretary

His Excellency Melih Esenbel, Turkish Ambassador

S/NM-Mr. Harry Schwartz

NEA/TUR-Frank E. Cash, Jr.

The Secretary began by expressing his regrets about the earthquakes in Turkey. Ambassador Esenbel said his Government was grateful for the assistance provided by Embassy Ankara. The Secretary said we would continue to do everything we could.

The Secretary then said that he, the President, and all Americans are seriously concerned about the narcotics problem in the United States. Its consequences are tragic. Any delay in control efforts is destructive. Ambassador Handley wishes to discuss the illicit opium arriving in this country from Turkey further with Prime Minister Demirel just as soon as possible. We would like to move very fast on this. Public and Congressional pressure is building up. This is really the only problem existing between our two Governments. Everything else is going smoothly. We don’t think money is a problem. We’re prepared to compensate Turkish farmers.

In response to the Secretary’s question as to whether Mr. Schwartz had anything to add, the latter said what we fear is the loss of a generation.

Ambassador Esenbel said the GOT has taken some control measures at its borders. A new security force is being equipped to cope with the illicit traffic. Turkey has cooperated for many years with the U.S., France, and Germany in this field. Poppy cultivation in Turkey has been gradually reduced from an initial forty-two provinces down to nine at present and will shortly be restricted even further. The Foreign Minister has been dealing with this matter very confidentially, and the Ambassador did not have precise information on the program. He did know, however, that a high-level decision has been made to eradicate poppy cultivation completely, but he did not know how rapidly this could be done. Turkish farmers have grown poppies for cooking oil for 800 years. It is, therefore, not so easy to uproot such a tradition. It will take time. It is not really a question of money.

The Secretary said that inasmuch as 80% of the illicit heroin coming into the U.S. is believed to originate in Turkey, we would be willing to cooperate in any kind of control system.

In response to the Ambassador’s question, Mr. Schwartz said the UN machinery is not effective in producing the results the U.S. must have.

The Secretary said the only real solution is the cessation of poppy cultivation. We could compensate-or more than compensate-any loss. There is bound to be more and more public discussion of this issue, and Turkey’s reputation in this country will suffer. This we would regret. We know the Turkish Government is trying to be helpful, and we are not unappreciative. But speed is essential. And, once again, we are willing to help in any way we can. Ambassador Handley will be discussing this further with the Prime Minister.

Ambassador Esenbel said he would report the Secretary’s remarks. He believes his Government is fully aware of this problem.

The Ambassador said that, at the request of the Robert College Board, he would like to mention the fact that the College needs about a million dollars more a year in AID funds in order not to be forced to cut back its operations, which would be a shame. Mr. Cash explained that we and the College are caught between spiralling cost of education and limited amounts of AID funds.

The Secretary told the Ambassador we would see what we could do.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS 17 US-TUR. Confidential. The meeting was held in Rogers’ office at 3 p.m. Drafted by Cash.

167. Telegram 1957 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 167. Telegram 1957 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, April 2, 1970, 1115Z.

Paris pass Cusack

For the Under Secretary

Subject:

Opium Production

Ref:

State 42685

1. I saw Prime Minister Demirel at his office at 9:15 this morning (April 2) for discussion of opium question. As is usually the case, we were alone with no note-takers on either side. After a brief discussion of earthquake disaster at Gediz, his forthcoming visit to the US and Under Secretary Richardson’s stopover here, I brought up main subject which was whether or not Prime Minister had decided to plow under this year’s crop.

2. Prime Minister said that there is absolutely no practical means whereby the Government of Turkey can plow under this year’s opium poppy crop. No Government of Turkey, he said, can destroy this crop. It would create a “clash between the government forces and the people and would make the problem worse, since it would create public support for plantings.” It is “impossible to do it,” he said. He reminded me that whereever the GOT had stopped opium production his party had lost the elections, but he said this was not important. He said we have “got to be successful” and should not create either a parliamentary or public problem. Moreover, it was not clear yet just what kind or size of crop will be available this year. We “dont know how it will come up and will have to see at the end of this month. Maybe some of the plants have been killed by the cold.”

3. At that point, I brought up our fallback position to which he listened carefully. In reply, he said that GOT had already made a decision at the governmental level to make a maximum effort to buy up all opium production in Turkey this year. They will use both national and local mechanisms and will, in addition, take the strictest measures to cut down smuggling. But, he said, at this stage no decision had been made about next year’s plantings, beyond what he had told me and Ambassador Hart before. “We cant tell anything about next year yet. We will study the case and do everything we can to be helpful,” he said. I pressed him on this point, and he said that the GOT will consider whether or not a complete ban on all opium production can be instituted for this fall. But, he repeated, no decision has been made on this yet. Needless to say, I did all I could at this point to make him aware of the importance of this decision to US-Turkish relations, not to speak of Turkish relations with Iran and with the international community.

4. The Prime Minister said that GOT has adequate resources, financial and otherwise, to buy up this year’s crop. Whether it sells the crop to our pharmaceutical manufacturers or keeps it in stock does not make much difference. He repeated that GOT is not organized to destroy this year’s crop, is considering not planting next year but cannot promise this now, and will, he repeated, take every measure to buy up this year’s entire production. He concluded by saying, “if you want us to make it, give consideration to our judgment; if you want to break it, force the situation.”

5. Comment: What came out of this morning’s session is obviously less than I had wished. Again, I left him in no doubt about the importance of this matter to US-Turkish relations. He understands this. At the same time, he does not believe that our initial plan to destroy this year’s crop is practical from any standpoint. I have the impression that he himself has given a great deal of throught as to how best to cope with the problem and meet our requirements. He did not believe that additional US help, technical or otherwise, was needed for the GOT to accomplish what he said it would try to do this year, namely, the maximum collection of opium production. Could not get him to give me a firm commitment against all further planting. but, without being excessively hopeful about it, I got the impression that this is being seriously considered. This, therefore, is a point that the Under Secretary might well bring up when he sees the Prime Minister in late April.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Paris.

168. Memorandum From Helmet Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 168. Memorandum From Helmet Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 5, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Task Force Meeting, Wednesday, May 6 at 12 noon

Dr. Moynihan has requested a meeting of the Heroin Task Force, since he felt the “steam was running out” of our efforts. He indicated he wished to see a decision taken to replace Ambassador Handley if the Turks plant a crop of poppies this fall. He feels this action would underscore to the Turks (and impliedly to the Ambassador) our seriousness in wanting the elimination of opium production. A meeting has been set, on General Haig’s agreement, for Wednesday, May 6, at noon. A list of invitees is at Tab A. (Note: Under Secretary Richardson will represent State, and either the Attorney General or Mr. Kleindienst will represent Justice.)

* * * *

Talking Points

1. Review of the Turkish Situation.

Background: Secretary Rogers called in the Turkish Ambassador on April 1 and stressed our serious interest in eliminating poppy production. On April 2, Ambassador Handley met with Prime Minister Demirel. Demirel said it was impossible to plow under the poppy crop presently in the ground. Handley said the US would be prepared to purchase the entire poppy crop late this spring, but Demirel said his government had already decided to buy up the entire crop with its own resources. Finally, Demirel reported that his government had not yet decided whether to institute a complete ban on production this fall. (A full report is at Tab B.)

--ask Under Secretary Richardson to comment on his April 22 meeting in Ankara with Demirel (you may wish to compliment him on the excellent speech he delivered on narcotics in Philadelphia in early April).

The Under Secretary will probably note that, prior to visiting Ankara, he encouraged the Shah of Iran to use his influence with the Turks during the Shah’s May visit in Ankara to persuade them to take constructive action on opium production. Reporting on his visit with Demirel, the Under Secretary will probably indicate that he is convinced that further bilateral pressure on the Turks will not be productive. Demirel admitted that, despite tight controls, smuggling could not be controlled effectively without the elimination of production. The Under Secretary agrees with the Turks that their ability to move to elimination of opium production will best be achieved by broadening the efforts into some international forum. (A full report on the conversation is at Tab C.)

--ask if there is general agreement that the US does not have to proceed with its plan of pre-emptive purchase of the late spring harvest;

--ask whether we can provide technical assistance to the Turks in their collection of the entire crop at harvest (BNDD Director Ingersoll will be prepared to respond to your question);

--note that normally after the May/June harvest there is a planting (20% of the production) which is harvested in the fall; there is also a planting in the fall for harvest in the spring of 1971. Ask if we can firmly insist that there be no fall planting;

--seek Under Secretary Richardson’s views on the nature of the internationalized effort which could be used to make it possible for the Turks to eliminate production (at Richardson’s direction, Schwartz has been preparing such a plan).

II. Germany’s Interest in Narcotics.

Background: In mid-April, the FRG Ambassador in Ankara indicated interest in supporting our efforts in Turkey. Ambassador Handley encouraged this, but cautioned against anything resembling joint international pressure since this would only generate Turkish resentment and resistance. On April 16, Dr. Moynihan met in Bonn with FRG Minister Ehmke, who proposed a bilateral exchange of drug information to be followed by a joint US-FRG meeting to discuss how to deal with drug addiction. Dr. Moynihan requested the German assistance in associating itself with US efforts in Turkey. (A report of Dr. Moynihan’s conversation is at Tab D.) Dr. Moynihan would like to report on his impressions of this visit.

--ask Dr. Moynihan to convey his impressions of the new and strong German interest in drug addiction;

--he may indicate an impression that the Germans feel the US forces in Germany are in part responsible for the spread of drugs in the FRG. (Note: Secretary Laird has just reported that a special DOD Task Force is being convened to make improvements in the forces’ drug program; this “eyes only” report was prepared at the President’s request as conveyed by you (a companion memo deals with this)-and it is not generally known. You may wish to leave it to Deputy Secretary Packard to mention this report.)

III. Cooperation with France.

--ask BNDD Director Ingersoll to report on the program of cooperation with the French; he leaves on Wednesday for the third meeting in Paris of the joint task force.

Note: avoid discussion of the details for next meeting with the French, since this might provoke a jurisdictional dispute between Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Rossides and Justice.

--there is general interest in whether the President discussed heroin with President Pompidou; you may wish to comment.

IV. World-wide Ban on Opium.

Background: Elliot Richardson has been working with Dr. Egeberg in considering whether it would be possible to declare that natural opium is no longer needed for medical purposes. If this is possible, a plan can be developed to call for an international conference to ban the production of opium world-wide in light of its medical irrelevance and social harmfulness.

-you may wish to raise this issue if time permits and seek the comments of Dr. Egeberg or the Under Secretary.

May 6, 1970

List of Invitees to Heroin Task Force Meeting

White House Dr. Moynihan

Mr. Ehrlichman

Mr. Krogh

State Under Secretary Richardson

Special Assistant Harry Schwartz

Justice Attorney General Mitchell or Deputy Attorney G. Kleindienst

BNDD Director Ingersoll

Defense Admiral William P. Mack

Mr. Frank Bortino

Treasury Assistant Secretary Rossides

HEW Assistant Secretary Dr. Egeberg

CIA Lt. Gen. Robert E. Cushman, Jr.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it. Tab B is Document 167. Tabs C and D were attached but not published.

169. Telegram 68968 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 169. Telegram 68968 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, May 6, 1970, 2246Z.

Personal for Ambassador Handley from Elliot Richardson

The telegraphic instruction being sent you concurrently concerning an international forum for the Turkish opium problem was discussed today at length and very seriously in the White House with Attorney General, Moynihan and others. It was pointed out by Moynihan that we had not as yet carried out Presidential orders to eliminate Turkish opium. Based on our conversation with Demirel, I urged that Demirel’s political situation requires an international formula if the Turks are to avoid giving in publicly to U.S. pressure alone.

This position was unanimously accepted. It is now perfectly clear, as a result, that the Department, the Embassy, the Foreign Service and you and I are definitely on the spot to produce results. This is one we have to win. I wanted you to understand this as I do. This is why I must ask you to alter your travel arrangements so that you can present our plan to Eralp and discuss it thoroughly with him before you leave. It seems to me most important that he understand what we are proposing and that he can consult Demirel and brief Caglayangil who I gather is in Izmir and will not return to Ankara before he leaves for the United States. Only in this way can I pursue the matter with the FonMin here in Washington on a business-like basis when he comes for the CENTO Ministerial meeting.

We are running out of time and cannot afford to waste a day. Good luck.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Schwartz, cleared by Eliot, and approved by Richardson.

170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Richardson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Richardson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 19, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Elimination of Turkish Opium Production

In the light of my discussions with Prime Minister Demirel and Foreign Minister Caglayangil in Ankara on April 22, it was agreed at the meeting of the Task Force on Heroin Suppression on May 6 that additional bilateral pressure on Turkey to eliminate all opium production could well be counterproductive. Since the Turkish officials had indicated that they could move faster on a multilateral basis, the Task Force also agreed to suggest to Turkey that the subject be raised in some international forum either due to be convened or capable of being convened at an early date. After preliminary soundings by Ambassador Handley in Ankara, I met with the Turkish Foreign Minister here in Washington on May 13. We agreed that the best way of getting the problem considered soon in a multilateral context would be to convene an ad hoc meeting of the Committee on the Challenges of a Modern Society. We have, accordingly, proposed the following scenario to Ankara and USNATO:

1. One member of CCMS, or a group of members acting in concert, would request an ad hoc meeting some time in June of CCMS at senior level to consider ways of stimulating early international action on the drug problem. Two countries we have in mind to make this proposal are Germany and The Netherlands, both of which have increasing problems with drug consumption and addiction. A joint approach, on the other hand, might be made by the three Benelux countries.

2. Alternatively, Brosio could circulate a paper on his own initiative stating that his attention had been called to the problem and proposing the convening of CCMS to deal with it.

3. At the CCMS meeting, members would consider how each could contribute immediately and in the long run to a solution of the problem, e.g., by the exchange of information on control, treatment and rehabilitation and by instituting more standardized and strict controls on the movement of drugs, including tighter customs procedures and stiffer penalties for traffickers. As its contribution to solving the problem, Turkey could announce the steps it plans to take toward further restricting and-hopefully-eliminating opium crops (as to the latter possibility, see below).

4. Recognizing the limitations of CCMS for dealing with a worldwide problem, members would also discuss ways of including the many non-NATO countries that are major producers or consumers of narcotics. This might be done either through an established forum such as the UN or one of its specialized agencies or through convoking a special ad hoc meeting of all the countries concerned. In either case, the CCMS would throw its weight behind the holding of a large international meeting as early as autumn of this year.

It is barely possible that Turkey could be induced at the CCMS meeting to announce that it will, as a humanitarian gesture and example to the rest of the world, eliminate all future opium production effective with the 1971 crop (the next normal planting season would be in the autumn of 1970). Its more likely offer, however, would be to couple stricter internal controls with an additional reduction in the number of provinces where opium poppies can legally be grown, perhaps reducing legal production to the single province of Afyon. In justifying some continued production, Turkey can be expected to point to the fact that some legal opium production is still necessary for the manufacture of such useful drugs as morphine. They would also be likely to argue that so long as opium production is legal anywhere, illicit production will move to other countries even if Turkey is eliminated as a source.

In order, therefore, to maximize pressure on Turkey to set a good example at the CCMS or, failing that, at the international conference to follow, the U.S. should be prepared to urge a complete cessation of all opium production anywhere in the world. This, in turn, requires that the U.S. Government itself agree on the necessity of this step. Given the differences among medical men on the continuing need for opiates, the possible opposition of drug firms, and the fact that India is the largest producer, this will not be easy.

I accordingly urge that the Task Force meet at an early date to develop a policy on this issue. Anticipating such a meeting, I have asked Bob Finch for the advice of HEW as to how to surmount the domestic obstacles to a worldwide prohibition of opium production and expect soon to be hearing from him on the matter.

Elliot L. Richardson

1 Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Confidential. Copies were sent to Finch and Moynihan.

171. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 171. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Task Force Meeting, Tuesday, June 9, at 3 p.m.

In a memorandum to you of May 19, Under Secretary Richardson requested that you call an early meeting of the Task Force to consider the possibility of the US urging the complete cessation of the world’s opium production (his memo is at Tab A together with our covering memo). In addition, since his memo there has been a flurry of activity and progress toward convening an ad hoc meeting of CCMS, perhaps on June 18, to consider the opium and general drug problem.

A Task Force meeting had been scheduled last week, but was cancelled since Mr. Finch and Dr. Egeberg could not attend. The purpose of this meeting is to take up Mr. Richardson’s proposal and to review our goals at the CCMS meeting. Since you have been unable to attend recent Task Force meetings, it is highly desirable that you chair this meeting. A summary of the last meeting of May 6 is at Tab B.

* * * * *

Talking Points

1. The Richardson Proposal: World Ban on Opium

Mr. Richardson feels that, in order to justify their probable position against a complete ban on opium, the Turks will argue that some opium production is required for medical purposes (morphine). To counter this, he believes that the US should be in a position to press at the CCMS meeting, or at a broader international conference in the fall, for the complete cessation of the world’s opium production, in part on the grounds that natural opium is no longer medically necessary. This approach will probably cause difficulties with the medical community, the drug firms, and the major legal opium producers such as India. Mr. Richardson pointed out in his memo to you that he had been in touch with Mr. Finch to solicit his advice on how best to surmount these obstacles. (Note: Dissatisfaction with the less than energetic action by HEW seems to have been one of the reasons Mr. Richardson has pressed for this meeting; presumably his new appointment will put the matter into a different context.)

--You may wish to ask Mr. Richardson to begin discussion by reviewing his proposal for a world ban on natural opium production, and the prospects for our ability to make such a proposal at the CCMS meeting later this month.

--Seek Dr. Egeberg’s views and comments on the best method to deal with the probable obstacles.

--Ask Mr. Richardson how he suggests this proposal could effectively be presented to the very large legal producing countries such as India, particularly where there is little evidence of divergence of that opium production into the illicit channels.

2. CCMS Meeting

The convening of an ad hoc CCMS meeting (probably on June 18) is designed to give the Turks an acceptable international forum in which to make more palatable a dramatic cut or even elimination of Turkish opium production. To avoid the impression that CCMS is being used as a cover for further US pressure on the Turks, the scope of the agenda will be broadened to include the entire drug problem (synthetics, education, rehabilitation), and the call for the meeting will be made by Brosio at the request of the Germans and perhaps also the Dutch and Belgians. Dr. Moynihan will represent the US at the meeting.

--You should try to reach a consensus at the meeting on how far we can reasonably expect the Turks to be able to go at the CCMS meeting in announcing the curtailment or elimination of opium production. (Note: Dr. Moynihan may take the position that the Turks must agree to announce that there will be no planting this June, although he may fall back to a position of no planting this fall. Mr. Richardson, on the other hand, may take the more realistic position that the Turks could agree only to cut back the fall planting to one or two provinces coupled with much stricter controls, and that there will be no planting in 1971.)

--You may wish to ask [name not declassified] Mr. Kleindienst about our ability to ensure that stricter Turkish controls on the crop collection are effective, and that opium is not diverted to illicit channels. (Note: Justice (BNDD) has dispatched a half-dozen agents to Turkey to assist local enforcement officials and to monitor the harvest.)

--Ask the current state of planning for a general international conference in the fall which will be called for in the CCMS meeting; this is designed to facilitate an eventual world ban on opium and also to permit the Turks to announce the total elimination of opium production.

A list of the expected participants at the Task Force meeting is at Tab C.

1 Source: Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Sent for information. Tab A is Document 170. The covering memorandum of May 21 from Sonnenfeldt to Kissinger was attached but not published. Tab B was not attached. Tab C was attached but not published.

172. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 172. Memorandum From Arthur T. Downey of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Task Force

Attached at Tab A is a summary record of the June 9 Heroin Task Force meeting which was chaired, in your absence, by Dr. Moynihan. A copy is being furnished to Dr. Moynihan, at his request and with General Haig’s concurrence.

The meeting surfaced an apparent strong feeling on the part of Dr. Moynihan, Deputy Attorney General Kleindienst and Assistant Secretary Rossides that more direct bilateral pressure should be applied to the Turks. Mr. Richardson forcefully reviewed the extreme importance of maintaining Turkey as an ally, and made the point repeatedly that further US pressure on the Turks could topple the Demirel Government. Mr. Richardson also defended the performance of Ambassador Handley. Following the meeting, General Haig and I discussed the situation of the Task Force and its Working Party (chaired by Harry Schwartz), particularly in the light of Mr. Richardson’s new appointment.

Tab A

WHITE HOUSE TASK FORCE ON HEROIN
Meeting of June 9, 1970, at 3 pm

The White House Task Force on Heroin met for 75 minutes in the Roosevelt Room. The meeting was chaired, in Dr. Kissinger’s absence, by Dr. Moynihan; a list of participants is attached.

* * * * *

Summary Conclusions

1. The State Department will cable Embassy Ankara and request an assessment of how the Turks are complying with their commitment to buy up the entire current poppy harvest. In addition, Ambassador Handley will be instructed to consult with Prime Minister Demirel to reach agreement on the scope and nature of the expected Turkish announcement at the CCMS meeting.

2. NATO countries should be advised of our strong interest in assuring that the CCMS meeting on June 18 is productive, and that all contribute. No mention will be made of the US-Turkish arrangements to those countries not already informed.

3. As Chairman of the Task Forces Working Party, Mr. Schwartz will prepare a list of areas in which we might apply pressure on the Turks; this should include things we could do to the Turks, for the Turks, and things we could withdraw from them.

* * * * *

Summary Record

At the Chairman’s request, Mr. Richardson reviewed and brought up to date the points in his memo of May 19. He concluded that the decision was made to open a multilateral channel because that would enable the Turks to move faster toward elimination of opium production than in response to direct bilateral US pressure. The CCMS meeting is a vehicle to create a forum for the Turks to announce further measures as well as to move toward a wider international conference on the entire drug problem. Mr. Kleindienst asked if this was considered the best approach solely because of the political problems within Turkey. In response, Mr. Richardson said this was the result of the very limited bilateral US pressure which could be used as leverage with the Turks; to press harder would be counterproductive. Also, the move to the multilateral would enable other countries to bring pressure on the Turks, and would enable the Turks to be in the company of others in taking its own steps.

After a brief discussion of the arrangements for the CCMS meeting, the Chairman raised the question of the proposed world ban on opium, as outlined in Mr. Richardson’s memorandum. Mr. Finch commented that at this time there is really no effective substitute for opium, and that there would be a host of domestic problems relating to such a position (including the various state laws on the subject). Dr. Egeberg expanded on these comments, noting that his preliminary soundings in the medical community revealed very stiff opposition to any such suggestion. Opium is used in twenty different medical preparations by 2-4 million people per year, and there is no effective substitute for its pain-killing and euphoric qualities. The Chairman suggested that, while it would be useful to raise the question generally in the CCMS meeting, it probably would not be productive to take further soundings within the US at this time. In discussion later in the meeting, Mr. Finch and Dr. Egeberg agreed, and Mr. Finch said that HEW would provide medical advice to Dr. Moynihan for the CCMS meeting.

Mr. Kleindienst emphasized that forceful action was needed with respect to the Turks and other countries; that at the moment these countries considered it in their interest not to eliminate production. Mr. Rossides picked up this theme, noting the corruption in opium traffic in Turkey. He referred to Secretary Kennedy’s view that next year the AID program for Turkey should be held up if there was not satisfactory improvement in the situation. Following the Chairman’s expression of concern that the Turks might not in fact be collecting the entire poppy harvest, Mr. Rossides suggested that the Defense Department consider working closer with the Turkish military on the opium problem. Mr. Richardson thought this suggestion was worth pursuing.

The Chairman referred to a recent conversation he had with the President on the status of the heroin elimination efforts, and also noted that he was unhappy with the apparent lack of vigor with which Ambassador Handley was pursuing this matter. Mr. Kleindienst said we needed a very active Ambassador in Ankara. Mr. Richardson said he was satisfied with the Ambassador’s performance, and that the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister both emphasized to him that the Ambassador had been persistent on the opium question. Further, the Demirel Government would fall if it appeared that he responded to direct US pressure on this. Mr. Kleindienst asked if that assessment assumed that, if Demirel falls, the next government would not be as friendly toward the US. Mr. Richardson said that was correct, unless the generals take over.

The Chairman asked Mr. Richardson to describe the commitment the Turks have made to us. Mr. Richardson said it was not very clear: at a minimum they will reduce the number of provinces for 1972 to one; at a maximum, elimination in 1971; and the middle ground would be reduction in 1971 to one province. They have been evasive, but they promised some action at the CCMS meeting. (There was a brief discussion of the degree of interest held by the other NATO countries, and of the possibility of suggesting a survey of the narcotic problem in the NATO armed forces.)

Mr. Kleindienst opined that the CCMS would not accomplish anything, that the meeting would merely deplore the problem and agree to meet again. Mr. Richardson reviewed the strategic importance to the US of a strong Turkish ally, and the delicate political balance within Turkey. Rhetorically, he asked whether Mr. Kleindienst had any alternative suggestions as to how better to accomplish the task of eliminating the opium problem.

The Chairman concluded the meeting by summarizing the conclusions noted above.

PARTICIPANTS AT THE HEROIN TASK FORCE MEETING, JUNE 9

White House Dr. Moynihan

Mr. Blaney

Mr. Ehrlichman

Mr. Krogh

General Haig

Mr. Downey

State Mr. Richardson

Mr. Schwartz

Justice Mr. Kleindienst

HEW Mr. Finch

Dr. Egeberg

Treasury Mr. Rossides

Mr. Liddy

Defense Admiral Mack

Mr. Bartimo

CIA [name not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential; Sensitive. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Saunders. Kissinger wrote the following note at the bottom of the page: “ What conclusion did you reach or may I not know? HK.”

173. Briefing Memorandum from the Deputy Legal Adviser (Salans) to the Acting Secretary of State (Johnson) 173. Briefing Memorandum from the Deputy Legal Adviser (Salans) to the Acting Secretary of State (Johnson)1

Washington, July 7, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Proposal for a New International Convention on Opium.

Attached is the proposal discussed with you July 6 for a new international convention to deal broadly with the opium problem and to multilateralize pressure on states like Turkey. The existing international instrument, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, negotiated in 1961, relies on voluntary cooperation of states. The proposed new convention would (a) fix quotas for legal export that would be tied to world need and a country’s success in controlling illegal diversion; (b) establish an opium control organization with significant power to gather information, fix quotas, and. impose penalties; (c) establish a Diversification Fund capable of providing significant assistance to opium producing states desirous of limiting and eventually eradicating production.

In order to deal with another phase of the drug problem and to make strict controls more palatable for producing states, the proposal suggests the U.S. and other manufacturing states express a willingness to accept parallel regulations of manufacture and export of opium based and synthetic drugs and to explore the feasibility of similar regulation of the manufacture and export of all drugs.

We believe that consideration of this proposal now is propitious. The climate is more receptive than in 1961 for acceptance of meaningful international controls. A reluctant country like Turkey may be encouraged to put its affairs in order by the prospect of such a convention even before it is adopted. It is a natural “fall back” position to Under Secretary Richardson’s recent suggestion that the White House Task Force on Narcotics consider whether the U.S. could adopt a stance in international forums that there should be worldwide elimination of opium production. If it is determined that a position of worldwide elimination is not feasible, because of the medical professions continued need for opium derivatives for medicinal purposes, then the next logical step is restricted, carefully controlled production. A quota proposal could serve as a realistic, constructive U.S. position in the next international meeting on narcotics.

IO endorses the idea contained in the attached proposal, agrees with the recommendation that it be discussed at your meeting with Dr. Moynihan July 8, and considers that the proposal requires a number of refinements.

Recommendation: That you introduce this proposal for discussion at your meeting with Dr. Moynihan July 8.

Attachment

A Proposal for a New International Convention to Deal with the Opium Problem

The Problem

Opium presents a grave menace to the health of the U.S. and other societies, but its production and export cannot be banned as long as it remains indispensable for legitimate medical purposes. Once some legal use for opium is conceded, it becomes difficult to determine what opium is intended for legal and what for illegal purposes. Likewise, it becomes difficult to convince one country which produces significant quantities of opium upon which a portion of its economy depends that it would not be discriminatory for it to forego production totally. Turkey is the estimated source of 80% of the heroin illicitly entering the U.S., but the illegal opium trade is so profitable that criminal elements would surely establish new supply lines elsewhere in the event that Turkey establishes better controls or eliminates production. The problem is multi-lateral rather than bi-lateral and should be dealt with in the broadest possible international context. The existing international agreement, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, drafted in 1961, lacks effective sanctions and is inadequate. What is needed is an international instrument that would 1) recommit nations to the limitation of opium production and export solely for medical and scientific requirements; 2) provide for a precise determination of such requirements and actual production; 3) contain some sticks (including world opinion, embargo, inspection, and loss of diversification assistance) and carrots (including quotas of the legal market and substantial diversification assistance) so that nations will feel a need to make greater efforts to eradicate excess production and diversion into the illicit market. The threat that this instrument might be adopted should encourage countries to enforce immediately their compliance with existing obligations.

The Single Convention of 1961

The Single Convention was drafted at a United Nations conference and makes use of the UN’s Economic and Social Council, ECOSOC’s Commission on Narcotic Drugs, and an International Narcotics Control Board. These international control organs possess, however, essentially only recommendatory powers. The Single Convention relies primarily on the character of cooperation received from individual states that remain largely free to make their own decisions. There is loose international supervision with dependence upon information supplied by states and virtually no effort to develop an international policy that would correlate a party’s success in controlling illegal drug use with its right of access to the legal drug trade. There is also no effort in the Single Convention to en-courage the development of situations in which parties will no longer require drugs and in which producing countries will be able to afford a decline in the market.

Objections to Stronger Control

The 1953 Protocol for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant actually had a number of stronger provisions than the Single Convention which largely superseded it. Objections to strong controls expressed during negotiation of the Single Convention particularly by the Soviet Bloc and by newly independent countries included 1) dislike of open inspection; and 2) dislike of the principle of restricting legal production to a handful of long-established states and embargoing all other states. Producing countries have shown a tendency to oppose strong controls that fall only upon them. The atmosphere in 1970 may be more conducive to acceptance of strong measures. The magnitude of the problem is more apparent. Younger countries are more mature and perhaps more aware that there is no economic bonanza for them in opium. Various degrees of inspection have been accepted by the Soviet Union in other sensitive agreements (Outer Space, Antarctica, and Draft Seabees Disarmament Treaties).

We can take additional steps to reduce opposition. The sensitivities of younger countries could be assuaged by a system that would give them at least the theoretical right to negotiate a legal production quota. They should thus be more willing to accept the principle of sanctions against a country producing opium that is exported without a quota. We can also develop a series of information gathering devices as fall backs between on-site inspection and the inadequate provisions of the Single Convention, including possible use of satellites or provisions for mandatory response to a range of informational requests. We can consider pacing ourselves and other countries that manufacture drugs from opium bases or produce synthetic substitutes under an international supervision and control that parallels the supervision and control we propose for producing countries. This could be in itself a significant contribution to the drug problem, and it would at least signal to producing countries that we are serious and willing to submit to burdens ourselves. The latter point would be politically useful in getting the agreement of a number of sensitive producing countries.

Framework of a Stronger Opium Control

The Framework of a stronger opium control would include 1) an organization composed of all interested nations and entrusted with substantial powers; 2) a quota system for legal export of opium tied to a country’s success in preventing illegal diversion; 3) a system by which the controlling body would be able to obtain and verify full information relating to opium; 4) binding commitments by parties to take whatever action is necessary and supervision of these commitments by the organization; 5) a Diversification Fund to help parties limit and eventually eradicate opium production. An attempt could also be made to include in the Convention controls on manufacture and export of opium-based drugs and synthetics and quotas and controls for production of opium intended only for domestic use. Many of the specific mechanisms are based on those already in operation in the International Coffee Agreement of 1968.

The new organization would have a governing body composed of interested nations including producers of opium as well as those with legal use interests and illegal consumption problems. This body should have extensive powers to regulate the international flow of opium, and it should have full access to necessary statistical data, including obligatory receipt of all certification information relating to every international transfer of opium. It should have specific authority to require Members to furnish such information as it considers necessary for its operations and to question a member not supplying requested information within a reasonable time. In addition to material which the parties supply it, the opium body should also have investigatory powers such as those granted the International Coffee Council in Article 43(3) of the Coffee Agreement, which provides that: “The Council shall, either directly or through an internationally recognized worldwide organization, take all necessary steps so that at any time it will be able to satisfy itself that Certificates or Origin and Certificates of Re-export are being issued and used correctly and to ascertain the quantities of coffee which have been, exported by each Member.”

The powers granted the opium body would reflect the need to ascertain the quantities of opium exported in any manner from each Member including quantities smuggled without the Member’s knowledge.

With access to detailed and reliable information on need for opium, production capabilities, and export-import patterns, the body could fix specific quotas for the legal movement of opium. Basic quotas might be negotiated for each country and distributed voting on annual quota revisions and other matters geared to reflect the different interests of importers and exporters as well as compliance with the basic obligation to fulfill commitments and to act against illegal traffic.

Members of the body could undertake firm commitments add give to the body the powers included in Article 38 of the Coffee Agreement: “1) Exporting Members subject to quotas shall adopt the measures required to ensure full compliance with all provisions of the Agreement relating to quotas. In addition to any measures it may itself take, the Council by a distributed two-thirds majority vote may require such Members to adopt additional measures for the effective implementation of the quota system provided for in the Agreement.

“2) Exporting Members shall not exceed the annual and quarterly export quotas allocated to them.”

In addition, Article 38 provides that the Council may impose a graduated series of punishments including expulsion upon members violating their quotas. The opium body would consider effective action to prevent smuggling as a function of a states compliance with its quota.

A producing country would naturally seek to obtain as large a share of the legal trade as possible. The body would correlate quotas with the success of countries in reducing production to the bare minimum required for legal uses. Improved documentation would allow that bare minimum to be more precisely fixed, and access to information would provide an objective basis on which to make quota decisions. A country producing obviously more opium than it consumed and for which it had a quota would find its quota reduced accordingly. It would thus have considerable reason to take steps to reduce domestic production, and it would find it easier to take such steps since the impetus would be provided by international action rather than unilateral foreign pressure.

This trend would be enhanced if states could accept provisions similar to Article 48 of the Coffee Agreement by which “Each producing Member undertakes to adjust its production of coffee to a level not exceeding that needed for domestic consumption, permitted exports and stocks…”

That Article also provides that Members must obtain the approval of the Council for production goals, that the Council will have the power to review those production goals “and shall revise them to the extent necessary to ensure that the aggregate of the individual goals is consistent with estimated world requirements.” Members “undertake to conform with the individual production goals established…” and to “apply whatever policies and procedures [they] deem(s) necessary for this purpose.” The Council, moreover, is empowered to pass on the adequacy of these policies and procedures and if it finds insufficient compliance may suspend a members voting rights, and “If, ... after the elapse of such additional period as the Council shall determine it is established that the Member concerned has not taken the steps necessary to implement a policy to conform with the objectives of this Article, the Council may require the withdrawal of such Member from the Organization....”

Certain other devices in the Coffee Agreement also have applications for opium. Article 46 has as its goal sponsorship by the Council of “the promotion of coffee consumption,” an end which obviously would not be paralleled in an opium agreement. An opium agreement might well, however, contain a commitment by the controlling body to sponsor research on and development of opium substitutes, and to disseminate information on the harmful effects of drugs. Article 54 establishes “the Diversification Fund of the International Coffee Organization to further the objectives of limiting the production of coffee in order to bring supply into reasonable balance with world demand.” A similar fund should be developed within the context of an opium agreement that would help producing countries over the difficulties of agricultural conversion. Participation in the Diversification Fund is compulsory for major coffee exporters and discretionary for importers and minor exporters, but different participation guidelines obviously could be structured to the opium situation. The psychological factor of the Funds multilateral involvement and the concrete economic and technical aid it could offer would be major inducements to producing countries to control their crops strictly and eventually to eliminate them. The Fund would also offer the U.S. an excellent forum in which to press for as rapid a cutback of production as feasible.

Possible Additional Elements and Negotiating Points

As a first and optimum proposal in negotiating this instrument, we could seek the right, patterned on that described in the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency, of on-site inspection within any contracting party by an international team representing the organization. The inspecting team might be empowered to destroy clearly illicit stocks, to issue immediate recommendations to the party, or merely to report to the organization. We might also explore the feasibility of observation by satellite or airplanes. The mandatory informational provisions described in the previous section would represent a feasible compromise between this and the system in effect under the Single Convention.

Producing countries would be interested in stringent controls on manufacturing countries. We might begin by offering the organization a parallel right of on-site inspection within manufacturing countries, and we could also indicate a willingness to negotiate a quota system for export of manufactured and synthetic drugs paralleling the quota system for export of opium.

Ideally international control would extend substantially to opium intended only for domestic use, but this might be considered too great an incursion on sovereignty by many countries. Supervision of production goals like that provided in the Coffee Agreement would offer, however, significant control of domestic consumption and combined with the organizations power to reduce quotas of non-complying parties and to manage the Diversification Fund would offer guarantees against the possibility that a party would not act effectively to prevent diversion of opium produced ostensibly for domestic use. We should encourage producers to submit to more explicit controls over all production by agreeing to accept reciprocally equal regulation of all phases of manufacture and distribution of opium based drugs and synthetics a well as regulation of their export, and we should indicate a further willingness to explore the feasibility of extending the regulatory system to the manufacture and export of all types of drugs.

This framework would provide the international community with more significant tools than it has ever possessed to fight the opium problem. Equally important, it would work on the will of countries to comply with their commitments. A country that refused to join would be branded an outcast, its production would offer an unequivocal target for international police work, and it would lose a legal source of income and the opportunity to receive assistance from the Diversification Fund. The same factors would apply proportionately to contracting parties whose performance or effort was deficient. Finally, although it would take some time to establish this framework by treaty, the fact that it was under active consideration and might soon be adopted should spur countries to improve their opium control procedures.

Method of Strengthening Opium Control

The framework described above is sufficiently novel that it is properly the subject of a new Convention that would, at least for opium, supplement the Single Convention between contracting parties. It should be developed within the U.N. system, however, for maximum effectiveness and acceptability. The initial proposal and preliminary discussions would logically be in ECOSOC and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. ECOSOC could then call an international conference as it is empowered to do by Article 62(4) of the U.N. Charter “on matters falling within its competence.” Procedural considerations, including advance consultations with a range of probable problem countries (e.g. the Soviet Union, Turkey, India) should receive careful study and planning in an effort to minimize potential opposition and hopefully to obtain broad co-sponsorship for a new convention.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. No classification marking. Drafted by G. Jonathon Greenwald (L/NEA) and cleared by Schwartz and Rodger P. Davies.

174. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 174. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Turkey and Narcotics

A telegram was sent to Ankara last night instructing Ambassador Handley to return to Washington at the request of the President for consultations, and stating that the President places the highest priority on the drug problem notwithstanding the defense and political components. The cable (Tab A) was approved by Acting Secretary Johnson and was cleared for the White House by Dr. Moynihan. Assuming your office was not consulted, the NSC staff was not informed of it and saw it only after dispatch. We understand that Dr. Moynihan discussed this matter with the President and presented the Presidents views at a meeting on July 8 with Alex Johnson.

This circumstance underscores difficulties facing the bureaucracy on the issue of priorities of interests and tactics with respect to Turkey. This was brought out in the Heroin Task Force meeting of June 9 where there was a difference of opinion on whether and how further bilateral pressure should be applied to Turkey. A more recent example is reflected in the June 29 letter from Acting Secretary Johnson to Secretary Kennedy (Tab B) in which Alex expressed concern that Treasury might refuse to approve the recent Turkish request for PL 480 wheat-on the ground that the Turks have not helped us adequately on the opium issue.

It would seem important at this point to seize upon Ambassador Handley’s return as an opportunity to put the entire issue back into proper channels and to have it resolved. The best method would seem to be to instruct the Working Party of your Task Force to produce papers on the following points: --with respect to Turkey, analysis of the obtainable goals (i.e., elimination of production, or full collection and control), together with alternative methods of achieving these goals taking into account our defense and foreign policy as well as domestic interests;

--with respect to France, an assessment of the degree to which France has cooperated with us, and how to achieve more effective assistance (they have been upset over US press stories charging ineffective French help);

--alternative positions the Administration might adopt with respect to legislative measures such as the Rodino amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act under which the President is authorized to suspend military or economic assistance to any country failing to prevent narcotics from entering the U.S. (Tab C);

--finally, a status report on the efforts to multilateralize the narcotics issue, and to ban natural opium.

The Chairman of the Working Party (Schwartz, State) should be instructed to submit these papers for your review, after which they should be distributed to the members of the Task Force. A Task Force meeting should be scheduled before Ambassador Handley returns to Ankara (around August 1) to reach agreement on these positions. Issues unresolved can be submitted by the Task Force to the President.

This procedure is designed to (a) ensure that the question of priority of interests in Turkey (defense/foreign policy vs. narcotics) is resolved before actions are taken which could inadvertently result in the collapse of the Turkish Government; and (b) to insure that further narcotics activity is channeled through your Task Forces Working Party where all views can be aired in a systematic manner and disputes referred for decision to the Task Force itself.

This issue has come to a point where we are in danger of serious disruption of our relationship with Turkey-including our ability to press for the tightest opium control possible. That is why we are suggesting this means of reasserting your control. We realize that this could put you in conflict with some proponents of narcotics control, but it need not. The issue is really how to pursue that objective in ways that are realistic in the foreign policy context.

Recommendation: That you agree to this course of action and approve oral instructions to the Working Party (a written memo is unnecessary).

Approve _________ Disapprove __________ Other ________

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Confidential. Sent for action. Kissinger approved the recommendation on July 14. Tab A was telegram 108993 to Ankara, July 9 (Ibid., Box 663, Country Files, Middle East, Turkey, Vol. II), Tab B was a letter from Johnson to Kennedy, June 29, scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, Eastern Mediterranean and Eastern Europe, 1969-1972, volume XXIX. Tab C was not attached.

175. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 175. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, July 28, 1970.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT-Evening Report

1. Narcotics Legislation-U.S. Ambassador to Turkey William J. Handley, along with John E. Ingersoll, Director of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (Department of Justice), met with Chairman Farbstein (Subcommittee on Europe, House Foreign Affairs Committee) and Congressman Peter Rodino to discuss Rodino’s bill which would give the President discretionary authority to cut off AID funds to any country failing to take appropriate steps to control the flow of illicit narcotics into the United States.

Ambassador Handley urged that Chairman Farbstein refrain from holding public hearings on this bill on the grounds that the reaction in Turkey would inhibit rather than encourage the Turkish Govermment in enacting pending narcotics control legislation. Rodino made it clear that he considered it his duty to press forward with his bill regardless of the effect it might have on the Turkish domestic political scene. Chairman Farbstein, however, agreed to postpone public hearings on the bill until Ingersoll could report back to him concerning the progress the Turkish Government is making in controlling illicit narcotics traffic subsequent to Ingersoll’s forthcoming visit to Turkey for this purpose. Farbstein concluded the meeting by assuring Ingersoll and Ambassador Handley that unless Ingersoll returned with convincing evidence that the Turkish Government is making progress in this endeavor, he would begin public hearings on the bill.

[Omitted here is a paragraph unrelated to Narcotics]

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret.

176. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 176. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, August 4, 1970.

UN: PROBLEM OF DRUG ABUSE TO BE CONSIDERED AT SPECIAL MEETING IN GENEVA

Due largely to US initiative, a special session of the UN’s Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) will begin in Geneva on September 28, 1970. This session, which was unanimously approved by the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) on July 24, is to consider short- and long-term policy recommendations for international action against drug abuse and to prepare a report to the 25th General Assembly, which meets this fall. In addition to focusing international attention on the drug problem, now reaching epidemic proportions, the CND meeting may also take some of the heat out of US discussions with Turkey over opium production in that country. The Turkish Government has recently been accused by its domestic critics of “selling-out” to US “pressure.”1

US Takes Initiative. Feeling that the alarming increase in drug abuse is becoming a danger to all nations, the US took the initiative in the current ECOSOC session to assure that the problem would be discussed at the 25th General Assembly. A US resolution approved in ECOSOC calls for international action in three principal areas: (a) illicit traffic (establishing effective national and international enforcement machinery); (b) illegal production (stopping narcotic raw materials by all means); and (c) demand (reducing the illicit demand for drugs by means of treatment, rehabilitation, and education programs). Both the Turks and the Indians at first opposed the US proposal.

Indian Objections Pro-forma. India, which is the largest opium-producing country but also has the most stringent controls over illegal channels, appeared to be concerned that the CND meeting would be used as a forum to advocate the complete elimination of opium production. Actually, however, Indian reservations were based on India’s opinion that the industrialized countries have managed to impose strict controls in the poppy-producing countries while refusing to accept equally strong controls on synthetic substances, which could be an even greater menace to the developing world. India agreed to go along after minor changes in the US draft.

Turks are Sensitive. The Turkish observer suggested amendments reflecting the Turkish Governments concern that the CND would focus on illicit opium production in Turkey. The Turks were assured that the term “drug abuse” was not restricted to narcotic drugs, and Turkish objections were satisfied by additions to the resolutions preamble.

During the discussions, however, the Turkish observer made quite clear to US officials his governments “serious concern” over the manner in which the US Government was handling the opium-production problem in Turkey, stating that US was treating the Turkish Government “like a small African country”. Ankara’s sensitivity to US “pressure” stems from Turkish domestic criticism on the opium issue, which followed Prime Minister Demirel’s decree of June 38 announcing that areas in which poppies may legally be cultivated will be reduced from nine to seven provinces in 1971 and to four provinces by the 1972 spring harvest. The decree is a set-back to US efforts, which were aiming for a complete ban on opium cultivation by 1971. The subsequent reporting in the Turkish press of speeches and alleged comments by US officials critical of Turkey’s handling of the opium issue has had an adverse impact upon Ankara’s dealing with Washington.

Prospects. The CND discussions may serve to help Turkish Prime Minister Demirel domestically by demonstrating to his critics that illicit opium-production is of serious concern not only to the US but to the world. International consideration of the problem may have some effect also in conveying to many Turks that their country’s role in world affairs will be measured in part by the cooperation Turkey gives to international efforts to curb the opium traffic.

While it is doubtful that the special meeting will produce any dramatic results, it will serve to focus world attention on the seriousness of the problem. For the US the meeting represents a welcome alternative means of action because of the disappointing results of the bilateral discussions with Turkey, which is the source of an estimated 80 per cent of the heroin entering the US annually(Mexico accounts for 15 per cent). The meeting may also give the US an opportunity to announce its proposal that the UN undertake pilot project on narcotics control, for which the US would make a special financial contribution.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-1973, SOC 11-5 ECOSOC. Confidential. Drafted by John J. Donovan (INR/SGR).

1 * See RNAN-21 “Turkey: Opium Poppies-Reaping and Weeping Ahead,” July 17, 1970

177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, August 6, 1970.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT-Evening Report

[Paragraph unrelated to Global Issues has been omitted]

2. Narcotics, Embargo and the Trade Bill-U.S. Ambassador to Turkey Bill Handley and other Department officers called this afternoon on Congressman Vanik to discuss some of the problems created by the amendment he has proposed to the Trade Bill which would give the President authority to impose an embargo on trade with any country which permits uncontrolled or unregulated production or trafficking in poppy-derived drugs, so as to permit these drugs to get into the U.S. through illicit channels. We stressed that our objective is the same as Vanik’s to curb illicit drug production in Turkey and elsewhere, but that we are concerned that the legislation of sanctions and particularly publicity about it will have a negative rather than a positive effect on the actions of other countries, particularly Turkey.

Vanik pointed out that the amendment had already been introduced, but said he would be glad to make minor alterations if we wanted to suggest any. He also offered to incorporate helpful language in the report. He indicated that there would be no further Committee discussion in open session, that the markup would be completed by Monday, and the report issued Wednesday so as to reach the floor soon after the recess. As it would come up under a closed rule, there would be no floor debate on details. He felt that if no such provision were included in the House bill, it would be added in the Senate with more public discussion. Vanik saw no possibility of eliminating some such provision and suggested that the present situation might be the least damaging that we could expect.

[Paragraph Unrelated to Global Issues omitted here]

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret. Eliot signed for Rogers.

178. Memorandum of Conversation 178. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 17, 1970.

Participants:

The President

William Handley, U.S. Ambassador to Turkey

Emil Mosbacher, U.S. Chief of Protocol

Harold H. Saunders, NSC Staff

Date and Place: 1:15 p.m. August 17, 1970 in the President’s Oval Office

After general conversation during a photo session, Ambassador Handley opened the substantive part of the meeting by explaining to the President the recent restrictions which the Government of Turkey has decreed to decrease the number of provinces in which the opium poppy is grown. He showed the President a page-size map indicating the provinces in which it is still legal to grow opium and those in which growing has recently been prohibited. He then explained that the next step is for the Turkish Government to pass a licensing bill which would provide stricter measures for enforcing the limitations on growing.

The President responded by saying that it is very important that we cut off as many sources of these drugs as we possibly can. The drug problem has become a serious one not only in our cities but in our suburbs.

The President then asked how our relations are generally with Turkey.

Ambassador Handley replied that they are fundamentally sound. The Turkish Government still bases its policy on the NATO alliance. It is devoting more of its GNP to NATO goals than any other of our NATO partners. When the U.S. was recently forced to withdraw from Wheelus Base in Libya, the Turks quietly permitted us to expand our range facilities at Incirlik Airbase. There has recently been a back lash against the Turkish left following its challenge to the army in recent public disorders. The President indicated his understanding that the army occupies a special place in recent Turkish history as a defender of the republic. Ambassador Handley said that anti-Americanism by itself is not a major problem but that the leftists use that issue for their own purposes in attacking the Turkish establishment.

The President asked who makes up the left in Turkey. Ambassador Handley replied that since there is no legal Communist party, the formal left is the Turkish Labor Party with a base among the young and among the Marxist element in the Turkish labor movement.

Ambassador Handley volunteered that we had recently “run into something of a buzz saw” in relation to the opium question and Turkish public opinion. A number of those who wish to attack the Turkish establishment have tried to capitalize on the charge that the Demirel Government is bowing to American pressure in reducing opium growing.

The President reiterated that it is very important for us to close off as many sources of narcotics as possible but said that we do not want to embarrass the Demirel Government. He repeated: “You tell them that we won’t embarrass them publicly. But privately you should say that this issue is terribly important to us.” The President concluded by saying, “That is the line.”

Ambassador Handley noted that he had briefed several Congressional groups during his present consultation. He explained the pressures that are building up in the form of amendments to trade and aid legislation which would throw the whole issue back into the President’s lap to decide whether Turkey, for instance, is taking adequate measures to control opium growing. The Ambassador said he felt that, at this point, Turkey could be judged to be taking serious steps. He explained some of the details of the licensing bill that the Government will attempt to have passed at the next parliamentary session-how it provides for Government collectors of the crop to pay cash, provides per diem for them, and so on.

The President indicated his understanding of this improved collection effort, noting the importance of quiet cooperation. He likened the Congressional pressures to those against military assistance to Greece. There were those here-as well as the Danes and others-who felt we should not aid Greece. But with the situation what it is in the eastern Mediterranean, one looks at the Danish forces and at Greece’s 10 divisions and the choice is pretty clear. One looks at the Turkish forces and dedication to NATO and it is plain that we cannot jeopardize our fundamental relationship.

Harold H. Saunders

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. Drafted by Saunders.

179. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 179. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, August 18, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Heroin Task Force Meeting-Conflicting Interpretations

In order to ensure that all agencies and members of the Task Force are working from the same base, it may be desirable to distribute a summary of the conclusions reached at yesterday’s meeting. Such a summary at Tab A can be distributed to the members by the Secretariat in the same way as WSAG conclusions are distributed.

One serious difference of interpretation has already surfaced. An Inter-agency group is scheduled to meet on August 20 to consider the long-stalled PL-480 wheat program for Turkey, Treasury had held up the program because it wanted it either cut or in some other way, tied to the opium question. On July 30, Secretary Kennedy informed Under Secretary Johnson (Tab B) that, in view of the urgency of the wheat program, he would be prepared to concur in the release of the first 500,000 ton tranche (against their estimated need for 1,700,000) on the understanding that the Turks would be informed now that approval of further shipments would be conditional upon their employing a substantial portion of the lire-generated funds in an accelerated and more broadly based poppy crop substitution program.

Assistant Secretary Rossides raised the question of the PL 480 program near the end of the Task Force meeting. The response to his point was not perfectly clear. But, from the comments of the Attorney General, Under Secretary Johnson and yourself, there seemed to be a consensus that until the Handley/Ingersoll assessment was received, the AID program should not be directly linked with the opium issue. You clearly left open the possibility of employing AID funds in some fashion, if in fact the conclusions of the assessment so warranted. The summary conclusions at Tab B (item 5) reflect this view.

On the other hand, Assistant Secretary Rossides considers that the conclusion of the meeting was that Treasury’s objection (as contained in Secretary Kennedy’s letter) still stood, and that no inconsistent action with respect to the PL 480 program should be taken until further decision based on the assessment. In short, State/AID feel that the meeting resulted in agreement to proceed as usual with the PL 480 program, and Treasury thinks the meeting agreed to its reservation to the PL 480 program. The circle must now be squared, hopefully in time for the inter-agency AID meeting on August 20.

One method of settling this would be to distribute the summary reflecting the meeting’s consensus and at the same time call Rossides to advise him that if Secretary Kennedy feels strongly that the PL 480 program must contain his reservation tying it to opium, he should feel free to send a memo making his case. If Secretary Kennedy does decide to send a memo, compromise could be to permit the 500,000 ton tranche, but at the same time inform the Turks that we are considering conditioning further trenches on their use of the proceeds for opium control if such steps seem warranted.

Recommendations: That you approve the summary of the conclusions at Tab A.

Approve ______ Disapprove ___________

2. That you approve the distribution of the conclusions at Tab A (or as altered) and that you call Assistant Secretary Rossides.

Approve _________ Disapprove __________

Tab A

August 18, 1970

WHITE HOUSE TASK FORCE ON HEROIN
Meeting of August 17, 1970, at 3:15 p. m.

The White House Task Force on Heroin met for 60 minutes in the Roosevelt Room.

Summary Conclusions

1. Elimination of Turkish production of opium as soon as possible remains a goal; it is to be pursued in the context of our efforts to achieve a world-wide ban on the production of natural opium.

2. Our central goal is to achieve air-tight control of the 1971 crop and to ensure that the Government of Turkey has the political will as well as the organization, personnel and equipment to meet this goal.

3. Ambassador Handley should continue to apply pressure to the Turkish Government, making clear the seriousness of our interests.

4. BNDD Director Ingersoll will visit Turkey to take a survey and assess exactly what is needed by Turkey with respect to organization, men and equipment to eliminate diversion to illicit channels.

5. A back-stopping mechanism will be established in Washington to be responsible for recommending to the Task Force a plan to achieve the goal in paragraph 2 on the basis of the results of the assessment of Ambassador Handley and Director Ingersoll.

6. At least, until the plan is received, economic assistance programs (PL 480) shall not be linked with the opium control issue.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Confidential. Sent for action. The memorandum was unsigned. There is no indication that Kissinger approved or disapproved the recommendations. Tab B was attached but not published.

180. Action Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (DePalma) and the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 180. Action Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (DePalma) and the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, September 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Proposals for Amending the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs-ACTION MEMORANDUM

In your July 8 meeting on heroin imports with Dr. Moynihan, it was decided: “The Department of State will prepare drafts of a new convention on (i) international control of opium production

(ii) making participation in the heroin traffic an international crime with a view to submitting them for discussion and study at [next month’s special session of the U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)] either for strengthening the Single Convention of 1961 or for a separate instrument.” (emphasis added).3

Pursuant to this decision, a major new instrument which would establish a new International Opium Agency has been prepared in consultation with the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. With BNDD’s concurrence however, this memorandum concludes that it would be more practical to work through existing international bodies for more effective international controls by proposing amendments to the 1961 Single Convention rather than to propose a new instrument and establish a new Agency. We are recommending specific steps to implement this conclusion starting at this month’s special session of the CND.

Background

The 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs makes use of the UN’s Economic and Social Council, the CND and an International Narcotics Control Board. These bodies now possess essentially recommendatory powers, and the Single Convention depends on the voluntary cooperation of individual states for its implementation. There is some international supervision based upon information submitted by states but virtually no effort to develop an international policy that would correlate a country’s success in controlling illegal drug use with its right of access to the legal drug trade. There is no authority under the Single Convention to encourage parties to reduce and eventually eliminate the production of opium, nor has the Single Convention been effective in controlling or eliminating the illicit production, processing and distribution of opium.

The 1953 Protocol for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant actually had a number of stronger provisions than the Single Convention which supersedes it between parties to the latter Convention. During negotiation of the Single Convention, objections to strong controls were expressed, particularly by the Eastern Europeans and by newly independent countries, including dislike of open inspection and of the principle of restricting to seven named long-established producing states the legal production of opium for export and prohibiting such production by all other states. Countries producing opium for export have shown a tendency to oppose strong controls that fall only upon them.

In the last few years, the rapid spread of hard narcotics addiction may have created an atmosphere more conducive to acceptance of stronger measures. The problem is made more acute and apparent by greatly increased international travel. Younger countries are perhaps more aware that there is no economic bonanza for them in opium production and that drugs pose a threat to their people.

New Control Measures

Our new proposals are based on the beliefs that an essentially voluntary system is no longer adequate and that what is needed is a system of enforceable international controls on the cultivation of the opium poppy and the production, manufacture, and export of opium substances -both those derived from the opium poppy and similar substances produced synthetically-in order to limit these activities to what is necessary for legitimate medical and scientific requirements.

To achieve these purposes, fundamentally new authority could be assigned to a new organization or, as we believe would be more feasible, to the CND to (a) collect necessary information from member countries, (b) set annual quotas for legal cultivation, production, manufacture and expert of opium substances, such quotas to be based on world need and a members success in preventing illegal diversion, (c) direct a body of international inspectors with authority to investigate conditions in a state party to the Single Convention under certain circumstances, (d) adopt remedial measures if a state party seriously exceeds an approved quota, and (e) administer a fund to provide significant assistance to parties desiring to limit and eventually eliminate opium production, to improve domestic control systems or for other related activities such as public education and rehabilitation of addicts.

We propose also that participation in the international traffic of opium substances contrary to the provisions of the international quota system would constitute an international crime like piracy and genocide. No major new U.S. criminal legislation would be required as our present domestic licensing system provides criminal penalties for violations.

Amendment Procedure vs. New Convention

In order to justify a proposal for a new convention to establish a new Agency, we would have to demonstrate not only that the 1961 Single Convention is defective, but also that it cannot be strengthened by amendment. After examining this question with BNDD, we have concluded that we cannot now argue convincingly that the present system is incapable of improvement by amending the Single Convention. We also believe that other interested countries, as well as Congress, would be more receptive to proposals to improve the present machinery and thus avoid creating a new international organization.

An important question is whether we want to encourage the participation of Communist China, East Germany, and other divided states in any new international controls. Communist China is an important nation in the international opium market in terms of potential, if not present, production and export. If we decide that the participation of divided states is desirable, there might be an advantage to proposing a new organization distinct from the U.N. system. On the other hand, participation of the Communist parts of divided states is legally possible under the 1961 Single Convention through an ECOSOC invitation.4

Presentation of U.S. Proposals at CND’s Special Session

We recognize that achieving international agreement on a new regulatory system would probably take several years whether in the form of a new convention or as amendments to the 1961 Convention which itself required ten years to negotiate. We would expect, however, certain benefits to flow immediately from surfacing the substance of some new proposals during this month’s special session: --It would make clear that we consider the matter to be a serious multilateral problem and that we are not singling out Turkey or any other country for undue attention. This is essential to help Turkey’s Government resist charges of bilateral U.S. pressure while pursuing its efforts to reduce poppy cultivation and exercise more effective controls over opium produced in Turkey.

--It would demonstrate our seriousness and good faith by having the proposed new control measures apply to synthetic opium-type drugs as well as to opium and opium derivatives. Any new proposal would be significantly less attractive to and probably rejected by countries producing opium and opium derivatives if it were not also applicable to opium-type synthetics.

--It should stimulate greater energy and imagination on the part of the International Narcotics Control Board in operating under its existing authority.

--It would stimulate others to think about alternatives for improving the inadequate system which now exists.

The United States Delegation, alone or with a representative group of co-sponsors, could formally introduce the texts of proposed amendments to the Single Convention at this month’s special session of the CND. Formal introduction would be the most dramatic and attention-getting procedure and would make clear that we are determined to press for more effective international control. On the other hand, formal introduction of the amendments to a session limited to five working days might focus the opposition of those who, at this stage, are not prepared to accept drastic changes in the present system and would almost certainly detract from attempts to discuss other short and long term policy recommendations for integrated international action. In addition, there would be some advantages to introducing our ideas in more general form so as to encourage others to participate in the formulation of specific texts.

Instead of tabling a formal proposal, therefore, we recommend that the U.S. Delegation in its opening statement should identify the weaknesses of the existing system, state our opinion that the 1961 Single Convention should be amended to correct these deficiencies and that the U.S. expects to submit specific proposed amendments at an early date to the Secretary-General in accordance with Article 47 of the Single Convention. Also, during the special session, we believe the U.S. Delegation should introduce a working paper which would discuss in more detail the defects of the existing system, the nature of new regulatory authority which could be given either to existing bodies such as the CND or possibly to a new agency and procedural steps for bringing such amendments into force. In addition, the Delegation would have available the texts of specific amendments to the 1961 Convention embodying our ideas for informal circulation.

To proceed as quickly as possible to obtain serious international consideration of our suggestions, the U.S. would formally submit the texts of its proposed amendments to the Secretary-General shortly after the conclusion of the special session of the CND. The Secretary-General would communicate them to the other parties and to ECOSOC, which has supervisory authority over the Single Convention. After making approaches in key capitals to assure ourselves of adequate support, we would then urge ECOSOC at its November session to call for a plenipotentiary conference to consider the proposed amendments as early as Spring 1971. L believes this timetable is feasible if we are serious about encouraging other countries to give prompt consideration to our proposals or suggest alternatives on an urgent basis. IO does not believe enough ECOSOC members can be persuaded to call a conference at such an early date. Accordingly, IO prefers to leave open the question of next steps until after the CND meeting at which time we will be able to plan on the basis of the initial reactions of other CND delegations.

Recommendation

That you authorize the U.S. Delegation to the 1970 Special Session of the U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs to: (1) table a working paper describing generally our ideas for establishing new enforceable international control of cultivation of the opium poppy and the production, manufacture and export of opium substances (as set forth at pages 3 and 4, above); (2) to have available the text of specific amendments to the 1961 Single Convention for informal distribution to other delegations and (3) to indicate that we will shortly propose amendments formally and that we will seek to obtain a call from ECOSOC for a conference to consider those amendments as quickly as possible.

APPROVE _______

DISAPPROVE __________

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret. Drafted by Stephen M. Boyd (L/NEA), cleared in IO, BNDD, S/NW, NEA/TUR, and L/T, and approved by Johnson on September 15.

3 Paragraph (10)c of your July 10 memo to Dr. Moynihan.

4 The ROC and ROK are already parties to the Single Convention; the FRG and ROVN are also eligible without special invitation as members of specialized agencies.

181. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Staff (Davis) to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) 181. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council Staff (Davis) to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot)1

Washington, September 10, 1970.

SUBJECT:

PL-480 Wheat for Turkey (S/S 12059)

The President has approved the sale of 500,000 tons of PL-480 wheat for Turkey without linking it or future sales to the opium program at this stage.

Ambassador Handley should be instructed to confirm privately to the Prime Minister or Foreign Minister that the delay in our response was occasioned by the concern of some in the USG-in response to mounting Congressional concern-that there should be a Turkish quid pro quo in the area of opium suppression. He should also say that it may be desirable to discuss at a later date whether it might not be useful to devote the proceeds from any additional sales to the opium suppression program.

Jeanne W. Davis
Staff Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. A notation on the memorandum indicates Davis signed the original.

182. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 182. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, October 29, 1970.

RSGN-11

UNITED NATIONS: US INITIATIVES ON NARCOTIC FRONT PROGRESSING DESPITE MINOR OBSTACLES

General endorsement for the urgent establishment of a UN Fund for Drug Control seems assured at next months meeting of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). This special voluntary fund was proposed initially by the US and approved during a recent meeting of ECOSOC’s Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND). For the time being, the fund will be under the administration of the Secretary General, who has also been charged with developing a comprehensive long-range plan of action against drug abuse.

An endorsement by ECOSOC will represent an important advance in US efforts to stimulate concerted UN action against drug abuse. While obtaining broad UN support for its action, the US is still seeking to overcome the fears and reservations of a number of its NATO allies, particularly the British, who balk at the establishment of another UN fund at a time when many countries, including the US, have argued that there already are too many.

US Proposals. At the instigation of the US, the CND meeting in late September 1970 approved overwhelmingly a resolution calling for the establishment by the UN of a large-scale plan of coordinated action to attack the problem of drug abuse, specifically the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances (e.g., LSD, amphetamines, tranquilizers). The intent of the plan is to attack the problem at its most critical points: supply, demand, and illicit traffic. Recognizing that the proposed approach would call for financial resources in addition to those now available within the UN system, the US plan seeks to impress upon the Secretary General the urgent need for establishing as a first step a UN Fund for Drug Control. Money for such a fund is to come from voluntary contributions by both government and non-government sources. US pledges have already attained $2 million and those by the Federal Republic of Germany, $275,000.

The Fund’s primary objective will be: (a) to expand research and information facilities in the UN as an aid to member governments and to the public, (b) to provide technical assistance and to help improve national drug control administration and enforcement machinery, and (c) to improve the capabilities. and to enlarge the operations of the staffs of the UN organs engaged in drug control by providing additional manpower.

The CND also gave the Secretary General a year’s time for coming up with a long-term plan of action against drug abuse. The US also succeeded in laying the groundwork for strengthening the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs by putting the CND on notice that within 90 days this country intended to offer specific measures for more effective control of opium and its derivatives.

Parallel Action in UNESCO . While these efforts moved along in ECOSOC, the US also took the initiative in placing the narcotics problem before UNESCO. The Director General of UNESCO is being asked to develop a six-year program of study and action, given the availability of funds, at both national and international levels aimed at solving the drug-abuse problem.

Simple ECOSOC Resolution Planned. No specific General Assembly action is required for the proposed fund, but Assembly endorsement would doubtless prove a fillip to it. On the other hand, ECOSOC’s endorsement of the CND resolution is necessary for the fund to become operative. At this date, the US expects to obtain at least 20 of the 27 ECOSOC votes for a simple resolution approving the basic plan. This would obviate the procedural wrangling which took place at the special CND meeting. In the CND eighteen of the twenty-three members voted for the US proposal, but the French and the UK delegates (particularly the latter), took the position that any new fund should be established as part of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) in order to avoid a proliferation of such funds, a practice which all countries, including the US, have generally opposed.

No Support from CCMS . The US sought to take advantage of the October 19-20 meeting of the NATO Committee on Challenges of Modern Society (CCMS) in Order to obtain the complete support of its Western allies at the ECOSOC meeting in November-an effort which backfired.

The French, Danes, Norwegians, and Turks disapproved of CCMS involvement not only because they felt that CCMS was too closely tied to NATO but also because the drug problem was a world, not an area problem. In particular, the Danes feared that any association of the drug problem with CCMS would only help to stir up Denmark’s activist youth to engage in anti-NATO activities, with possibly unfavorable repercussions in the Danish legislature. Many delegations were also apprehensive that publicity about CCMS consideration of narcotics might damage ongoing national and UN efforts in finding solutions to these problems.

Finally, the Turks apparently are still suspicious that CCMS might seek to pressure Turkey, to the exclusion of other opium-producing countries, into eliminating poppy-growing. In this context, Ankara expressed concern that continued discussion of narcotics in CCMS would result in a revival of strong domestic pressures on the Turkish Government and “might affect relations between the US and Turkey.” Also, the Turks as well as the French expressed unhappiness with US working papers, the former claiming that these papers were misleading because they did not contain a study on psychotropic drugs and the latter that no account was taken of tightened French national controls over drug processing and traffic.

UK Still Undecided. Perhaps the most important holdout in the CCMS was the UK. Notwithstanding their agreement that NATO’s limited role in drug control has thus far been helpful in stimulating UN action, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) officials continued to argue that the narcotics problem should not be further pursued in the CCMS framework. As a result, FCO officials have reserved their position regarding the establishment of a UN Fund for Drug Control and have questioned why the UNDP and existing budgets could not be satisfactorily used for this kind of activity. On the other hand, the British have given limited approval to the US initiative in UNESCO because no new fund is contemplated. If British reservations to the UN fund are not resolved before November 11, they may well be raised at the forthcoming ECOSOC meeting. The likely ensuing lengthy debate in ECOSOC could reduce the margin of favorable votes the US expects to obtain.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan.

183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 183. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, November 19, 1970.

SUBJECT:

International Action Against Drug Abuse

On November 11 the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) approved by a vote of 22 for, none against and 2 abstentions (USSR and Bulgaria) the resolution introduced by the United States (Tab A) endorsing the recommendations of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs for concerted UN action against drug abuse and the establishment of a UN Fund for drug abuse control.

This approval authorizes certain immediate measures on an urgent basis subject to the availability of financing through the special voluntary UN Fund. These measures include the expansion of the research and information facilities of the UN drug control bodies; the planning and execution of programs of technical assistance to establish and improve national drug control administrations and enforcement machinery and train needed personnel; and the enlargement of the capabilities and extension of the operations of the UN drug control bodies and their secretariats. This approval also authorizes and directs the Secretary General to draw up a plan for long-term action including, for example, crop substitution programs, calling upon the UN specialized agencies and other competent international bodies for help as appropriate. The WHO, FAO and UNESCO, among others, have pledged their cooperation.

The United States announced an initial contribution of 2 million dollars to the UN Fund subject to Congressional approval. The Federal Republic of Germany has pledged 1 million marks. It is hoped that with other voluntary contributions the Fund will reach 5 million dollars in the first year and increase in subsequent years. In the absence of available resources elsewhere within the UN system a special fund was essential, but there is support and justification for its eventual merger into the UN Development Program.

This overwhelming support by ECOSOC is the culmination of an American initiative which began with the calling of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs into special session and continued with the Commission’s approval of the coordinated international program proposed by the United States. The United States delegation confronted the Commission with the increasing gravity of drug abuse in the United States and worldwide and challenged the international community to act. The Commission recognized the special concern of the United States, elected the U.S. Representative Rapporteur of the meeting and approved without a dissenting vote the recommendations which ECOSOC has now endorsed. I am enclosing a copy of the U.S. Delegation’s report (Tab B).

In the Commission on Narcotic Drugs the United States collaborated most closely with Turkey, India and Sweden who were the original cosponsors of the resolution. Subsequently Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Iran and Pakistan joined in cosponsorship. In ECOSOC the U.S. resolution had the cosponsorship of Brazil, Greece, Indonesia, Norway and Uruguay. In the debate on the resolution France gave outstanding support, Argentina, Ceylon and Peru gave strong support and the United Kingdom, India, Yugoslavia and Japan expressed general approval and cast affirmative votes.

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5 ECOSOC. Unclassified. Tabs A and B were attached but not published. A copy was sent to Moynihan.

184. Telegram 47398 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma 184. Telegram 47398 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Burma1

Washington, March 19, 1971, 0434Z.

Subject:

Narcotics Traffic

Refs:

A. State 38049

B. Rangoon 686

C. Rangoon 3949 (Nov. 21, 1969)

D. Rangoon A-110, May 26, 1970

1. Appreciate your useful discussion of opium production and trafficking in Burma in your response to Ref A.

2. We agree that it is doubtful representations from us could cause GUB to take more effective action against production and traffic of opium in Northern Burma given complex links between those activities and the problems of security discussed Ref B. At same time, however, we feel that there is value in discussing drug problems with GUB from time to time to underline our continuing interest in increasing cooperative efforts to reduce international flow of drugs. To this end, we suggest that you raise question of international traffic of drugs with Foreign Minister at time and in manner you feel appropriate. Following points could be made: A. You may wish to refer to your previous discussion with Maung Lwin (Ref C) and point out continuing high level USG interest in cooperating with other countries in attempts to stem illicit drug production and trafficking. Express our hope that there can be continuing and frank dialogue between our to governments on this subject and recall useful exchange of information between Mr. Dick of BNDD and GUB officials in May 1970 (Ref D).

B. Convey our comprehension that problem of opiates trafficking in Southeast Asia is regional problem effecting several countries and that USG has already and will continue to discuss this problem also with the RTG and the RLG. Point out that the U.S. now has BNDD and Customs officers in Thailand working closely with Thai officials on matters relating to international illicit drug trafficking and that it is likely our cooperation with the RTG will increase in this and related fields.

C. Indicate that from time to time our officials in Thailand through their activities there obtain information about illicit drug trafficking operations in neighboring countries including Burma. Suggest that this kind of information on Burma could passed to the GUB and by way of example you might outline the reports on the opium caravan and the laboratory near Tachilek mentioned Ref B indicating information obtained in Thailand. Point out further that we would like to receive any information the GUB obtains on illicit international trafficking of drugs. If Hla Han give an encouragement to this approach, you might suggest a channel for exchange of information between Embassy Rangoon and the appropriate officials in the GUB be established.

D. Express the USG’s interest in providing full support to increasing UN role in international drug control. USG took initiative in proposing voluntary UN Special Fund for Drug Abuse control which SYG is establishing this month and so informing all UN member governments. FYI V. Kusevic, Director of the UN Division of Narcotics Drugs, who recently visited Washington indicated that he had discussed the possibility of pilot projects (unspecified) in Burma with GUB officials during a visit in late 1970 to Rangoon. He said that it is possible that the GUB will accept a planning mission in the “not-too-distant” future.

E. Express USG satisfaction that Burma participated in recently concluded UN Conference for Adoption of Protocol on Psychotropic Substances at Vienna, GUB came to conference as observer but then became full participant and signed Final Act.

Attending for Burma were U Sein Hla Oo, Commissioner of Excise, as Representative and U Kan Nyunt, First Secretary, Prague, as Alternate.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS BURMA. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William F. Beachner (EA/TB); cleared in EA, in substance with BNDD, S/NM, and Defense; and approved by Wilson. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Phen, Saigon, Vientiane, Hong Kong, and CINCPAC.

185. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) 185. Memorandum From Harold H. Saunders of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh)1

Washington, March 25, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Turkey’s New Government and the Opium Problem

In response to your memos, I asked CIA to give us its reading on the new Turkish government’s possible attitudes and capabilities in relation to the problem of further reducing the flow of illegal opium from Turkey. The main conclusions of the CIA analysts are: --The new Prime Minister’s immediate preoccupation will be to regain control of public order by suppressing political radicals. The opium licensing bill now awaiting parliamentary consideration and the organizational changes in the collection and enforcement agencies will necessarily have lower priorities for the moment.

--Nevertheless, these programs have already achieved a momentum of their own. If the more violent dissidents can be brought under control and calm restored to college campuses, there is nothing to prevent the opium control program from moving forward or even accelerating during the next few months.

--Conscious of being under the watchful eye of the military, Parliament may now move ahead on the opium bill with far less debate in the pre-voting phase than was usually the case while Demirel was in office and each move became hostage to opposition efforts to make life uncomfortable for him.

--The military will set priorities in Turkey for the foreseeable future and are the final arbiters, even if they choose to go on as they are now working through a parliamentary government. They are essentially uninformed on the international opium problem as it affects Turkey. They have taken no stand. As you know, President Sunay has been initiated into the problem and his influence with the present top military leaders remains strong.

--Thus, the way is now open to convincing the military decision-makers of the urgency of the opium problem. We should encounter no particular pre-conceptions or resistance, although the generals will probably be more receptive if they expect some tangible return to Turkey for their cooperation.

--Little is known of Prime Minister ERIM’s personal attitude toward this problem. He is, however, an expert on international law, and his recognition of Turkey’s need to live up to its commitments under the 1961 UN convention can be used to encourage his support. He is genuinely well disposed toward the U.S. His political base is secure, and he would probably be far less deterred from acting than was Demirel by charges of subservience to U.S. interests.

Our program thus falls now under three objectives, and I have noted below each what I have asked State to do in respect to it: 1. The most urgent aspect of the program is to improve the enforcement and control measures in order to achieve the complete collection of this years crop. This is critical because an effective program for buying up production would provide “insurance” against failure of the government to make other desired moves toward licensing and eradication. It would also have more immediate impact. As you knows a program for doing this came out of Jim Parker’s December visit to Turkey. At the same time, the Turkish Soil Products Office (TMO), which is responsible for buying up the crop, has developed a program for enlarging its organization and increasing the collection force in each of the seven provinces where poppies are now grown legally. All of this can be done in the absence of a licensing law under the previous law that sets up the system for declaring opium to be grown. This law contains enough teeth to permit the government of Turkey to be sure the farmer fills out an honest declaration and then to collect everything declared.

Action being taken: Ambassador Handley has been authorized to say that the US would meet the costs of this program. So far the Turks have acted as if they are prepared to handle these themselves. Unless BNDD sees technical deficiencies we can correct or further encouragement we can provide, this seems on the tracks.

2. The objective of second and almost parallel immediacy is the passage by parliament of the licensing and control law. Ambassador Handley has already made some approaches to the military and key members of parliament, stressing the importance which we attach to the passage of this legislation. If it does not seem to be moving as we would like, Secretary Rogers will put it on the top of his agenda when he goes to Ankara on April 30 for the CENTO ministerial meeting.

Action being taken: In addition to the above, I have asked that Ambassador Handley submit a plan for impressing on the military, as well as on members of the new government, the international significance of this legislation and the importance to US-Turkish relations. This plan is due early next week.

3. The last action-chronologically-will be the approach we take to the Prime Minister’s proclamation legally required by June 30, on the number of provinces where planting will be permitted for the following year. You will recall that Demirel last June stated his intention in his announcement this June to reduce to four the number of provinces where poppy could legally be planted in the fall of 1971.

The main issue will be whether, as soon as the new government gets its feet on the ground in a couple of weeks, to make a major approach to the Prime Minister urging him to declare total eradication in his proclamation this June 30. The State Department informally feels that the best we could persuade him to do is to confirm planting in four provinces in this coming year, as Demirel had intended, and then announce reduction to one or two in the following year. If this were done, and if he followed up in his announcement in June 1972 of intent to reduce to zero the following June that would still permit the President to say before the 1972 conventions that Turkey had agreed to complete eradication, although there would still at that time be some production. Undoubtedly, however, there will be pressure here for a reduction to planting in no provinces in the announcement of this June.

Action being taken: I have asked State to begin drafting the instructions to Ambassador Handley on this approach. Unless there is unexpected agreement within our own ranks, I think this may well be the occasion for the next meeting of the Heroin Task Force, but let’s see how the instructions develop.

This leaves one question untouched: How to counter some of the more adverse publicity now developing on this problem. State is conducting a series of press and Hill briefings now. However, it seems to me that we really ought to gear ourselves to capitalize on some concrete move such as passage of the licensing bill. If that happens, then there should be a major effort to focus attention on that achievement.

If you have further thoughts on the above, please let me know.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 663, Country Files, Middle East, Turkey, Vol. II. Secret; Noforn. Sent for information. Concurred in by Downey. On March 12 Demirel resigned under pressure from military forces upset by Turkey’s political instability. Turkish President Sunay designated Nuhat Erim to form a new government.

186. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman) 186. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)1

Washington, April 13, 1971.

SUBJECT:

VIETNAM AND THE DRUG PROBLEM: JOINT WHITE HOUSE WORKING GROUP

Two weeks ago the Attorney General expressed deep concern about the problem of returning Vietnam veterans addicted to heroin. As you know, this subject has been around since the Senator Dodd hearings of last summer and probably will not go away.

It strikes me that we should initiate an effort to solve the problem at the highest level. I have had difficulty in convincing certain officers in the Department of Defense that their problem is a real one and deserving of their closest attention. We will be receiving soon the results of a preliminary urinalysis test which will give us some general idea of the scope of the problem. Getting them to conduct even this kind of test required more than simple pressure.

If such a group were initiated, I would recommend that we pinpoint the following areas: (1) Treatment of addicted Vietnam veterans a. DOD and the VA currently disagree over who should receive VA treatment. VA treatment is currently only available to those who are honorably discharged; DOD discharged addicted soldiers who do not offer themselves for amnesty with a general discharge or lower.

b. Organized church activities to continue rehabilitation process begun by chaplains in Vietnam. At our religious conference, a chaplain from Vietnam provided a very good report on how he had succeed with heroin addicts in his unit by constant availability and concern. The religious leaders who came to the White House indicated strong interest in continuing treatment of this nature back in the United States once a soldier has been discharged. This type of activity could be coordinated through the Chaplain’s office in DOD. Work has started on this already.

c. The status of the returning addicted veteran who does not want treatment must be resolved. Civil commitment legislation is a possibility, but it has, as you can see, serious political overtones.

(2) Law enforcement-Vietnam a. Upon our return from Vietnam last year, we pushed through a quick supplemental of $100,000 for the Provost Marshal’s use in Saigon. The Criminal Investigation Division (CID) up until that time had not funded the Vietnam law enforcement program adequately. This needs to be checked carefully.

b. Smuggling of heroin into Vietnam. We have received an alarming report from a U.S. Bureau of Customs agent in Saigon indicating that smuggling is being actively engaged in by members of the Vietnam legislature, Executive branch, or their close friends and relatives. This report is attached at Tab A. We need to consider establishing a special unit in Saigon, under U.S. control, which would not be neutralized by the corrupt Vietnam National Police. A collateral issue is the smuggling of heroin from Vietnam into the United States.

c. The diplomatic effort, which you began with President Thieu, should be stepped up if we confirm allegations that Vietnamese officials are directly involved.

If the President felt that this issue deserved the highest consideration, I would suggest that the following agency heads be included:

Attorney General John Mitchell

Secretary Rogers

Secretary Laird

Secretary Richardson

Donald Johnson-Administrator of the VA

Richard Helms-Director, CIA

Staff support would come from you and Henry Kissinger and whoever else would be designated by you and the Cabinet Secretaries. It seems to me that Jack Ingersoll and Myles Ambrose should be definitely included in addition to Col. Hobson, the DOD Drug Task Force commander, and myself.

One threshold question is whether it is politically acceptable to publicly display the drug problem in Vietnam and the fact that the President is doing something about it.

My view is that it is publicly acceptable because many people, sensitized to the scope of the issue by Senator Dodd and subsequent CBS and other media disclosures, are aware that it is there and expect it to be handled. The President has been winding down the war, and I think he is in a good posture if he is determined to wipe out the social scourge that goes with it. Also, and perhaps most importantly, we want to stop the crime problem that goes with discharging an untreated heroin addict from the military into the civilian population. We need to be careful that we are not in any way maligning the typical Vietnam vet, and we can do this by stressing treatment and our desire to make his transition back into civilian life as easy as possible. It would be a natural type of discussion following on his meeting yesterday to encourage returning GIs to make full use of the GI Bill’s benefits.

I would appreciate your letting me know whether we should proceed with developing a high level working group and preparing a specific pan of action.

______ Approve __________ Disapprove

Comment:

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 357, Subject Files, Narcotics II. Secret. Sent for action. There was no indication that Ehrlichman approved or disapproved of the recommendation. Tab A was not attached.

187. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 187. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, April 30, 1971

RSGN-6

UNITED NATIONS: US-INITIATIVE TO STRENGTHEN SINGLE CONVENTION ON NARCOTIC DRUGS

The US campaign for stricter controls over the illegal use of narcotics and dangerous drugs throughout the world is likely to encounter heavy seas as it moves closer toward its objective of establishing a more comprehensive international inspection system. The spring session of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), which began on April 26, is expected to approve a US request to schedule an international conference early next year in order to consider several US and any other proposed amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961.

The US amendments would provide the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) with mandatory powers where it now has only the power to request voluntary compliance. Inasmuch as the amendments proposed by the US concentrate on the cultivation of opium poppies and the production of opium, they will probably meet varying degrees of opposition from opium-producing countries such as Turkey, Thailand, Burma and Laos. What is more, they are likely to be joined by many other states which have long been reluctant to surrender their enforcement powers in this area to an international body. Preliminary indications are that the negotiations promise to be both prolonged and difficult.

US Proposed Amendments. The Single Convention of 1961 on drug control (ratified by 82 states) codified earlier conventions and made significant advances in the area of limiting the production, manufacture, export, import, distribution of, trade in, use, and possession of narcotic drugs for medical and scientific purposes and also provided for continuous international cooperation. The principal flaw of the Single Convention is its essentially voluntary character with respect to cultivation of the opium poppy, production of opium, manufacture of opium-derived drugs, and import and export of these substances.

Hence, current US proposals aim to remedy this situation not only by using the existing measures wherever possible but also by providing new authority to control the production and illegal traffic of narcotic drugs. To this end the US proposes strengthening the authority of the INCB-comprised of eleven technical experts serving in their individual capacities-because the Board repeatedly has demonstrated its ability to act as an impartial body when seeking to restrict narcotic activity to medical and scientific requirements. By increasing its authority, the Board would be able (a) to demand full information on the cultivation of the opium poppy and the production of opium, (b) to order reductions in cultivation or production in cases where a significant danger of illicit diversion existed or where world needs were already being met, (c) to call for worldwide remedial measures up to and including a mandatory embargo against the putative offender, and (d) to make a local inquiry of drug-related activities, with the agreement of the state concerned. Regarding any action taken by the Board, the country concerned would retain the right to appeal to ECOSOC as the political body primarily responsible for supervising the Single Convention.

In addition, the US proposes to make narcotic offenses already enumerated in the Single Convention immediately extraditable by strengthening its extradition provisions along the lines of the new Convention for Supervision of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft adopted at the Hague in December 1970.

US Initiative. The US took the first step in its current campaign to strengthen drug control measures at the Special Session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) in September 1970. At the instigation of the US, the CND meeting approved by an overwhelming majority a resolution calling for the establishment by the UN of a large-scale plan of coordinated action to attack the problem of drug abuse. The new plan focused specifically on the abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances (e.g. LSD, amphetamines, tranquilizers) at its three most critical points: supply, demand, and illegal use. Recognizing that the proposed approach would call for financial resources over and above those now available within the UN system, the US also proposed (and ECOSOC and the General Assembly later approved) the establishment of a UN Special Fund for Drug Abuse Control under the administration of the Secretary General, who has also been charged with developing a comprehensive long-range plan of action against drug abuse.

Conference Appears Assured. To date, no firm commitments from Council members to support or co-sponsor the US resolution for convening a conference have materialized. Nevertheless, the requisite support for holding it is virtually certain as is support for request that preliminary talks be held on the proposed amendment to the Single Convention within the framework of the CND meeting his fall. Most states, however, will probably support the conference without prejudice to their ultimate positions on the US amendments.

The Reaction of Opium-Producing Countries. While the producing countries thus far have not reacted to the US proposed amendments, it is possible to anticipate what their attitude on these issues is likely to be.

Turkey has traditionally objected to focusing international attention exclusively upon opium poppies and production, insisting that opium-derived or synthetic drugs must be regulated with equal force. Still, the newly elected Prime Minister, Erim, in his first major address to the Parliament on April 2, referred to the “terrible disaster for the youth of the world” of the illicit narcotics trade, thus publicly acknowledging the human and social aspects of the drug problem which the previous Demirel government had highlighted only in its last months of office. On the other hand, the new Turkish government is no likely to show much enthusiasm for proposals empowering the INCB to probe and control Turkish sources. That part of the proposed strengthening of drug control measures would tend to be seen, especially by the Turkish military, as a violation of a more fundamental principle of Turkish self-interest: Turkish control of Turkish territory. The new government remains wedded to control of opium production, not its elimination. On the other hand, the US initiative is responsive to concerns of Turkey and others that efforts to strengthen international narcotics control be pursued in a multilateral rather than a bilateral context.

Of the Southeast Asian producers, Burma, which is responsible for a huge part of the illicit market, has consistently refused to provide the Board with statistics. However, Burma like Afghanistan, Laos and Thailand-the other three producing countries-has at best only tenuous control over the opium-growing areas in its country. In addition, the Thai Lao, and Burmese governments, while giving lip-service to the objectives of the US amendments, are likely to oppose many of the proposed amendments, particularly those involving sanctions,

Possibly indicative of the reaction of many Latin American countries are the preliminary views expressed by a Mexican Foreign Ministry official regarding local inquiry. He pointed out that his government has consistently rejected the principle of local inquiry, even in implementing the recent US-Mexican joint efforts against illicit drug trafficking. He also noted that the issue of extradition was “touchy”, adding that while the US-Mexican treaty provides for the extradition of drug offenders, the Mexican government in practice has chosen not to comply with requests involving Mexican nationals.

Other Reactions. Some of the US proposed amendments are likely to run into opposition from countries other than producers. Many states, particularly the Soviets and Eastern Europeans, already had rejected a provision for local inquiry on the grounds that it was too strong; consequently, was not included in the Single Convention when it was signed in 1961. A provision for a mandatory embargo met a similar fate.

Possibly indicative of the future position of the European Communist countries on the US amendments to the Single Convent on are Soviet and Romanian reactions to a resolution on international drug traffic at the recent International Parliamentary Union (IPU) conference in Caracas. The resolution, which was finally adopted unanimously, encourages governments to support proposals for amendments designed to strengthen the Single Convention; however, in supporting it both the Soviets and the Romanians took a casual attitude toward the drug problem in their countries, which they described as being either non-existent or not critical. In the end, the Soviets still might cooperate in strengthening drug control measures, although they will undoubtedly balk at those US proposals that envisage mandatory controls, sanctions, or local inspection.

Prospects. On balance, there is widespread hope that the rapid spread of narcotics addictions since 1961 has contributed to a greater awareness of the drug problem and increased the need For stronger controls. Whether the concern of many states over the narcotics problem can overcome their reluctance to surrender the degree of sovereignty involved in the US proposed amendments remains to be seen. Preliminary indications are that the negotiations promise to be protracted and difficult.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan.

188. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 188. Intelligence Note Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, April 30, 1971.

RNAN-13

TURKEY: WAITING FOR THE NEW GOVERNMENT’S OPIUM PROGRAM

The Erim government, which came into office in late March, has not yet announced its program to control or eliminate opium production in Turkey. At present, the government is preoccupied with internal security, and its foreign policy initiatives are focusing on Cyprus and China. Ankara’s ranking officials have privately cautioned the US that-in its own interests-opium should not become a public issue at this time. Legislation providing for the licensing of opium producers, which was expected to be passed in the waning months of the Demirel administration, remains bogged down in Parliament. The senior civilian leaders in the new government, however, have categorically stated that the pending legislation will be enacted. In the meantime, the Turks have attempted to tighten controls by an executive decree, which was issued March 19. In an environment of governmental caution, the initial test of Erim’s good intentions regarding the poppy problem will come in late June, when the effectiveness of the government’s effort to buy up opium gum can be gauged, and when the annual decree regulating the autumn planting of poppies will be issued.

Opium Policy: Playing it Cool for Now. The new government’s only public reference to opium so far was contained in a brief passage in the government’s program, which Erim presented to Parliament on April 2. The Prime Minister acknowledged that opium smuggling has become a “terrible disaster for the youth of the world” and promised that due importance will be given this problem. He also stated that “opium producers will be provided a better way to make a living.” Erim later told Ambassador Handley that he had personally written this statement which expressed his humanitarian concern about the opium problem.

The US has been urged privately not to mount any public pressure on the new government to curb opium production. Otherwise, sharp criticism will be directed at the government for catering to the US, making the kind of action desired by Washington more difficult to achieve. Foreign Minister Olcay told Ambassador Handley on April 22 that the US could help in easing Turkey’s serious political problems by controlling the “counterproductive and public US pressures”; he stressed that Ankara preferred to address the opium problem in the context of multilateral, rather than bilateral, relationships. In this way, he alleged, it would be easier for Turkey to cooperate with the US.

Technical Approach Emphasized. Ambassador Handley has reported that, during his discussions with Erim on April 27 and with Deputy Prime Minister Karaosmanoglu on April 20, both officials advanced the theme that the opium problem in Turkey must be attacked by technical means on the basis of economic realities. The idea of developing light industry in the poppy areas, as well as substitute crops, were specific suggestions offered by the Turks. This approach, however, would take a long time to implement, and it would not achieve the goals of collecting all the opium production this spring, reducing legal planting to four provinces next fall, and stopping production entirely in the fall of 1972.

Noteworthy was Karaosmanoglu’s statement to Ambassador Handley that upon coming into office he had found no information and evaluation group to advise the new government on the opium problem. Despite his numerous; pledges, Prime Minister Demirel did not assign a high priority to solving the opium problem, and, in any case, he handled the problem through his own personal staff, now disbanded. A reliable Turkish source reported on April 9 that Karaosmanoglu had already requested an official study assessing the cost to the Turkish government of controlling the illicit opium trade as compared to the income that farmers earned by legal opium sales to government purchasing agents.

Prognosis. The government’s decree of March 19 provides a means for tighter control of poppy culture within the limits of existing law. Unlike Demirel, the Erim government is not dependent on political support in the poppy growing provinces. On the other hand, the new government’s first line supporters-the military-have not yet become directly involved in the opium issue, and a military source has indicated that the US cannot expect governmental initiatives to curb opium production for at least three to four months.

The government’s effort to buy up this year’s output of opium gum will be underway by late May; collection activities are expected to be more effective than a year ago because Turkish agricultural agents and police are receiving vehicles and other logistical support through an AID loan of $3,000,000. Moreover, training of enforcement personnel is beginning to show results, and the various ministries involved in the collection effort have prepared more detailed operational plans for this spring’s campaign. By the summer, the government may have implemented the first steps of a long range scheme to subsidize poppy farmers or to find other sources of income for them.

The key man in formulating the governments policy will be Karaosmanoglu, who is fresh from four years’ residence in Washington and presumably well versed in the humanitarian and diplomatic dimensions of the involvement of Turkish opium in the illicit trade. It is still too early, however, to affirm that he and other civilian leaders in Ankara have a strong personal and political commitment to control or eradicate poppy culture by 1972.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Gene R. Preston (INR).

189. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon 189. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 8, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Status of Opium Control in Turkey

You asked for views on the idea Secretary Connally mentioned for a pre-emptive purchase of the Turkish opium crop this year.

Actually, the Turkish government has already launched a major effort to buy up this year’s crop to keep it out of illegal channels. We have offered to help financially, but the Turkish government has so far preferred to foot the bill itself. Our Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs feels that the Turkish collection effort this year will be a major improvement over last year’s and regards it, in prospect at least, as satisfactory.

Secretary Rogers mentioned in Ankara our willingness to participate in an international pre-emptive purchase program such as that described by Secretary Connally. The Turkish leaders appear to feel that such a program by outsiders would cause political problems, increase resistance to their collection program, and stimulate rather than control illegal production by increasing the financial advantage to the grower.

In addition to working with the Turkish government on this program to buy up the crop, we are also urging passage of a licensing bill and complete elimination of production. The prospects for both improved sharply as a result of the change of government in March. Ambassador Handley and Secretary Rogers have both urged Prime Minister Erim to announce in June that opium production will not be allowed anywhere in the fall of 1972. The Prime Minister has replied that he feels it necessary to provide the Turkish farmer with some alternative crop or agriculturally based industry if he is to do this and has asked us to work with him. This is a significant invitation, and the bureaucracy is already working on proposals to make to the Turks.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. Secret. Sent for information. On April 27 the President sent Kissinger a memorandum that read: “Moynihan’s idea of buying the entire Turkish opium crop is one that seems intriguing. I realize that there are problems here, but would you have a check made to see what, if anything, could be done. Connally seems to like the idea, provided it does not have other foreign policy implications which would mitigate against it.” (Ibid., Box 341, HAK/President Memoranda,1971)

190. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 190. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 28, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Blue Chit Narcotics Reports [less than 1 line not declassified]

1. Our recently intensified collection effort designed to acquire further information on the overseas distribution and processing of narcotics has begun to bear fruit. Reports on narcotics traffic, however, are likely to be politically as well as operationally sensitive, especially in the Indochina area. We have therefore set up a special system designed to ensure that certain Indochina narcotics reports come to the personal attention of concerned senior U.S. officials and, at the same time, ensure that the distribution of these reports is tightly controlled and limited to a small number of individually identified recipients. All such reports will be sent to their recipients under a blue transmittal slip over my name and signature, all will also be labeled as [less than 1 line not declassified] reports and their individual numbers will have the prefix [less than 1 line not declassified]

2. As with the somewhat analogous [less than 1 line not declassified] series used for sensitive Indochina reports of a more general nature, Indochina area narcotics reports will be handled in this special fashion when either (or both) of two considerations apply: (1) The report in question contains information or allegations of particular political sensitivity, and/or (2) the report is sufficiently illuminating or informative to warrant the personal attention of the senior U.S. officials directly concerned with the overall problem.

3. The first report in this new series is appended hereto. It reflects the format, numbering and mode of transmittal that will be employed in future narcotic traffic reports selected for inclusion and handling in this channel.

Richard Helms
Director

Attachment

[5 pages not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to Rogers, Laird, Mitchell, Moorer, Sullivan, Ingersoll, and Rossides. The attachment is Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem Abroad; Background Use Only.

191. Summary of a Meeting 191. Summary of a Meeting1

Washington, June 3, 1971, 8 to 9:50 a.m.

SUMMARY, NARCOTIC MEETING, STATE DINING ROOM, JUNE 3, 1971

President told group that interdepartmental cooperation in the drug area will now be required. Crapping around will not be tolerated.

President expressed intention that the U.S. will get one notch tougher than did the Japanese by cracking down on pushers. If Japanese can do it, we can do it.

President announced that a new tough, ruthless, line-drawing administrator who knows the drug area will be brought in to run all drug programs.

President declares that we have tried to persuade our allies, Turkey and France, of the importance of heroin traffic to the U.S. We will be tough with our allies now and will put more emphasis on solving the problem, than on diplomatic niceties. We will not temporize anymore. All departments are to move vigorously now.

President expressed concern that some of the public, especially some employers, view the Vietnam veteran as a ruthless killer and a junkie, and therefore he cannot get a job. This image must be changed. President asked the attendees to view the collage of TV tapes on the drug problem in the military in order to get an idea of how 60 million Americans may be perceiving the problem.

President talked about the disagreement over whether marihuana leads to heroin addiction. He maintained that if you look at the number of addicts who used marihuana first, that the relationship would be clear. At any rate, the President asserted that the line has to be drawn somewhere, and he is drawing it at marihuana.

President wants exploration of the utility of harsher penalties for pushers in interstate commerce-not addict pushers-up to and including the death penalty. Will be in new legislation package. President hastened to add that if penalties are too severe, that judges would not convict.

Mr. Ingersoll gave an extensive overview of heroin trafficking, growth in incidence of addiction domestically, including death rates, growth in military narcotic investigations, and discharges due to narcotic violations and increased seizures.

Secretary Connally pledges support of Treasury, including IRS, to help with the problem. Complimented joint action group on Vietnam. IRS agents are now helping Vietnamese. Connally believes we should not tolerate allies who will produce opium which leads to the destruction of American youth. He believes that for $3 million a year, the U.S. can buy Turkish opium crops until substitute crops are introduced.

Secretary Laird stated that the military has and is working diligently on the problem of addiction in Vietnam. The services differ on the role of discipline, but now all services agree that the military has the responsibility of treating addicts.

DOD is planning to introduce urine testing at two bases in Vietnam and will detain servicemen for 5 days in order to run tests. The Army will control these two departure points. Mr. Ehrlichman and Mr. Krogh reported that testing can be done in less than a minute with free radical assay technique.

Secretary Laird suggested that new legislative authority is required in order to detain servicemen in the military for treatment.

Secretary Laird claimed that up until January of 1971, President Thieu was not personally aware of the heroin problem. The President contradicted Thieu’s position, but added this would not be used to confront Thieu. Rather we will assert that Thieu responded immediately to the problem at our request.

President asked Laird if there is one top man at DOD responsible in the drug area. Laird responded that there is, but a doctor will be brought into DOD in July to head up the program.

Mr. Johnson talked about the need to expand V.A. budgets for the capacity exists to take on more addicts. He emphasized the importance and the need to resolve the issue of dischargees’ eligibility for V. A. treatment. In response to Presidential question, Johnson reported that of the 50,000 addict veterans, 5,000 are Vietnam era which is 1% of those who served.

Mr. Johnson reported that 80% of the addicts treated by V. A. are on methadone. There is some success. He emphasized the importance of jobs for the addicts, and therefore has started a program whereby patients can establish a job record.

In response to the President’s question on timing, Mr. Krogh reported that a legislative package would be ready in two weeks. The President asked that the new initiatives be kept secret.

President related the fact that a high percentage of doctor’s wives are addicts and then to a lesser extent doctors themselves are addicted and then nurses. Psychiatrists have the highest rate of addiction, and therefore this is a situation of the blind leading the blind. President asked Secretary Richardson to initiate a program whereby doctors would be trained so as not to over-prescribe drugs.

President emphasized a number of times that this is not a problem peculiar to the military, but a problem of the U.S. Therefore, the meeting includes involved departments beyond DOD. President expressed concern that narcotics would be an issue used by adversaries of our Vietnam policy to impugn the military. So, narcotics is a political as well as a real issue. President pledges his continued support to the military.

President urged all to meet the responsibility of this new challenge to the military and society. He recommended all read his speech given at West Point which indicates that there is much right with America, and that he will defend the military.

APPENDIX A

INTERDEPARTMENTAL BREAKFAST MEETING
JUNE 3, 1971

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Melvin Laird

Deputy Secretary David Packard

Assistant Secretary Roger T. Kelley

Secretary Stanley R. Resor

Secretary John H. Chafee

Secretary Robert C. Seamans, Jr.

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Thomas H. Moorer

General W. C. Westmoreland

Admiral R. W. Cousins

General John D. Ryan

General Leonard R. Chapman, Jr.

Secretary Elliot Richardson

Attorney General John Mitchell

Under Secretary John Irwin

Donald Johnson-Administrator, Veterans Administration

John Ingersoll-Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs

Secretary of the Treasury, John B. Connally

Donald Rumsfeld

Henry Kissinger

John Ehrlichman

Ronald Ziegler

Bud Krogh

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics III. No classification marking. Appendix A, the list of participants, is taken from the President’s Daily Diary. (Ibid., White House Central Files)

192. Telegram 100799 from the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 192. Telegram 100799 from the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, June 8, 1971, 1802Z.

Ref:

Ankara’s 3911

1. Fully endorse your view that early meeting with Prime Minister now desirable. You authorized inform Prime Minister that President Nixon has asked you to pass personal message given below.

2. Begin text: In recent days I have been even more deeply disturbed by the catastrophic proportions of the heroin problem in the United States which is becoming graver day by day. My June 1 announcement to the American people, who are alarmed and aroused because this problem has become a national epidemic, stressed that this Administration shall place the highest priority at all levels on solving this problem. We intend to step up our national program by even more vigorous efforts. The worldwide efforts to control opium production, including the vigorous steps of your Government, has my closest personal attention.

The statement on opium in your Government’s program was gratifying; it is an encouraging example of humanitarian understanding and concern. I am aware of the important matters awaiting your decision in response to proposals made by Ambassador Handley on May 17, and fully appreciate the difficulties that these present. It is clear to me, however, that the entire world will applaud decisive action by your Government on this difficult problem. Such action would also serve as an inspiration and example for other nations. You have my assurance that the United States stands prepared to help in any useful way. Ambassador Handley has been asked to discuss with you some important aspects of our cooperation in this field. End text

3. For Ambassador: President intends, as part of major new initiatives referred to in para. 2, to send a message to Congress and possibly address the nation on all phases of the drug problem in next two or three weeks. Present intention is not, repeat not, to single out any one nation for mention. However, in light of coincidence of Turkish decisions and the President’s message, we wish to consult on the manner in which the President might most usefully treat the issue of bilateral cooperation. You are therefore instructed to inform Erim most confidentially of above and ask for his suggestions as to how to play coming Turkish decisions and future cooperation in a way that would be most helpful to him. FYI. While we understand possible problems in Ankara, it would be ideal from viewpoint of dealing with criticism of Turkey here, if a Turkish decision to end poppy growth could be highlighted either in the President’s message or in background briefings on his proposals. Such a decision would represent successful culmination intensive US diplomatic effort and statesmanlike Turkish government response to humanitarian problem. Alternatively, unhelpful Turkish decisions at this particular time would feed criticism here. Therefore, earliest possible information on direction of Turkish decisions and PM’s personal suggestions as to our handling would be most helpful. An important purpose of this portion of your conversation with the PM is to make clear that the President is deeply interested in engaging in the highest level and most confidential consultations on this issue.

Above states ideal. We willing to play Turkish angle in accordance with Erim’s judgment. End FYI

Irwin

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Geoffrey Ogden (NEA/TUR), cleared by, Wellman, and NEA/TUR, in substance by Sisco, and approved by Davies. The account of Handley’s discussion with Erim is in telegram 3489 from Ankara, May 18, and is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, Eastern Mediterranean and Eastern Europe, 1969-1972, Volume XXIX.

193. Memorandum for the President’s File from the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) 193. Memorandum for the President’s File from the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh)1

Washington, June 14, 1971.

SUBJECT:

MEETING WITH AMBASSADORS AND STATE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS ON INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS TRAFFICKING, JUNE 14, 1971, 10:10 A.M.-11:45 A.M.

The President opened the meeting by saying that the presence of senior members of the Cabinet, plus Ambassadors of five countries underlines the importance the President places on the drug problem. The Administration’s program will emphasize reduction in the supply of dangerous drugs through the arrest and prosecution of pushers, treatment of addicts and education programs.

The President placed the drug problem in the perspective of a national rather than a military problem. He pointed out that the problem of supply of heroin is outside of the U.S., for the U.S. does not produce any opium poppy.

Mr. John Ingersoll, Director of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, gave an overview of the heroin problem. He reported that the Bureau now estimates that there are 300.000 heroin addicts in the U.S. and that 59% are less than 30 years old.

The President asked if there is more heroin available in the U.S. today than in 1969 despite the increased seizures. Mr. Ingersoll replied that there is more heroin available. The President asked if there were more addicts now than in 1969. Mr. Ingersoll replied that we really do not know. The President retorted that we have poor statistics and speculated that the problem is worse and that the cooperation of foreign countries is needed.

President Nixon stated that he did not intend to be criticizing any departments but merely wanted to point out the problems. He observed that we have either been doing the wrong thing or need to do more of what we are doing correct.

Central Intelligence Agency Director Helms briefed on heroin smuggling in the tri-border region of Laos, Thailand and Burma. Approximately 500 tons a year are produced in Burma, 300 tons a year in Laos and 200 tons a year in Thailand. There are an estimated 21 illicit refineries in this region. The trafficking is carried out by a 5,000-man irregular Chinese army.

Director Helms reported that there is corruption in the Customs agencies of Vietnam and Laos.

A kilogram of heroin is now worth $1,780 in this area which is a 45% increase in 8 months. Director Helms concluded that the trafficking could not be stopped.

Ambassador Bunker reported that the use of heroin began in Vietnam in late 1969 and that it has reached alarming proportions. Data shows that in 1969 there were 250 heroin use in Vietnam, in 1970 there were 1,146 and from January to May of 1971 there were 2,189.

In August of 1970, MACV set up a drug task force which implemented drug abuse education programs, drug suppression councils, joint Vietnamese/U.S. narcotics investigation and Customs teams, aerial marihuana destruction missions and expansion of the amnesty program.

Ambassador Bunker asserted that it was clear that unless President Thieu directly intervened, that progress would not be made in suppressing heroin. He told President Thieu that if heroin remained readily accessible to U.S. servicemen, that U.S. support could not be guaranteed.

President Thieu responded quicker on this warning than in any other situation by (1) assigning a senior military officer, General Quang, to direct the Vietnamese campaign, (2) intelligence and enforcement efforts have been improved, (3) the courts have been directed to expedite trials and punishment, (4) inter-ministerial committees were set up, (5) corrupt officials in Customs were removed, (6) police were replaced at air-ports, (7) pharmacies are not selling dangerous drugs without prescription, (8) tax-free rewards for police who make arrests, (9) some lower House Deputies were arrested, and (10) there is greater interchange of intelligence between U.S. and Vietnamese officials.

Ambassador Bunker stressed the need to patrol the airports, ports and borders of Vietnam. He continued that the Government of. Vietnam does not have a sense of urgency nor are there enough competent and non-corrupt people. There are not rapid and impartial prosecutions. President Thieu emphasized military and pacification programs in the past and will now emphasize heroin suppression.

President Nixon asked what proportion of heroin comes from Southeast Asia. He was told that the figure now approximately 10% and increasing with 80% coming from Turkey.

Secretary Rogers asked about the use of special courts to process heroin pushers. Ambassador Bunker replied that sentences are 6 months for pushers.

Ambassador Bunker reported that one recent urine analysis test showed 2.5% positive out of 567.

Attorney General Mitchell asked if the Vietnamese Government will move against high officials in that government. Ambassador Bunker replied that the Prime Minister’s brother was removed from the Customs Agency and speculated that President Ky’s sister may be involved in trafficking.

Secretary Rogers asked if it would be useful to have entertainers go to Vietnam to entertain and educate the troops about drugs. Ambassador Bunker replied that it would be productive.

Ambassador Handley briefed on the subject of U.S. Turkey relations and the long history, dating back to 1932, of negotiations between the U.S. and Turkey on the reduction of poppy cultivation. In 1967, there were 21 provinces in Turkey cultivating poppy. By 1971, the number of provinces was reduced to 7; and in 1972, the provinces will be reduced to 4. It is noted that these 4 provinces are the most productive. Where the Government of Turkey has banned the cultivation of the poppy, this ban has been effective. In fact, the number of acres in production went up from 1970 over 1968.

The U.S. policy is to have Turkey eradicate completely its poppy crop. Prime Minister Demirel tried to do this over 4 to 5 years, but was not successful. Prime Minister ERIM also wants to eradicate the poppy crop.

By the end of June of 1971, there will be an announcement from the Government of Turkey that only 4 provinces will be allowed to cultivate the poppy starting in September of 1971. Unprecedented efforts have been made by the Government of Turkey to buy up the crop. Ambassador Handley expressed some reason for optimism.

Ambassador Handley suggested that $50 million over the next 3 to 4 years would suffice to get Turkey out of poppy production. The Government of Turkey is concerned, however, that the farmer be given a better life.

President Nixon asked whether Prime Minister ERIM could move immediately in eradicating poppy cultivation with this $50 million. The President suggested that we could not wait 3 or 4 years to end poppy cultivation. The President asserted that it is worth $50 million to the United States if we can get it done. The President asserted that the United States will not be blackmailed, but he is willing to pay the price that must be paid in order to eradicate the poppy.

Ambassador Handley stated that the Prime Minister must give a one-year notice before he can tell the Turkish farmers that they cannot plant the poppy. This is a legal requirement.

Secretary Connally suggested that the crop could be purchased for $3 million. Ambassador Handley said that the Turks use the oils from the poppies for other industrial purposes and that there is no addiction to speak of in Turkey. He feels that the Prime Minister must be able to offer the farmers something better than poppy production, for instance sugar beets or onion plants. There is also discussion of the possibility of constructing textile plants so that textiles can be shipped to the U.S.

Secretary Richardson stated that the production of poppy has a cultural meaning for the Turks, for in 1969 the U.S. pharmaceutical companies were going to buy up the entire crop. Secretary Richardson asked why, if India can prevent diversion, cannot the Turks.

Ambassador Handley replied that in India a farmer is denied a license if he claims that he had a small crop. The rationale is that the farmer is either a liar or a poor farmer.

Ambassador Handley speculated that within 2 years there should be a total end of production of poppy in Turkey.

President Nixon stated that Congress could cut all foreign aid to Turkey because of the drug problem in the United States.

The President instructed that we explore at the very highest levels: 1. What would be the price to buy the Turkish poppy crop.

2. Will that work to effectively stop illicit diversion.

The President said that we should not pay a high price for something not worth the price. However, the price is cheap now because the price later can be the destruction of our NATO alliance.

Secretary Richardson stated that whatever the cost is, Congress will pay the bill if we can be assured that the crop can be eradicated.

Ambassador Hanley stated that the Turks cannot buy the crop and control the crop this year; that we should take the toughest stand next year and demand total secession of production.

The President remarked that Thailand, Laos and Turkey cannot control their own territories and therefore control of production would be difficult. The President admitted that part of the problem is that Americans demand heroin and we must educate our own people. He stated that marihuana gets young people into the drug culture and then it becomes easier to move on to heroin.

Ambassador Handley stated that he was convinced that Prime Minister ERIM is trying to manage and curtail poppy production and that Turkey should not be singled out for retribution or criticism.

President Nixon stated that it would be interesting to know how many addicts enter Vietnam and how many addicts leave Vietnam who are not theretofore addicted to heroin.

Ambassador Handley felt that it would not be wise to accept Secretary Rogers’ suggestion that the President send a letter to Prime Minister ERIM asking that production of poppy be terminated. The Ambassador felt that the Prime Minister could not comply and therefore there would be needless tension between the President and the Prime Minister.

President Nixon asked that the Secretaries of State, Agriculture and Treasury and the Attorney General get together to decide whether the subsidy being paid by the Turkish Government to the farmers is adequate and whether we can purchase better performance. The President said that he is willing to spend $50 million in one year if that will do the job.

Mr. EGIL KROGH, Jr:, Deputy Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs, briefed on the Special Action Office on Drug Abuse Prevention. He stated that it is now difficult to set a national strategy because of the dispersion of responsibility across the federal landscape. He said that evaluation would be a key element of the new program in order to see what actually works in terms of treatment. He said that one of our goals will not necessarily be to make a man drug free. He discussed the increased resources for rehabilitation.

The President concluded the meeting by saying that the group was brought together because of the high priority he is putting on the drug problem. He forthrightly stated that the drug problem is Public Enemy No. 1 in America. He stated that we must educate our young people and that we should not downplay the eventual dangers of drug abuse. He stated that countries with strength and character take a no-nonsense stance on drugs. He stated that 60% to 70% of those convicted of major crimes are or have been associated with drugs. The President stated that he considers discussions with those countries on the drug problem the Ambassadors’ most important diplomatic mission. He ordered the Ambassadors to convey to their host governments that the U.S. means business.

Finally the President stated that stopping the drug traffic is more important than good temporized relations.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Special Files, President’s Office Files, Box 85, Memoranda for the President. No classification marking. The meeting lasted from 10:10 to11:45 a.m.

194. Telegram 108468 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts 194. Telegram 108468 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, June 17, 1971, 2213Z.

Rome for FODAG

Paris for NESCO

For Chief of Diplomatic Mission

From the Secretary

The President today sent to the Congress a comprehensive message on the drug problem, the text of which is contained in the USIS Wireless File. I want to draw your personal attention to this message and to stress its importance.

In a meeting on June 14 with members of the Cabinet and several of our Ambassadors from areas where the drug control problem is acute, the President made clear that he considers no problem to have greater priority for this Administration than the struggle against drug abuse and particularly heroin.

The President knows that if we are to win this struggle we must have international cooperation. I ask each of you to give priority attention to how such cooperation can best be promoted and translated into specific measures for joint efforts with individual countries.

I ask also that each of you give the text of the President’s message to the Government or International Organization to which you are accredited. On this occasion you should make clear that the President considers the heroin addiction of American citizens an international problem of grave concern to this Nation and that we seek the close cooperation of all countries to eradicate drug abuse in our own country and everywhere in the world.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Repeated to Rome for FODAG and Paris for NESCO. Drafted by Betty C. Gough (IO/HDC), cleared by Herz, Wellman, and Eliot, and approved by Rogers.

195. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 195. Memorandum From Samuel M. Hoskinson of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 18, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Turkish Opium Program

I thought you should be aware of the fact that there is a dispute between the State Department and Treasury concerning the program which the President asked for on Turkish opium. As I understand it, this centers on the issue providing the Turks with up to $50 million in assistance if they announce that all planting, cultivation, or the production of the opium poppy is prohibited after June 30, 1972.

Secretary Connally (see attached letter) argues that such large scale assistance might well be interpreted as blackmail by a large segment of the American public and have adverse domestic repercussions. He maintains that although the President said he might be willing to pay $50 million if the supply of opium is immediately shut off, he did this only to emphasize his position. Secretary Connally says specifically that he “did not interpret it to mean that he was actually prepared to offer payments in that amount. ”

The State Department believes that the President meant exactly what he said concerning the $50 million. They say that they have given in on several other points that Treasury has made on this general issue, but strongly believe that if we are going to sell our ideas to the Turks, we will have to include the $50 million. State’s general assessment is that we simply will not have any chance of success at all without the $50 million.

The state of play as of 7 p.m. was that Assistant Secretary Sisco had recommended to Secretary Rogers that he call Secretary Connally and attempt to retain the $50 million figure. Sisco is recommending that if this doesn’t work, the Secretary go directly to the President.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Exdis. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Downey. Hoskinson did not initial the memorandum. Connally’s letter was not attached.

196. Telegram 110121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 196. Telegram 110121 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, June 19, 1971, 2040Z.

For Ambassador from Secretary

Subject:

Turkish Opium Negotiation

1. Ambassador Handley should inform the Prime Minister that he has presented the Turkish situation, together with the June 11 Turkish proposal, to President Nixon and his senior Cabinet officials. He has been instructed by the President to convey the following:

2. The President is deeply concerned that the problem of opium is casting a pall over our entire relationship. He wishes to avoid jeopardizing our close relations, but he may not be able to control punitive measures proposed by Congress under pressure from the American people, who are alarmed because the drug problem is tearing our social fabric and jeopardizing the next generation of Americans.

3. The core of our drug problem is opium-derived heroin, the killer drug, which is also beginning to affect a number of European countries. The President knows full well that this is a global problem and that there are other sources, and the President is also taking steps in other parts of the world. However, Turkey is central to our drug problem, because it is the largest single source of heroin entering the U.S.

4. Ambassador Handley may state the President has authorized him to present the following:

To meet the foreign exchange losses to the Turkish Government and to help it compensate the farmers for a transition period, the U.S. would provide a total grant of $10-15 million of additional assistance over a period of up to three years, provided the Turks agree to the conditions in paragraphs 5 and 6.

5. The Turkish Government must agree to include in their decree yet to be issued this month that: a. All planting, cultivation, or production of the opium poppy in Turkey is prohibited after June 30, 1972.

b. The entire Turkish opium crop authorized to be planted this fall (only in the four provinces named in the June 30, 1970 decree) will be purchased by the Turkish Government.

c. Outside the decree, the Government of Turkey will agree to utilize part of the lira equivalent of the $10-15 million to pay those farmers who voluntarily abstain from opium planting in Fall 1971 and Spring 1972 in those provinces where legal cultivation will still be permitted. They will be compensated for each of the next three years on 110 per cent basis of their sales to TMO this year. In effect, we are using the US technique of a subsidy not to plant a particular crop. Cash payments to the farmers for this crop year are to be made between June 30 and September 1, in order to precede the September-October planting season. (FYI: the mechanics as to whether it would be by contract or by signing receipt for cash payments and the penalties for breach and strict enforcement can be developed later.)

6. The Turkish Government must agree to pass legislation to make planting of the opium poppy illegal after June 30, 1972. (FYI: This is so that plantings cannot be resumed by decree. END FYI.)

7. If the Turkish Government agrees to the above conditions we would consider providing on a grant basis additional funds to help finance activities aimed at improving the living standards for farmers in the affected regions. We would consider whether we could be helpful in the agro-industrial field.

8. The United States would also undertake to encourage additional World Bank lending and UN Development Fund projects in the affected regions.

9. The US cannot provide a guaranteed market for leather goods or textiles as envisioned in the Turkish proposal.

10. Ambassador Handley may, as appropriate, also say: should the Government of Turkey decide that it will not announce a decision to eliminate opium production, and if the collection of the 1971 crop is not effective, the United States Government would be compelled to take whatever action was necessary to protect the health of its people.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Ogden; cleared by Davies, Sisco, Robert L. Pugh (NEA/TUR), and Richard Kennedy; cleared in substance with Ingersoll, Hardin, Williams, Wellman, and Connally; and approved by Rogers.

197. Telegram 4337 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 197. Telegram 4337 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, June 23, 1971, 1030Z.

Subj:

Narcotics: June 21 Meeting With Prime Minister Erim

Ref:

State 110121

Summary: In long and frank discussion of opium issue with Erim on June 21, Turks stuck firmly to economic nationalist objections raised before to opium eradication. In addition they gave special significance to public opinion problems and most particularly to those of farmers affected by possible opium eradication. In end, however, Erim said he would meet three USG conditions. (Complete eradication by June 1972, full purchase of crop by GOT, and seeking pass legislation prohibiting all future poppy farming), if agreement reached on long term American assistance to improve living conditions of farmers affected by ban on poppy farming. Lower level meeting on that subject set for June 22. End summary

1. I met from 1800 to 2000 June 21 with Prime Minister Erim to continue our discussion of opium. Meeting took place in relatively informal and unofficial environment of Prime Minister’s residence. Attending on Turkish side were Deputy Prime Minister Karaosmanoglu, Foreign Minister Olcay, Minister of Commerce and Industry Cilingiroglu, Foreign Economic Relations Minister Derbil, and FonMin Deputy Director General Arim. Hill, Dillon and Greene accompanied me. This is full report of conversation summarized in Ankara 4302

2. I opened session at scheduled 1800 hours with only Erim, Olcay and Arim present on Turkish side. Other Turks joined us over next ten minutes. I explained I had just returned from Washington, where on June 14 at White House I had attended what I termed most important meeting of my career. I summarized President’s presentation of national and international narcotics problems and listed names of participants in meeting including Cabinet members and Ambassadors. (Foreign Minister Olcay interrupted to ask if India represented; I said Ambassador Keating was in fact in town but fully preoccupied with refugee problems.) I noted heroin problem had become one of even greater American concern in few months that had passed since Karosmanoglu left Washington. Noted President’s message to Congress including strong statement on controlling psychotropics. I reported that when my turn for “short” comments came, I remained at podium for more than an hour. This was clear proof of importance of Turkey as largest source of opium. I explained I had outlined to President and Cabinet members Erims proposals given to me in our June 11 meeting and answered numerous questions.

3. Turning to Erim directly, I read verbatim paras two and three reftel so Prime Minister would have full flavor of President’s views. In particular I stressed President’s deep concern that “opium is casting a pall over our entire relationship”, his hope “to avoid jeopardizing our close relations,” and his fear that he “may not be able to control punitive measures proposed by Congress”. I later noted that President fully realizes problem is global one and that, therefore, other steps are being taken in other parts of world.

4. Parenthetically I pointed out I had not on this, unlike last summer, made appearances before congressional committees. The administration, I said has sought to postpone such appearances until after June 30 in order not to complicate decision making in Turkey. After June 30, appearances can no longer be postponed and it seems clear that there will be many.

5. In view of these contacts, I told Erim I had no choice but to conclude that most important and most beneficial step Turkey could take. Would be to announce by June 30 that there would be no rpt no future planting of poppies in the country. Heroin is killer drug and Turkey is now our largest source. I asked directly whether eradication this year was legally possible. After some hesitation, Karaosmanoglu and Ciglingiroglu agreed the law requires one year notice for such a decision; to do otherwise would require new law. Prime Minister confirmed. Ciglingiroglu, who came late, noted he had just left National Assembly where opium licensing bill had been passed and sent to Senate. He said debate had been qte very tough unqte and attempt to past law permitting instant eradication would be impossible. Prime Minister nodded agreement.

6. With these points established, I commented I had in Washington done my best to explain Turkey’s circumstances, but I must also explain, Washington views to Turkey. Not only Congress, but also many officials at highest levels believe time has come for Turkey to make that extra effort. Turning to my instructions, I said that if, in this month’s decree certain conditions are met, then we can consider assistance. Conditions are: (a) prohibiting all planting, cultivation or productions of opium poppy after June 30, 1972; (b) purchasing entire crop to be planted this fall; (c) seeking to pass legislation prohibiting all future poppy farming in Turkey after June 1972.

7. If GOT agrees to the foregoing, then, I continued, USG is prepared on grant basis to provide additional assistance to Turkey of $10-15 million to be used over two-three year period to compensate farmers who can no longer produce opium to meet resulting foreign exchange losses. Lira equivalent from part of grant would be used to pay farmers who voluntarily refrained from planting in four provinces where cultivation would be permitted. Payment would be over three-year period and would be based on 110 percent of amount paid to farmers this summer. This year’s payments must, thus, be made between June 30 and Sept 1. I then told Erim about possible further grants to help improve living conditions of affected farmers and also mentioned our williingness to increase world bank and UN Development Fund loans. Finally, I noted it would be impossible for USG to offer guaranteed sale of leather and textiles.

8. I concluded this portion of my remarks by saying clock is ticking if decree announcing no more planting after June 1972 not issued, there will be, as result public concern in US, actions taken by Congress which will seriously complicate our entire relationship and with which Executive Branch would be unable [to] cope.

9. Recalling emphasis in our June 11 meeting on growing opium on state farms, I said all present should know that USG could in no way be associated with such project.

10. I hoped GOT could announce this month full and immediate eradication. If that happened, undoubtedly Turkish flag would fly high around the world. If that impossible, I must urge Erim to announce eradication by June 1972. I offered these possibilities with full understanding of American mood and desire of President and Secretary Rogers to strengthen US-Turkish relations. Rarely in our history, I said, are American Ambassadors recalled for Cabinet discussion of domestic issues. That this happened in this instance is one indication of gravity of situation, which is only intensified by Vietnam addiction crisis among American soldiers. Nearly $160 million being made available to fight problem in U.S. supply situation is now in Turkish hands.

11. As I turned to Prime Minister, Olcay said he, as only “non-expert” present, would like to speak first and to speak frankly. Said he realized importance of heroin question in U.S. and knew I had done my best for US-Turk relations. He also appreciated fact that President was understanding of Turkish problems. Erim govt, however, has had to face one important question after another. In its first serious problem with US, Olcay believed Turkey, as result congressional and public pressure, being confronted with something like Johnson letter. He knew this not as President Nixon intended but at least this is way it seems to Turkish public which considers Turkey being threatened as result of question which has suddenly become number one issue.

12. Olcay, who during meeting generally followed line of Cabinet’s economic nationalists, continued that heroin problem is an American one. Turkey should not suddenly be blamed for it. Rhetorically he asked whether USG had ever informed Americans that blame for heroin should not be placed entirely on Turkey. Answered his own question, qte you have not unqte. This is not question which should overwhelm our relationship. He noted some people believed U.S. pharmaceutical industry was trying to force eradication of Turkish opium, so it could sell more.

13. Finally, Olcay wondered whether we were making similar appeals in other countries. He, as did others throughout meeting, specifically wondered what we were doing about India.

14. Replying in kind, I said I too would like to speak in complete frankness. I said we had been in contact with many countries. We had been working closely with France to control heroin laboratories there. Ambassador Bunker has put enormous pressure on Vietnamese Govt and situation is similar in Thailand. In Mexico, border was virtually closed for several days. As for India, the answer was qte no unqte. We are not making similar appeals there because India controls its opium, and Turkey does not. I continued that if Turkey, like India, had taken control measures required by single convention, I would not be sitting there talking. To be quite frank qte your collection record is dismal and you have not controlled poppy farming. WHO last year purchased sixty tons but police just since January this year have seized nearly eleven tons. Suleyman Demirel promised to end all production and pass licensing bill in four-five years, yet here we are with Turkey still the only problem country among those which can legally produce opium. In end, we could say let chips fall where they may, but that would be serious decision in terms US-Turk relations. Unqte Turkey was not singled out for special attention in President’s message, I said, in fact no country was, but they should be mindful of fact that Turkey is largest single supplier of opium reaching US in form of heroin.

15. Karaosmanoglu pointed out he lived in US for seven years and, thus, understands our problems. If addiction situation is as bad as I said, however, my specific proposals did not match in magnitude gravity which I had described. More is needed to compensate Turks.

16. In reply I noted that $10-15 million offer was generous and, beyond that, we williing consider possibility of longer range projects. I recalled that Demirel had told me money was not important in considering erclication problem. What was important, I continued, was to guard the millions of dollars of assistance that Turkey receives annually from US. Qte when our phone rings and you ask for 500,000 tons wheat we act nqte. It is tough struggle, however, to maintain such a relationship.

17. Karaosmanoglu returning to his pet project, said we should not write off qte guaranteed US purchase unqte of leather and textiles. As he had before, Karaosmanoglu claimed he knew we had qte gone outside the marketplace unqte to make such arrangements with other countries, even unfriendly ones.

18. Ciglingiroglu said he had heard people comment that, if US can put men on moon it should be able to control heroin problem. To him, conversation so far did not prove US wanted to eradicate opium worldwide but wanted instead to pressure Turkey into issue decree. Turkey is prepared to control its opium, so why bring US-Turk relations into this issue?

19. Olcay agreed with another Ciglingiroglu comment to effect that if US forces this issue and Turkey does not respond as desired, entire countryside could be turned to poppy farming. I said I assumed highest degree of statesmanship. Ciglingiroglu added we should appreciate fact Erim govt has done more about opium in its two and one half months in office than Demirel did in five years. To do so, they had to face serious opposition from the public.

20. Olcay once more turned to India, at which point I replied strongly that I was dealing with country (Turkey) whose opium is killing Americans. Insofar as I knew, no Indian opium came to us and none got into veins of Americans.

21. Prime Minister then, for first time, entered substantive conversation. He spoke in Turkish, using Karaosmanoglu as interpreter. Recalled item on opium in his govts program and fact he personally had written it. Said problem will be solved from humanitarian viewpoint and so pressure statements had no place in that context. Recalled that Demirel told him American anti-opium drive was part of propaganda of American Jewish population which objects to Turkey’s Middle East policy. Bizim Radio (clandestine Turkish Communist broadcasts from East Germany) has been asserting for past month that his govt has sold out to US.

22. Erim continued my suggestions did include some acceptable ones: (a) purchase by GOT of entire crop; (b) subsidy for farmers who volunteer not to grow; (c) compensation for “three, four, or five years”. Poppy farming, however, is 400 years old in Turkey and is not easy to halt. What happens after four years of short term projects? Qte had you accepted our proposal and we announced it tomorrow, there would be few grounds for public objections unqte.

23. Coming to key point, Erim said most obscure item is what US will do in long run. Qte with such obscurity, I cannot go to public unqte. With US proposal, Erim concluded, he could only promise to restrict next year’s production to four provinces, pass licensing bill, and compensate farmers who voluntarily abstain from growing.

24. I replied I had no instructions, no specifics on what might be done to bring better life to affected farmers or what US financial assistance might be possible. I suggested GOT officials think about possibilities for day or two and come up with suggestions. I noted, referring to Erim’s reference to pressure, that I had not come to threaten. I wanted to serve as a bridge of friendship between his government and my own.

25. Erim wondered how he could explain all of this to Turkish public. I immediately said I would be happy to write his speech. I would emphasize humanitarian aspects, possibility of increased development, compensation plan, and fact there already assurances of outside help.

26. Following my mention of assurances of help which Turks have, Erim quickly turned to English saying qte do we? unqte, and Karaosmanoglu, in his best American English, added qte what do you offer? unqte. Erim continued that public opinion is key question and there must be something specific and of substance to offer affected turks. Qte our common people are skeptical of generalities unqte.

27. I noted that any long range aid that we might discuss must be considered as promissory since our fiscal year is ending and Congress must consider all future appropriations. Turks nodded understanding. Karaosmanoglu again asked what magnitude our offer was. Turning questions to them, I repeated I had no instructions on specific magnitude but would be interested in what figures they had in mind. I wondered if complete eradication announced, plans for better life prepared, and reasonable assurances receiived from USG, what would be magnitude of assistance needed by Turkey?

28. As he had in our June 11 meeting, Karaosmanoglu replied this is multi-billion dollar problem for US and also involves lives of many Americans. I noted that President’s recent message to Congress had proposed nearly $160 million in additional appropriations for internal programs. Karaosmanoglu inquired, with one of his rare grins, how much would eighty percent of that be, since Turkey is source of 80 percent of trouble? Continuing more seriously, he hoped we wanted to solve the problem for good. I assured him we did. Karaosmanoglu said all Turk officials in that room qte are biased in your favor unqte.

29. Ciglingiroglu promised Turkey would solve opium problem, but said qte it must be done in our own way unqte. Qte this is long term problem that must be solved in long term way. As Turkish Minister, I cannot tolerate Turkey as a smuggling nation. Unqte. Karaosmanoglu added that to appreciate long term aspects I should have been present that morning when he qte had unqte to receive delegation to Denizli opium farmers. Qte there are economic problems, but there also problems of pride which must be considered unqte. There must be compensation for economic losses but without loss of pride.

30. Karaosmanoglu agreed USG under pressure at home. On other hand, GOT has been making decisions on toughest possible questions involving prices, wages, taxes. All have been difficult and now US confronts GOT with another. In addition, Karaosmanoglu said, America wants Turkey to take eradication step abruptly. This will be very difficult for Turkey unless there proof of acceptable long range program to help farmers.

31. Erim commented issue is such a touchy one that he would probably have to take any decision to Parliament and perhaps even ask for vote of confidence. Ciglingiroglu said thrust of parliamentary pressure is toward expanding, not limiting, poppy farming.

32. I once more repeated three basic USG conditions (eradication by June 72, buying entire crop, passage of law to prohibit poppy farming). Erim suggested meeting tomorrow at expert level to put together paper on possibilities. Qte. Then I may have to tell Parliament about it unqte. Once more I said no proposals could include possibility of production on state farms. To that, Karaosmanoglu came back with qte you have not given an inch and are asking us to give a mile unqte. Ciglingiroglu chimed in with comment he had returned from tough parliamentary debate on licensing bill to find US offering qte only unqte $10-15 million.

33. At this point, Karaosmanoglu made only reference in conversation to assistance to three provinces which will be dropped from production between 1971 and 1972. No one took him up on this point.

34. I asked then whether Erim agreed that full eradication was possible at a price, including no state farms and no opium factory. Karaosmanoglu commented US was trying to change name of province of Afyong (which means opium) to qte Little America unqte. He said we are asking GOT to change its laws, so why can’t US laws on textiles be changed?

35. Several of us then agreed that Hill and Toner should meet June 22 with Turkish qte technicians unqte to, in effect, discuss para 7 of reftel, i.e., assistance to improve living conditions of farmers affected by complete eradication. Ciglingiroglu said talk should not be restricted by eliminating possibilities of state farms, textile exports, etc.

36. Turning to Erim, I again repeated our three conditions and asked whether he would agree to those if we could agree on longer term matter. He said qte yes unqte, but added, as we were standing, qte we must agree on something so farmers will not give anything, but will actually gain unqte.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

198. Telegram 113716 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 198. Telegram 113716 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, June 24, 1971, 2257Z.

Ref:

Ankara 4366

For Ambassador from Secretary

1. We have just completed high-level meeting which reviewed reports of your conversations with Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and other Turkish officials. While we are obviously pleased that Turk National Assembly has passed licensing law and matter now going to Senate, and further that Erim is prepared to commit himself to our proposition looking to total eradication by June 1972, we are all agreed that price which GOT is trying to exact from us is outrageous. In particular, the idea of including substantial compensation for assumed losses from illicit production is unconscionable.

2. As we have examined Turkish laws, we do not assume that any Turkish look into the possibilities of postponing the June 30th decree is likely to prove feasible. Our understanding of Turkish law is that the one-year notice to the farmers must be given by 1 July. Moreover, our own view is that the best strategy at the present time is to drive hard and keep the pressure on for an immediate Turk decision before the end of the month which commits the Turkish Government now to the total eradication program. If some means is found by legal subterfuge or otherwise to get around the one-year advance notice requirement, then other reasons for delay and procrastination are apt to come up, including possible increasing criticism in Turkey of so-called American pressure. Our judgment is that the longer Turkish Government delays in biting the bullet, the more problems it is buying for itself with its own farmers who would be directly affected by such decision and in US where opium problem viewed as critical. In other words, Turk decisiveness in laying out an explicit program, as a follow up to the action already taken by the National Assembly, offers the best chance in our judgment for the Turk Government to make the kind of positive impact on its own people as well as the world community.

3. As to the possibilities you discuss, we do not like the idea of introducing outsiders such as IBRD experts, to make price determination. This is a matter that has to be sorted out between the US and Turkey; basically it is a question of negotiating the price.

4. As negotiating counter, you may indicate we prepared to compensate for losses from legal opium sales and assist in agro-industrial program by grant of additional $10 million in FY 1972. In any event, we would not want you to go any further at this point than a willingness on your part to recommend to USG, without making any commitment, that over next two years US will consider grant of $20 million. You should make clear that these funds would be over and above the 10-15 million dollars proposed for compensation farmers and for losses of hard currency earnings.

5. You should also make clear that given the emotional content of this problem both in the Congress and with American public, failure of GOT to take dramatic step at this time will put in jeopardy totality of US assistance programs for Turkey. You should express this as your flat judgment.

6. We believe that it is too early for us to consider course you list of withdrawing from attempt to influence Turkish performance and leaving them to solve problem “in their own way”, as the damage to their interests, as well as our own, must be avoided if at all possible. We believe, further, that Congressional pressures with threat of punitive measures could not be contained by solution which permits continued production beyond 1972.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Sisco; cleared by Ehrlichman, Mitchell, and Connally; and approved by Rogers.

199. Telegram 4439 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 199. Telegram 4439 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, June 26, 1971, 2245Z.

For the Secretary from Handley

Subject:

Opium

Reference:

Ankara 4437

1. Following my meeting at Golcuk yesterday (reftel) I had long conversation with Prime Minister Erim tonight at his private quarters which I believe opens realistic way to full eradication of Turkish opium production. It was also a sincere reiteration of Turkey’s basic friendship for United States. I recommend most strongly that Washington follow through quickly with actions needed to tie down this encouraging exchange.

2. The great difference between this evening’s discussion and others of past two weeks was that Erim was in complete charge of Turkish side (Deputy Prime Minister Karaosmanoglu was only other Minister present). Erim’s intelligence, sincere friendship for the West in general and US in particular, and deep impression you made on him while you were here came through in everything he said. In end, he said, it was not money but friendship that was important.

3. I stated if Turkey eradicates opium next year, USG will follow through with: (a) $10-15 million grant over next three years to compensate farmers and to offset foreign exchange losses; (b) another $10 million grant in FY 72 to help Turkey establish means for new way of life for affected farmers. In addition, I promised to recommend to Washington that Turkey should be granted an additional $10 million in FY 1973. Beyond these three basic points, I suggested USAID would do all possible to advise on new agricultural programs and USG would encourage similar help from international organizations and private foundations. I said I “fervently” urged that Turkey take this major step of eradication.

4. Erim presented his side by saying we agreed on two points: helping farmers and eventual eradication. Said compensation must be based on 1971 crop and on 1971 international price. I said yes to both, but refused to consider illegal crops as part of this computation. Erim agreed that illegal crops would not be considered, but also said compensation must continue until farmers income from new sources balances that from old. When I suggested this was open-ended arrangement, he said “no, no it will be equalized in three or four years.”

5. Erim recalled his first Cabinet position as Minister of Public Works in late nineteen-forties when American aid program just beginning in Turkey. Commented our greatest success then was highway development program. “Turkey will benefit forever from that work.” Suggested that what is needed now similar “agricultural mission” at high level to assist and advise in the basic agrarian reforms his government will propose.

6. Erim continued that he and Karaosmanoglu would draft new decree and public statement saying only four provinces will be allowed to plant for 1972 harvest and then there will be no more poppy farming in Turkey. We will be shown advance drafts on Monday. He would then, after decree and statement issued, need from President Nixon public statement referring to reassurances of friendship made in your late April visit to Ankara, giving full recognition to GOT’s efforts to control and eradicate opium, promising to help in the affected areas including enlisting the cooperatione of international organizations and private foundations, and reiterating fact military collaboration will continue between US and Turkey. He made clear that this message was a key element of his proposal and should come after issuance decree and his statement.

7. I summed up points of what I understood to be situation as follows: (a) GOT will write new decree and statement on opium; (b) only four provinces will grow poppies for 1972 crop;(c) thereafter there will be no poppy farming in Turkey; (d) USG will provide grant aid of $10-15 million to compensate farmers on basis 1971 international legal repeat legal price; (e) we will request President Nixon to send message along lines suggested by Erim; (f) we will pledge $10 million grant for FY 1972 to help improve lives of affected farmers; (g) I will recommend to Washington that an additional $10 million grant be provided for FY 73; and (h) we will do what we can to help thereafter providing US agricultural know-how including possibility of a high level agricultural mission. Erim added that compensation must as he noted earlier, continue until farmers’ income from new sources balances that from legal sales of opium.

8. Erim said he wanted President Nixon to know he had reliable ally in Turkey. He must go forward with reforms his government has announced, he said in order to move toward “normal state of affairs,” controlling extremists by positive action rather than martial law. “Martial law cannot and should not continue,” he said. In order to continue as strong ally, however, Turkey must strengthen its economic and social order. I said our work that night could mark beginnings of stronger US-Turk alliance. Prime Minister concluded “every occasion must strengthen that alliance.”

9. Comment: Full report on conversation will follow. Time is still very short and much remains to be done before June 30. We will report on Turkish draft decree and statement and will hope to exchange ideas about President’s statement. Only specific financial commitments made so far are $10-15 million for compensation over next two to three years and $10 million grant for agro-industrial development in FY 72. It seemed to me that Prime Minister, at least on basis of what he said tonight (unlike wild financial bonanza expected by his subordinates, particularly Minister of Commerce and Industry Cilingiroglu), placed highest priority on assumption that US would not let Turkey down as he took final irrevocable action to end poppy growing in Turkey.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.

200. Telegram 4441 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 200. Telegram 4441 From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, June 27, 1971, 0635Z.

Subj:

Narcotics Meeting With Prime Minister Erim

Ref:

Ankara 4439

Summary: In climactic discussion of opium with Erim on June 26 we agreed that opium issue must be worked out within broad framework of US-Turkish relations. In end, Erim agreed to issue June 30 decree permitting fall-spring planting in four provinces, but stating there will be beyond that no rpt no further planting of poppy in Turkey. I agreed that in exchange USG will grant total $10-15 million to compensate farmers’ losses and foreign exchange losses for about three-year period and will grant additional $10 million to help improve way of life of affected farmers. I promised to encourage Washington to grant another $10 million in FY 73 and to work with international organizations to help Turkey. At Erim’s request, I agreed that we would ask President Nixon to send Erim message thanking Turkey for its efforts and pledging continued military and economic collaboration.

Of great interest was his clear statement on his attitude toward martial law. He said, “martial law cannot and should not continue. Turkey must reform and extremists must be curbed. Your action will be important in helping with reforms and in strengthening your ally.” Seems clear Erim now willing to take major political risk to solve this long issue. Problems undoubtedly still ahead of us, but way now open to removing serious obstacle to fruitful Turk-US relations. Erim was clearly interested in financial arrangements and possibility of aid from agricultural experts but was even more so in receiving public congratulations. I hope all possible steps will be taken to meet his desires. Would appreciate receiving Washington reaction by COB Monday. End summmary.

1. In climactic discussion of opium issue I met June 26 from 1800 to 1940 with Prime Minister Erim at his residence. With him were Deputy Prime Minister Karaosmanoglu and FonMin Deputy Director General Arim. Hill and Greene came with me.

2. We both recalled Golcuk ship launching ceremonies of previous day (Ankara 4406 A) and Erim noted Turkey, with help of foreigners, is beginning again to build a navy. Had done so in past under Ottoman empire, but qte in days of decadence unqte Turkey had lost much. Now, little by little, it was moving forward. I quoted gist of Commodore Porters’ comment in early nineteenth century that he would take it as his mission in Ottoman empire to help build strong navy.

3. Using this as cue, Prime Minister said Turkey now needs help to build new agricultural system. He asked Erim to summarize in English excerpts from Turkish record of recent US-Turk meetings. Erim then gave good, factual summary key points related to opium in Erim’s meeting with Secretary Rogers on April 29. Then he covered in similar fashion my meetings with Erim on April 27 and May 17.

4. I next summarized developments since May 17 presentation of Turkish proposal, my trip to Washington and meeting at White House, the USG’s offer of a $10-15 million grant and possible longer range assistance, and recent fruitless negotiations at experts level, trouble is I said, point to my watch, June 30 is not far away.

5. I then repeated full USG offer. We prepared, if Turkey grows no more poppies after June 1972, to grant GOT $10-15 million to assist over next three years. Farmers who give up opium production and to help cover foreign exchange loss. In addition, we prepared to grant in FY 72 another $10 million to help develop agro-industry in areas where farmers will be seeking new and better way of life. Furthermore, I said I was prepared personally to recommend to Washington that another $10 million be granted for same purpose in FY 73. Qte Isn’t that enough evidence of our intention? Unqte.

6. As I had said many times during past few days, I repeated that none of this money was in any way to be based on illegal production of opium. I said I considered myself a veteran of congressional hearings and I knew how case of any official presenting request for aid to Turkey would be enormously strengthened if he could report Turkey qte had made that extra effort to end this poisonous problem unqte. On contrary, if such an official had to report Turkey still important source of opium, he would find it extremely difficult to ask Congress for the more than $200 million per year which Congress appropriates for Turkey.

7. In addition to specific figures involved in USG’s proposal, I suggested it was possible USAID program in Turkey could be directed more towards helping agro-industry and agricultural sector. We would also encourage IBRD, UNDP, and Ford and Rockefeller Foundations to assist.

8. In end, though I thought money was not most important element. Friendship with Turkey and commitment to defense of Turkey were keys to our relationship. We are facing, I said, combination of practical political problems on both sides, qte but I fervently ask you to take step which will cause Turkey to be acclaimed by world unqte.

9. Speaking in Turkish (Karaosmanoglu interpreted), Erim noted once more that from beginning he had called opium question humanitarian problem and had agreed that restrictions and eventual eradication must be Turkey’s goals. Qte but I must have something that will appeal to public opinion unqte so farmers will not suffer loss and so this year’s crop will be sold to TMO. Qte if you can give me this, then next year we will stop unqte.

10. One very practical point, Erim continued, is that any calculations for compensation must be based on 1971 crop and on 1971 international legal price for opium. This must include all elements of poppy crop such as straw and seeds. I said yes to all of this. Karaosmanoglu commented Turkey would be foregoing sure source of foreign exchange a point which he made several times in Turkish to Erim. I said, if you do not eradicate, you may also be giving up another sure source of foreign exchange-USG financial assistance.

11. To cover loss in foreign exchange, Karaosmanoglu said Turkey needs industry and an assured market for industry’s products. Erim agreed. He wondered whether American offer would be enough to cover TMO purchases. I told him that I was ready to bet it would. I also concurred with them that we would be covering all poppy byproducts except perhaps oil, costs of which difficult to calculate since it mostly consumed by farmers themselves. We all commented use of oil was long engrained habit which would be difficult to break. Karaosmanoglu, who seemed exhausted but was generally friendlier than at our other meetings, said it was something like his son’s continuing craving for American hamburgers. Qte there is no way to compensate for that unqte.

12. Erim again agreed, but said qte I will take brunt of this and other problems unqte for sake of US friendship. Qte it might even bring about fall of my govt unqte.

13. Erim said he had another point that must be made clear. American compensation could not be just for two or three years. It must continue until farmer’s income from new sources matched that from opium.

14. Erim recalled that when he had been in US, he, like Khrushchev, had been greatly impressed by exceptional agricultural developments there. Qte so, send your experts here and devise new type of agriculture so we can have better life for our farmers unqte. Erim said in 1948, when he was Minister of Public Works, American qte road mission unqte had come to Turkey and it had been impressive success. Qte now send US agricultural mission to go to Afyon and Burdue and change agriculture there unqte. Karaosmanoglu realistically commented that things are different now and I agreed. Erim continued what he wants is model in agriculture such as Hilton Hotel has been for hotels of Turkey.

15. After exchange in Turkish with Karaosmanoglu, Prime Minister said two of them would prepare new decree for June 30 release and public statement which would be made at same time. Decree would announce end to poppy farming after crop to be planted in four provinces this fall. In return, he proposed that President Nixon send message expressing American feelings as consequence of these steps. Compensation for those going out of business would be based on this year’s crop and there would also be compensation for loss of foreign exchange, again based on this year’s prices. This arrangement would continue until earnings from new sources equalled this year’s earnings from opium. I objected that this seemed to be open-ended arrangement. Erim quickly said in English qte, no, no it will be done in three or four years. Each year we will calculate income from new crops such as sunflowers and see what gap is. It won’t take long unqte. I suggested there many possible substitutes, one of which might be tourism in considering possibilities we should not have blinders on.

16. Turning to more general subject, Erim commented US is of course leader of West, but is 10,000 miles away from Turkey. Russia is close and danger is real. He mentioned Bizim Radio (Turkish Communist radio in East Germany) and recalled that more than two years before he had told Greene of danger in Communist publications being spread about in Turkey. Qte all of this is very serious for us unqte. When Prime Minister talks to public, qte he must show that Turkish interests are being protected unqte. Many people, Erim said, believe qte Turkey is being used by US, like Spain unqte. I quickly pointed out Spain does not enjoy NATO defense arrangements we have with Turkey.

17. I had been jotting down points on which we seemed in agreement and, at this point, I read to Prime Minister my understanding of them: (a) Turks will draft new decree and statement and will give US advance copies (b) decree will say fall planting will be permitted in four provinces (c) thereafter there will be no poppy farming in Turkey (d) US will provide compensation for eradication based on 1971 legal prices, coming to total of $10-15 million to be spread out over next two-three years (e) I will request President Nixon to send Erim a message on the steps taken by GOT (f) USG pledges to grant $10 million in FY 72 to help farmers affected by decision not to grow poppies and (g) we will see what else we can do to provide technical know-how so affected farmers will have better life. I will recommend to Washington that a high-level mission come to Turkey to advise on development of Turkish agriculture, particularly in areas affected by opium eradication.

18. Erim said foreign exchange compensation must be based on 1971 international legal price, as, for example, at Hamburg. Karaosmanoglu said income from all agricultural products must eventually match income gained from old opium land. Erim pointed out program should include all seven provinces now growing poppies. I replied we would consider what we might do for three that will not grow for 1972 crop, but no money could be involved. Erim concluded total amount of money not important, but friendship is.

19. Karaosmanoglu said there might be technical, legal problem in connection with eradication. Same point he made to me at Goluk (para 8 Ankara 4437). Erim promised, if that were case, he would have new law on subject passed.

20. Going back to message from President Nixon Erim explained he hoped it would include references to assurances given him by Secretary Rogers, recognition of Turkey’s efforts in controlling and eradicating opium, promise to as for assistance from World Bank and other international organizations, and statement that US-Turk military and economic collaboration will continue. To our specific question, he said he wanted statement to be public one. Before President’s message, GOT will have issued decree and made statement.

21. Moving at least partly beyond opium question, Erim reported govt now actively preparing land reform program. It will begin in southeast Turkey and will be, qte Western type land reform unqte such as in Italy and Taipei. Qte we will not follow the Eastern road we will compensate unqte. Karaosmanoglu noted he was working on that very point now.

22. Erim said he wanted US to know it had reliable ally in Turkey. Qte we must undertake fiscal, agricultural and educational reforms and so have a normal state. Martial law cannot and should not continue unqte. If Turkey is to survive thereafter, qte reforms are necessary and extremists must be curbed. Your action will be important in helping with reforms and in strengthening your ally unqte.

23. I asked if we could have a copy of Erim’s understanding of our discussion. He replied that Erim would have it ready for us in English next day.

24. Erim mentioned that he and Karaosmanoglu had been in National Security Council meeting that morning and implied opium had been one subject of discussion. Karaosmanoglu said he had explained to NSC nature of heroin problem in US by nothing that, if he had remained in US few more years his nine-year-old son would have been in danger.

25. Erim said, if he might quote Bulent Ecevit, (Erim’s principal foe in Republic Peoples Party) what he wanted to do was change the order in Turkey—like the Labor Party did in Britain after 1945. Qte to do so, we will need your help unqte.

26. Erim promised to give me a copy of the draft decree and statement on Monday.

27. I said our discussion could mark beginnings of stronger US-Turk alliance. Erim replied qte every occasion must strengthen that alliance unqte.

28. Karaosmanoglu noted situation reminded him of Robert Frost’s qte Mending Walls unqte, from which he then put a few lines into Turkish for Erim. I began to quote Ataturk’s remark about Turkey being alive to suffering of world, but before I could get few words out, Erim took over and described statement concluding Turkey still believes in this.

29. Comment: From foregoing it seems clear Prime Minister is now prepared to take major risk to his political position to meet our request for total eradication after next planting season. It is also clear his main financial requirement will be adequate compensation for farmers giving up production of opium poppy and for loss of foreign exchange. Our pledge of $10 million in grant assistance for agro-industry development in affected areas and my promise to recommend to Washington granting of additional amount for FY 73 seemed to be persuasive.

30. A major discrepancy might develop if sale of this year’s crop to TMO and the export at world market prices should subtantially surpass our computations in $10-15 million offer. I think, however, this amount should be enough for two-three year period, but I believe we should be prepared to consider another tranche or two beyond that promised, if TMO purchases and world market prices so warrant.

31. Prime Minister seemed place heaviest emphasis not on money but on having Turkey receive public congratulations from President about outstanding contribution that had been made by sacrificing a centuries-old crop. He believes this decision will affect world, especially US.

31. Erim also demonstrated great faith in US agricultural experts who might be able to help guide Turkish agriculture, especially in those provinces where poppy had been eradicated, to new and brighter future.

32. I and my colleagues left last night’s meeting with feeling that courageous and forward looking friend of US had decided on a step no other Turkish politician could take under current circumstances.

33. We have already received English summary transcript of talks as prepared by Turkish note-taker (Arim). It is in general agreement with our record, but to make certain there no doubts, we will give Erim informal summary of our understanding of last night’s conversation. We presume Prime Minister’s statement now being prepared and we know legal people at work on decree.

34. Erim and his associates, according to Arim, talked a bit more after we left last night. Among other subjects they covered possible legal problems in total eradication. Arim said he told two Ministers about possibilities under Article 22 of Single Convention, of an qte international exit unqte as I had explained to Olcay on June 24 when I left copy with him.

35. We are preparing contingency draft of possible presidential message to follow issuance of Prime Minister’s statement and publication of decree. I agreed, if Washington concurred in presidential statement, that we would arrange for advance text to be show to Erim, following which there would be simultaneous release.

36. Would much appreciate knowing by no later than close of business on Monday Washington’s reaction to events of past two days, particularly last night’s meeting.

37. I am now convinced that long and disturbing issue of opium production in Turkey can be removed as obstacle to fruitful Turkish-US relations. If things move the way I hope, I would also hope we could enlist assistance of senior Senators, Congressmen, Governors, Mayors and other notable to make or send congratulatory statements to Turkey on what is historical action.

Handley

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate; Exdis.

201. Telegram 116137 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey 201. Telegram 116137 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Turkey1

Washington, June 28, 1971, 0114Z.

Ref:

(A) Ankara 4439; (B) Ankara 4442

For Ambassador from Secretary

1. We are highly gratified that in difficult negotiations of recent weeks you have been able to bring Turks to verge of historic step of renouncing further cultivation of opium poppy. In order to ensure that our offers of assistance clear and that both sides in agreement on details of situation, we are setting forth in following paragraphs terms agreed to as understood in Washington.

2. GOT decree will confirm Fall 1971 planting in only four provinces. GOT will introduce program of voluntary abstention from planting in Fall 1971 and in Spring 1972 with advance payments to individual farmer at rate of 110 per cent of legal proceeds from crop now under harvest.

3. GOT decree will include fact that no planting to be permitted in Fall 1972. In order to make prohibition permanent, GOT undertakes to obtain legislation banning further opium poppy cultivation.

4. In order to prevent foreign exchange loss to GOT and to help GOT to prevent loss of income for opium poppy farmers during transition years to new crops or to other means of earning livelihood, as well as to assist GOT to fund advance payments to induce voluntary abstention from planting in Fall 1971, USG will provide up to $10-$15 million in grants to GOT over four-year period. This period would coincide with USG Fiscal Years 1972, 1973, 1974, and 1975. (FYI-This reaches outside year of three to four-year time span Prime Minister said it might take for farmers’ income from new sources to balance that from old-para 4, ref (A). END FYI.) 1971 crop now under harvest to serve as base for calculation volume of crop and price for advance and compensatory payments in any given year.

5. USG will provide grants of $10 million in FY 1972 and $10 million in FY 1973 to be utilized to assist GOT effort to redirect economic life in affected areas away from dependence on opium poppy cultivation.

6. USG will encourage World Bank, other multilateral organizations, and private foundations to assist in GOT agrarian reform measures.

7. USG will, as part of AID assistance program, send agricultural experts to Turkey to advise on development of agrarian reform program within which withdrawal from opium poppy cultivation would be subsumed.

8. Following issuance of GOT decree and statement by Prime Minister, President will make public statement along lines suggested by Prime Minister. Text of such statement, based on ref (B), will be dispatched by septel for your comment.

9. Because of its importance to the potential immediate disruption of supplies opium to international traffickers, it imperative that Erim Government understands fully need for active support program of voluntary withdrawal from cultivation. USG would be prepared to consider additional grant funds in FY 1975 equal to total advance payments made to farmers between June 30 and September 1, 1971 for voluntary program, if ERIM Government institutes a program that results in withdrawing from cultivation at least 35 percent of area which otherwise would be planted in the Fall of 1971 and the Spring of 1972. If voluntary program does not result in withdrawal from cultivation of 35 percent of area which otherwise would have been planted, then additional US funds will not be made available in FY 1975 and total US grant for advance and compensatory purposes will remain up to $10-$15 million through FY 1975.

10. Foregoing conditional on effective GOT performance to control and collect 1972 harvest and to prevent illegal cultivation.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS TUR. Secret; Immediate, Exdis. Drafted by Pugh; cleared by Davies, Sisco, Connally, and Saunders; cleared in draft with Williams and in substance with Ingersoll and Wellman; and approved by Rogers.

202. Intelligence Report 202. Intelligence Report1

Washington, July 1, 1971

[8 pages not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive

203. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 203. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT:

A Major Step on Opium Eradication in Turkey

Following your meeting on June 14 on narcotics, Ambassador Handley has had a series of discussions with Turkish Prime Minister ERIM, which have resulted in Turkish agreement to eliminate planting of the opium poppy in 1972 on certain conditions. This is a major breakthrough, and the purpose of this memo is to seek your approval of the steps that are necessary to conclude this agreement.

Prime Minister ERIM has agreed to issue a decree no later than June 30 announcing that opium poppy cultivation will no longer be permitted after this year’s planting, which must be allowed under present Turkish law in four provinces. [There will be a maximum effort to buy up this year’s crop.] This means that there will be no more Turkish poppy crops after the summer of 1972. In return, he has asked certain financial assistance and a public message from you praising this step and pledging continued US economic and military cooperation with Turkey.

Ambassador Handley in return will confirm an offer to the Turkish government of up to $15 million to help compensate farmers for their loss of income for a transition period of three, possibly four, years. He was also authorized to offer an additional grant of $10 million in FY 1972 and $10 million in FY 1973 to assist the Turkish government with economic development in the opium-growing areas in order to provide the farmers there with alternatives.

Both the financial offer and the requested statement seem quite consistent with US interests. The financial assistance will go principally to the development of the agricultural sector in Turkey. The public statement is nothing more than a reiteration of your strong conviction of the importance of attacking the narcotics issue, an expression of gratitude to Turkey, and a pledge of continued military and economic collaboration between the US and Turkey, which is a strong element in our NATO relationship anyway.

RECOMMENDATION:

1. That you confirm offering up to $35 million as described above.

2. That you approve the attached statement as suggested by Prime Minister ERIM to be issued shortly after the Turkish decision is announced if ERIM says it meets his needs.

3. That you endorse in principle sending a high-level agricultural mission to Turkey to help with this transition. (text cleared by Price.)

Secretary Rogers makes the above recommendation and Secretary Connally, the Attorney General and the Administrator for AID concur. Mr. Ehrlichman and I agree.

APPROVE _______ OTHER _________

Attachment

TEXT OF DRAFT PRESIDENTIAL STATEMENT

In today’s world, declarations of statesmanlike intent are not difficult. But instances of courageous statesmanlike action are few. Prime Minister Nihat Erim of Turkey has just combined the two. Today he declared that the Republic of Turkey, our friend and staunch ally within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, would abandon a traditional agricultural practice in order to make a significant contribution to the well-being of the world. In the decree of his Government, he announced that within one year in accordance with the law of his nation the opium poppy will no longer be planted. This farsighted step will provide an example which we trust will soon be followed by other nations.

For hundreds of years, tens of thousands of Turkish families have raised the opium poppy as a legitimate cash crop and for its edible oil and seed. Under a United Nations Convention, Turkey is one of those few nations permitted legally to grow poppy for export; yet Turkey is one of the few opium-cultivating countries in which the use of opium or heroin as an addictive drug is virtually unknown. Since the opium farmer has little if any knowledge of his part in the spread of a frightening international epidemic, a ban on opium production is a particularly difficult decision. These circumstances accentuate the vision and wisdom of this very important step. We know well the importance of the agricultural sector of Turkey’s economy and we are prepared to put at the disposal of the Turkish Government our best technical brains to assist Turkey’s program to bring about a better life for the Turkish farmer. We are proud to assist in a program from which we all will benefit.

Secretary of State Rogers told me about his discussions in April with Prime Minister ERIM and senior Turkish officials. Secretary Rogers understood fully the range of problems confronting the Turkish Government and its people, and he was impressed by the efforts being made to solve them. We in the United States are obligated to a friend and ally whose firm military and political commitment to the welfare and defense of the Atlantic community is well known. My Administration is committed to aid nations and peoples prepared to help eliminate the narcotics menace. I pledge continued cooperation with Turkey in its efforts to increase the well being of its people and to maintain its independence and security.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Outside system. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval. The attached statement was released on July 30 and is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1971, pp. 789-790.

204. Intelligence Report 204. Intelligence Report1

Washington, July 9, 1971

[2 pages not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive.

205. Unattributed Memorandum 205. Unattributed Memorandum1

Washington, undated

[6 pages not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret; Sensitive.

206. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 206. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 23, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Involvement of Panamanian Government Leaders in the International Narcotics Trade

As you know, there have been reports for some time that figures in the Panamanian Government are involved in the international narcotics traffic. Information developed by the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) over the past several months indicate that: --Panama is one of the major way-stations and clearing houses in the international narcotics traffic, and perhaps the major one in the Western Hemisphere.

--A good many important figures both within and outside the Panamanian Government seem to be involved. There is information indicating that General Torrijos (de facto ruler of Panama), his brother, presently Ambassador to Spain, President Lakas, and many if not most of the top officers of the National Guard (GN) are deeply involved. In fact, the National Guard as an institution apparently manages the drug traffic. In addition, there is evidence that elements of the Panamanian diplomatic corps also play a role in narcotics traffic and are abusing diplomatic privileges to further it. (According to BNDD the Panamanian Consuls General in New York and Miami are probably involved, but there is no information regarding personnel attached to the Panamanian Embassy in Washington.)

General Torrijos is apparently aware of our knowledge about involvement of members of his Government and perhaps even himself in international narcotics traffic, and his awareness recently verged on panic following the arrest in New York of the son of a Panamanian diplomat who has been charged with smuggling 80 kilos of heroin into the US. This week Torrijos sent the G-3 of the National Guard to the US to meet with State and BNDD officials. He expressed his Government’s concern with discovery of the existence of the narcotics traffic in Panama, offered whatever cooperation was needed to suppress this traffic, and requested a high-level mission from BNDD to visit Panama to consider joint measures for controlling the traffic. The State Department and BNDD were non-committal, but were careful to emphasize that we had a great deal of information from many sources about the narcotics traffic in Panama.

The importance of the narcotics traffic through Panama, and the extent of official involvement, have obvious implications for both our narcotics suppression strategy and for the current Panama Canal Negotiations. Clearly we have two goals: --Eliminating official involvement and support for the narcotics traffic through Panama, and to the degree possible squeezing it off.

--Attaining our goals in Canal Treaty negotiations.

Properly handled, the information developed by BNDD could contribute to achieving at least one and perhaps even both of these objectives. However, there is some risk that we could lose the advantage given us by the information in our hands without making significant progress toward either goals due to mishandling or lack of coordination. In fact mishandling could result in serious damage to one or both interests. Several agencies are involved (principally State, BNDD and CIA). In addition, the Congress is becoming concerned about Panama’s role in the narcotics traffic due to the arrest referred to above, and BNDD officials could be called to testify. Even if testimony were in executive session, the net result could be to blow the whole affair before we have a chance to use the information either to protect our several interests or to forward them.

BNDD and State will probably agree to accept in principle the invitation of the PJG to send a high level BNDD representative to Panama to consult on the narcotics problem. However, before he actually departs, it is important that we develop a coordinated scenario covering both his tactics in dealing with the PJG and actions which we might take in conjunction with or following his visit designed to gain the greatest advantage from the present situation without jeopardizing either our narcotics control or foreign policy interests. We should act quickly if we are to take advantage of the situation, and unless we respond to Torrijos soon he may be driven by his own insecurities to take precipitate action against our interests. To assure that this does not slip between the cracks, I have prepared for your signature a directive to State, Justice, and CIA instructing them to prepare such a scenario, with options and agency differences highlighted where appropriate, by July 31, 1971.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the directive to the Secretary of State, the Attorney General and the Director of Central Intelligence at Tab I.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive, Eyes Only. Sent for action. Tabs A and I were attached but not published. Kissinger instructed Nachmanoff to see Haig and suggested that he check with Ehrlichman’s staffers to determine how they preferred to handle the issue.

207. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 207. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 28, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Control of International Drug Actions

As you are aware, John Ehrlichman formed a Cabinet committee on the international drug problem. This is to be a parallel organization to Dr. Janka’s organization which handles the domestic program. As it stands now Secretary Rogers is the chairman of the committee, you are a member. Rogers has just appointed Nelson Gross, a Republican politician from New Jersey, as an assistant secretary to handle the international aspects of the drug problem under the Cabinet committee.

Bud Krogh believes and I agree completely that the quarreling which has been associated with the international drug problem involving frictions between State, Treasury, Justice, Customs, etc. suggests that State will not be able to adequately coordinate the maze of conflicting interests. A more serious factor is the problem associated with having State freewheel the various capitals in search of remedial action on the drug problem. I am especially concerned about Southeast Asia where the influences of corruption involving high-ranking governmental and military officials could run directly contrary to our more fundamental objectives.

Krogh believes that the only solution to the problem is to appoint a member of the NSC staff as executive secretary to the Cabinet committee. He is anxious to have your okay to have Art Downey appointed to this position. He would in turn appoint one or two staff assistants from Treasury and elsewhere to support Art. Art would in turn manage the interdepartmental effort consistent with your views.

I have discussed this with Art. He is anxious to serve but would expect to be relieved of his other duties, promoted to GS-17 and be authorized to bask in a fairly high-profile publicity campaign designed for political reasons to emphasize the remedial action being taken by the President. There are rumblings on the Hill that while the domestic program is going well, the President has not moved as decisively as he might in the international area.

We have two options: (1) Permit State to retain the lead with the risks that inter-departmental squabbling will continue with disastrous impact on the coordination of our programs abroad. An additional risk and of greater concern to me is the likelihood that a State dominated program will serve political objectives which run counter to the President’s best interest.

(2) Permit Art Downey to serve as executive secretary to the Cabinet committee while remaining formally as a member of the NSC staff and thus responsive to you for ultimate guidance. This solution is of course somewhat awkward and may not be acceptable to Secretary Rogers. If you agree with the solution, it must be clearly understood that Downey works directly for you, that he is available for other duties when required and that adequate space is provided in the EOB to house the operation.

I am inclined to favor Option 2 recognizing its pitfalls.

Decision

Option 1

Option 2

See Me

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Confidential. Haig did not initial the memorandum, and there is no indication of Kissinger’s decision, but see Document 208.

208. White House Press Release 208. White House Press Release1

Washington, September 7, 1971.

MEMORANDUM FOR:

Honorable William P. Rogers Secretary of State

SUBJECT:

Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control

Drug abuse, particularly narcotics addiction, has grown to crisis proportions in the last several years in the United States. It is imperative that the illicit flow of narcotics and dangerous drugs into this country be stopped as soon as possible. In order most effectively to coordinate this effort, which encompasses diplomatic, intelligence, and law enforcement functions, I am hereby establishing a Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control.

The Cabinet Committee will be chaired by the Secretary of State and include: Secretary Rogers

Attorney General Mitchell

Secretary Laird

Secretary Connally

Ambassador Bush

Director Helms

and such others as become necessary in the opinion of the Chairman.

The Cabinet Committee will be supported by a Working Group to be composed of personnel from each of the concerned agencies. The Executive Director of the Cabinet Committee and Chairman of the Working Group will be EGIL KROGH, Jr.

The Cabinet Committee shall be responsible for the formulation and coordination of all policies of the Federal Government relating to the goal of curtailing and eventually eliminating the flow of illegal narcotics and dangerous drugs into the United States from abroad. To the maximum extent permitted by law, Federal officers and Federal departments and agencies shall cooperate with the Cabinet Committee in carrying out its functions under this directive and shall comply with the policies, guidelines, standards, and procedures prescribed by the Cabinet Committee.

More specifically, the Cabinet Committee shall- (1) develop comprehensive plans and programs for the implementation of these policies;

(2) assure that all diplomatic, intelligence, and Federal law enforcement programs and activities of international scope are properly coordinated;

(3) evaluate all such programs and activities and their implementation;

(4) make recommendations to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget concerning proposed funding of such programs; and

(5) report to the President, from time to time, concerning the foregoing.

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 359, Subject Files, Narcotics V. No classification marking. Printed from a copy that indicates Nixon signed the original.

209. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 209. Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, September 23, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Bi-Weekly Report on the Narcotics Problem in Southeast Asia

Regional

Early this month the Inter-Agency Working Group on Narcotics completed and sent to all East Asian diplomatic and consular posts basic guidelines on narcotics control. The guidelines affirmed that Asian nations must be convinced that the problem is theirs as well as ours, and that their effective cooperation with us in this field constitutes an essential part of our bilateral relations with them. Program objectives were defined as: 1. Long Range-elimination of opium poppy cultivation.

2. Short Range --Stem the flow of illicit narcotics to U.S. troops in Asia and to the U.S.

--Eliminate the illegal manufacture or processing of heroin and other opium derivatives.

--Help Asian governments educate their populations regarding the growing narcotics problem.

--Assist in reducing the demand for narcotics and rehabilitation of addicts in Asia.

Washington agencies have also agreed that an enhanced United Nations role in the “Golden Triangle” (the tri-border area of Burma, Thailand, and Laos) would be effective, particularly with Burma, which resists our efforts to stimulate action. The U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs has formulated a new $17.2 million program for these three countries for 1971-1976.

Individual Countries

1. Burma. When Secretary Rogers’ Drug Coordinator Nelson Gross visited Rangoon earlier this month, he was told by Burmese officials that: --Burma would solve its drug problems itself and did not welcome cooperative efforts with Thailand and Burma or through the Colombo Plan.

--The Burmese Government has reduced opium poppy acreage by 80% in the last five years through crop substitution. (Burma is estimated to supply about 400 of the 700 tons of the annual opium production in these three countries.) Embassy Rangoon comments that such a radical reduction in poppy acreage is highly unlikely.

--[1 line not declassified]

--U.S. purchase of a Burmese Government stock of 50 tons of opium, accumulated over the past four years, would be welcome. (Mr. Gross responded that this would be very difficult.)

2. Thailand. A joint U.S.-Thai statement on narcotics was issued August 25 in which both governments committed themselves to joint efforts to bring the drug problem under control. In addition, our Embassy in Bangkok has been authorized to negotiate a Memorandum of Understanding with the Thai Government which would include a Thai commitment to initiate immediately the measures required to stem the flow of illicit drugs transiting Thailand.

3. Laos. The Inter-Agency Working Group is completing an integrated drug control program for Laos.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 358, Narcotics IV. Confidential. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President did not see it.

210. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 210. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 24, 1971

[9 pages not declassified]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret; Sensitive.

211. Circular Airgram CA-4945 from the Department of State to all NEA Diplomatic and Consular Posts 211. Circular Airgram CA-4945 from the Department of State to all NEA Diplomatic and Consular Posts1

Washington, November 1, 1971.

SUBJECT:

NEA Narcotics Control Programs

Because of the importance to the United States of illicit narcotics activities in the NEA area, the Bureau has been in the process of intensifying its focus on drug problems extending beyond those of opium production and trafficking in Turkey. An NEA inter-agency working group has been established composed of AID, BNDD, CIA, Customs, Treasury, and interested Department offices. Programs are being developed for a number of countries, on which posts will be asked to comment.

At the outset, a need was felt for a short NEA concept paper to (1) outline the general problem, (2) set out the principles under which we should operate, and (3) define our objectives. Such a paper has now been approved. A copy is enclosed for your guidance.

Johnson, Acting

Enclosure

October 19, 1971

CONCEPT PAPER

AN ANTI NARCOTICS PROGRAM FOR THE NEAR EAST AND SOUTH ASIA

I. Introduction

All the major problems associated with opium-based narcotics are found in the NEA area: cultivation, opium production, heroin factories, illicit traffic, and addiction. In addition, hashish and marijuana are produced, trafficked in, and consumed in most NEA countries.

The problems are compounded by the inability of some governments to exercise control over significant portions of their territories. Other countries, notably India, have not yet had their control systems put to a real test.

Further, the importance of narcotics’ problems as seen by the United States is not shared to the same extent by many governments in the region. Other economic and social concerns take much higher priorities.

Governmental sensitivities to outside interference and pressures constitute an additional hindrance.

Nonetheless, the importance of NEA countries in production of opium (perhaps as much as 1500 metric tons a year, both licit and illicit) and as a major conduit to the United States and Western Europe, dictates that an imaginative and vigorous program be agreed on and initiated at the earliest possible time.

Furthermore, various NEA nations have serious addiction problems of their own, creating a heavy local demand for narcotics and an incentive to local production and smuggling. These factors must be taken into account. In addition, there will be an interest in curative and rehabilitative techniques which have been developed in the U.S.

II. General Principles A. U.S. participation should be overt and in support of programs and initiatives of local governments and regional or international organizations, particularly the U.N.

B. Where desirable, encouragement should be given to cooperative efforts among sub-regional groupings among countries where a facet of the problem is not confined within one border and multilateral actions are required.

C. Illegal narcotics production, trafficking, and addiction are world problems, not just those of the U.S., and every effort should be made to convince the governments and, to the extent possible, the peoples of the area that these problems and the fallout therefrom are very much their concerns also.

D. We should determine which countries would be more amenable to approaches or offers of assistance from international organizations such as the UN or from regional organizations such as the Permanent Anti-Narcotics Bureau of the Arab States League, and we should plan appropriate ways of assisting such international and regional organizations in strengthening their own programs and activities.

III. Objectives

A. Short-term: 1. To stop the flow of illicit narcotics from NEA countries to the U.S. either by direct or indirect routes by: a. stimulating the passage and enforcement of national laws against illicit trafficking;

b. assisting by helping to strengthen internal law enforcement and border control capabilities;

c. making assistance available to UN, regional, and sub-regional bodies pursuing this objective;

d. encouraging participation by regional States in international efforts aimed at more effective drug control, including a strengthened single convention on narcotic drugs and the UN Special Fund for Drug Abuse Control.

2. To eliminate illegal production of poppy-derived narcotics by: a. supporting passage and strengthening of national laws against illegal production;

b. offering detection assistance, sharing intelligence with local narcotics authorities, and supporting through the various means available to us, local efforts to uncover and prosecute drug traffickers;

c. encouraging countries in the area to support the U.S. amendment to the Single Convention.

3. In cooperation with local governments, UN, and regional organizations, to help educate local populations concerning their own narcotics menace.

B. Long-range:

(Note the delineation between long-range and short-range objectives should not be regarded as sharp and distinct. Elements of the two may overlap.)

To eliminate opium-poppy growing by: 1. supporting an international convention against poppy cultivation as well as national laws outlawing the same;

2. developing and supporting international enforcement efforts;

3. developing a medicinal substitute for codeine and other needed opium derivatives;

4. developing crop substitutes and persuading present opium-growers to accept them; taking other measures to help countries overcome the economic dislocations associated with cessation of illicit production and trafficking;

5. cooperating with countries on matters of treatment, rehabilitation, and related research in cases where addiction is a problem in efforts first to reduce and eventually eliminate it.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by James H. Broughton (NEA/RA) on October 28, cleared by Davies, and approved by Stanley D. Schiff (NEA/RA).

212. Telegram 212605 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 212. Telegram 212605 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, November 23, 1971, 2114Z.

Delivery opening of business

For Chief of Mission

Subject:

Presidential Letter to Ne Win on Narcotics Control

1. Request you deliver immediately to Burmese Ambassador Chit Myaing following message from the President to General Ne Win, Chairman, Burma’s Revolutionary Council, who is presently in London.

Verbatim text:

Dear Mr. Chairman:

I have been most gratified to learn of your personal interest and understanding with respect to the problem of the illicit production and trafficking in narcotics in certain parts of Southeast Asia, including Burma.

As you know, the problem of drug abuse world-wide has become increasingly serious in recent years, necessitating that the highest priority be assigned to international cooperation in developing solutions. To further our mutual interest in reducing the supply of illicit narcotics, I would hope to see an increasing exchange of information and views between our two governments. With this in mind, I would be grateful if you would meet at an early date with Nelson G. Gross, whom I have designated as my personal representative for this purpose.

Mr. Gross is now serving as Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State and Coordinator for International Narcotics matters. In this capacity, he has primary responsibility for the coordination of the United States international activities in the narcotics field. As such he has my full confidence and that of Secretary of State Rogers, who serves as Chairman of our Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control.

I believe you would find a meeting with him useful, and I know that he would find a discussion with you most rewarding in connection with the responsibilities that he has been asked to undertake.

I have asked Ambassador Annenberg to deliver this letter to Ambassador Chit Myaing personally. May I suggest that, if it is convenient, you advise Ambassador Annenberg of the date when it would be agreeable to you to receive Mr. Gross. End verbatim text

Signed letter will follow by air pouch.

2. Please advise Department by immediate cable when informed of date agreeable to Ne Win to receive Gross. We understand Ne Win will be available in London until at least November 30. Gross will arrange to come to London as soon as appointment date firm. However, would prefer date as late as possible, since must be in Europe for Chiefs of Mission meeting week of December 6 and would prefer that week in order to avoid two trips.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 729, Country Files, Europe, United Kingdom, Vol. VII. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Wellman, cleared by Dexter, and approved by Gross. Repeated Priority to Bonn and Rangoon.

213. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig) 213. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Krogh) to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig)1

Washington, December 8, 1971.

SUBJECT:

ILLICIT NARCOTICS AND THE SUMMITS

Russia and China are unlikely to respond favorably to a Presidential call for an international “Manhattan Project” to end drug abuse as suggested by Governor Rockefeller.

Neither nation now has a significant drug problem. Both rather smugly regard drug abuse as a manifestation of decadent Western culture. China still nurses a grudge over the Western role in introducing opium onto the mainland a hundred years ago.

While a massive Rockefeller-type program should not be proposed, it is important to our international control effort that drugs be discussed in general terms at both summits.

This more modest approach would probably prompt a favorable response. Neither Russia nor China is likely to be against narcotics control as a general proposition.

By securing a general agreement to work together wherever possible, the President would lay the groundwork for future meaningful cooperation. He would also add impetus to our diplomatic efforts to control narcotics production and trafficking in those Asian and European nations where Chinese and Russian attitudes weigh heavily.

At counterpart sessions it would be useful to delineate where increased cooperation might be possible. The pending Single Convention amendments, control of drug smuggling through Eastern and Western Europe, and our efforts to limit the production of opium in the Near East and the Golden Triangle are three such areas. Again, we should seek only a general expression of support for our initiatives.

It is important that reference be made to an agreement to cooperate on narcotics in the official press releases issued after each summit.

A more detailed analysis of the importance of discussing narcotics at the Peking meeting is contained in Nelson Gross’s memorandum at Tab “A”.

Egil Krogh, Jr.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics IV. Secret. Tab A was attached but not published.

214. Telegram 19761 From the Embassy in the Republic of Vietnam to the Department of State 214. Telegram 19761 From the Embassy in the Republic of Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 22, 1971, 1055Z.

CINCPAC for Polad

Subj:

Conversation With President Thieu on Anti-narcotic and Anti-smuggling Campaign.

1. I called on President Thieu December 21, accompanied by Berger, to discuss the status of the Vietnamese anti-narcotics and anti-smuggling campaign. I said it had got off to a good start in May, when there was a great sense of urgency, but had lost its momentum in recent months and was in need of a new initiative, and more energetic direction and supervision by him.

2. I then went into details: A. The men he had appointed to head the campaigns—Admiral Cang, Commissioner Qui of the police force, and Colonel Khanh, the new Customs Director—were good and hard-working men, had created more effective organizations, were giving US good cooperation, and there had been some progress. Their problems were sabotage of their efforts, bureaucratic inertia and the absence of sustained pressure through the government to pursue the campaigns with energy, vigor and imagination.

B. I called attention to the areas of weakness: 1) Arrests were up 75 most of those arrested were small peddlers or habitual users. Vietnamese intelligence on its own had failed to uncover any major ring or traffickers. The large operators that were detected and arrested was based on intelligence developed by US. There were signs that when the Vietnamese intelligence and police got on the track of significant traffickers they were being waved off.

2) The Vietnamese Air Force and to some extent the Vietnamese Army and Navy were not cooperating in the anti-narcotics and anti-smuggling campaigns. In some cases customs officers were being prevented from searching Vietnamese Air Force planes.

3) The courts were excessively lenient in imposing penalties and slow in trying and punishing even the major offenders who have been arrested.

4) Although the need for a reward program was recognized from the very start, and funds had been earmarked for rewards, no funds had as yet been provided to the authorities to pay rewards.

5) The Director General of Customs was having difficulty getting rid of some of his incompetent and corrupt subordinates, and was still unable to get the extra manpower—450—he had asked for to strengthen the customs force and broaden its coverage in the country

6) Most of the arrests and seizures were concentrated in Saigon.

7) The Vietnamese were reluctant to discuss with the Thai and Korean Governments the narcotic and smuggling activities of members of their forces.

8) As a result heroin was still easily available in most parts of the country and there were huge revenue losses arising from smuggling of goods in general.

C. Finally, I made reference to the need to develop regional cooperation with the neighboring countries, to actively press for the passage of the new narcotics bill, and to ratify Vietnam’s membership in the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and support the proposal to amend the convention to make it more effective. I ended by urging on him the necessity for him personally to reinvigorate the program in the various areas where weakness existed. I asked him to call in Admiral Cang, Commissioner Qui and Colonel Khanh to learn at first hand the difficulties they were encountering, and to call in the service chiefs and the judiciary, and the Ambassadors of Thailand and Korea.

3. Thieu took no issue with what we had to say and made notes. I shall follow up with an aide memoire. I left him in no doubt but that while we recognized that some progress had been made, we were not at all satisfied with the effort so far.

Bunker

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok and Seoul. The Embassy requested that the Department pass to CINCPAC for POLAD. The text of the aide mimoire is in telegram 587 from Saigon, January 13, 1972. (Ibid.)

215. Memorandum From John H. Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 215. Memorandum From John H. Holdridge of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 28, 1972.

SUBJECT:Exploiting Ne Win’s Interest in Cooperating on Narcotics Control

Attached at Tab A is a memorandum to you from Bud Krogh forwarding Nelson Gross’ report of his meeting with General Ne Win on the narcotics problem in Burma.

Ne Win proved almost shockingly cooperative to Gross’ presentation of the seriousness of the problem and the need for the earliest action. Importantly, Ne Win indicated interest in Gross’ suggestion that the U.S. might assist with the provision of certain military equipment [1 line not declassified].

Krogh endorses Gross’ conviction that the U.S. should respond quickly to Ne Win’s interest in an attempt to commit him to action while he is still in this frame of mind. Krogh met with Under Secretary Johnson, Marshall Green, and Nelson Gross January 27. Johnson agreed that up to $3 million in military equipment should be offered, financed from the AID Contingency Fund. Secretary Laird and. Admiral Moorer subsequently agreed to cooperate in providing equipment at a reasonable cost. [less than 1 line not declassified]

Krogh believes we should also consider sending a letter to Ne Win thanking him for his interest in the narcotics problem.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Secret. Sent for information. Haig was the original recipient, although he redirected this memorandum to Kissinger. Tab A was attached but not published.

216. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 216. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 29, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Indian Position on Narcotics Control

The Indian position on narcotics control has acquired crucial importance for the success of our efforts to improve the international narcotics control apparatus. Of most immediate concern is the probably negative position that India, as the world’s largest licit opium producer and exporter, is preparing to take with regard to our proposed amendment of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs in March. There are available to us some promising short-term and long-term approaches to India looking toward moderation of the Indian position, but the outlook for their success is complicated by the current state of our bilateral relations. In view of the critical importance of our efforts in the international narcotics control field, we believe this problem of the Indian position merits the most careful high level attention.

Most recent contacts with the Indian officials responsible for the preparation of the Indian position for the Single Convention Amendments Conference indicate that India is preparing a negative position on our proposals in the interest of protecting its licit opium industry from what it considers undue interference from international control organizations. Because of its commanding position on the supply side, India has considerable leverage over major consuming states such as Japan and the UK, whose support for a negative position on the amendments could very likely be obtained by an Indian threat to withhold sales. As the USSR and its satellites are also opposed to our proposal, the Indian position is pivotal and we fear that an adverse Indian stand could undermine the success of the March Conference. Our strategy for this Conference has been based on the need for a large consensus of the 80 signatories rather than a simple majority, as a small majority in favor may weaken the impact of the 1961 Single Convention by demonstrating that the signatories to the Convention now have less concern with the narcotics problem than they had originally.

However, our recent contacts with the Indians have also suggested the outline of a possible long-term solution for the Indians’ opium problem which, if prompt preliminary steps could be taken, would remove the concerns which underlie the negative position they are preparing for the March Conference. These contacts indicate that the Indians would be receptive to a comprehensive plan for ending opium production under certain conditions. As Indian cultivators are not eager to plant poppies because of high production costs and as Indian officials see the development of synthetic substitutes as only a few years away, there is little reason for them to continue opium production except for the foreign exchange earnings. Thus the price of negotiating a growing ban in India is likely to be limited to replacement of the annual foreign exchange loss which we estimate at $5-10 million per year. The term of such a subsidy could be shortened by a technical assistance program oriented toward the development of synthetic substitutes for opium by the Indian pharmaceutical industry, which could be accomplished both by subsidizing Indian research on opiate substitutes and by sharing with India the results of our own research.

We believe the Indians might be willing to consider a ban on opium growing within a feasible time frame provide they could count on international assistance and support. A ban would be more easily enforceable in India than in most other opium producing countries because of Indian administrative experience with an enforcement system. A ban by India would have numerous advantages, most prominent of which would be the exemplary effect on other opium-producing nations and the removal of a large potential source of illicit opium from the world market.

The current state of Indo-US bilateral relations would make it extremely difficult for us to negotiate bilaterally a ban on opium cultivation based on a US input of financial and technical assistance. Our aid program to India is in abeyance, with a large part of last year’s pipeline still under suspension, and no consideration being given to resumption of development lending. Indian officials, meanwhile, have been expressing both publicly and privately their misgivings about US aid, and it would be particularly difficult for the GOI to deal in domestic political terms with an aid offer so clearly conditioned on Indian performance. Furthermore, Indian resentment at what they consider the unjustified suspension of part of the aid pipeline during the war might undermine their confidence in the validity of any multi-year aid proposal from the US.

We propose to explore possibilities for dealing with the problem outlined above in the context of the Inter-agency Working Group operating under the Cabinet Committee for International Narcotics Control. Embassy New Delhi has recently submitted a Narcotics Control Action Plan for India. Subject to the determinations to be made with respect to US policy toward India, program proposal could be developed for approval.

This memorandum is being sent to you at this stage primarily for information purposes pending further review of this problem.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 358, Subject Files, Narcotics V. Confidential. David Passage signed for Eliot.

217. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts 217. Telegram From the Department of State to all Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, February 9, 1972.

Paris also for Nesco

AMERICAN PRESIDENTIAL MESSAGE TO CHIEFS OF MISSION ON SUBJECT OF INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL

From the outset this Administration has been firmly committed to meeting American’s drug problem.

I was convinced by the experience of my first two years in office that major organizational changes were required.

In September 1971 I appointed Secretary Rogers chairman of a new Cabinet Committee to deal with the international aspects of narcotics control.

On June 17 1971, I established the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention under Dr. Jerome Jaffe to mobilize the attack on the demand side of the problem. On January 28, 1972, I launched a major Federal effort against pushers and domestic traffickers under Mr. Myles Ambrose, my new Special Consultant for Narcotics Law Enforcement.

The task is to make these organizational arrangements work as designed.

Ending drug abuse will require the cooperation of all nations. For this reason I have made effective narcotics control a primary foreign policy objective of the United States.

The State Department’s Senior Adviser and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters, Mr. Nelson Gross, and other Administration officials at all levels have attempted to convey to foreign governments and our overseas diplomatic missions the determination of the United States to take the necessary steps in cooperation with others to bring narcotics and other dangerous drugs under control.

These efforts are beginning to bear fruit. I am particularly gratified by the courageous decision of the Turkish Government to ban opium cultivation; by the results of Operation Cooperation in Mexico; and by recent successes in narcotics enforcement in Europe, Southeast Asia, and Latin America.

Still, much remains to be done. In many nations narcotics law enforcement is still in its infancy. Better narcotics intelligence is required almost everywhere.

Narcotics Control Action Plans have now been drafted by fifty-seven missions. The key to their successful implementation is to convince the leaders of producing and transit countries to commit their governments to attacking the narcotics problem with urgency and determination.

Your assistance will be critical to this effort. We need your advice on how best to obtain the requisite political commitment from the Government to which you are accredited. If you have not already given us your views we shall appreciate receiving them promptly.

Greater support for multilateral approaches to the drug problem must also be forthcoming. Increased and continuing financial support from other governments for the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control is particularly important.

Strengthening the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 is also a priority objective. In extensive consultations throughout the world, our diplomats have been seeking to promote a consensus on proposed amendments.

Between now and the plenipotentiary conference to be held March sixth through March twenty-fourth, I hope you will continue to stress to policy makers in foreign governments the vital importance of our working together to assure the success of this conference.

I have made it clear many times that the United States stands ready to assist where essential in the worldwide battle against narcotics. Other nations must now be induced to do their part.

I very much appreciate what each of you has done in the past.

I am confident you share my conviction that few projects are more worthy of your personal attention in the future than this campaign to eradicate the scourge of drug abuse.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Text received from the White House; cleared by Hurwitch, Fessenden, Robert P. Myers (EA), Andre J. Navez (AF), IO/HDC, and Davies; and approved by Wellman. The time of transmission is not indicated. Repeated to USUN New York, the U.S. Mission in Geneva, and Paris for NESCO.

218. Letter From President Nixon to Pakistani President Bhutto 218. Letter From President Nixon to Pakistani President Bhutto1

Washington, February 10, 1972.

Dear Mr. President:

Because the problem of drug addiction is becoming an increasingly serious one for many nations of the world, I have asked the Senior Advisor to our Secretary of State and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters, Mr. Nelson Gross, to visit Pakistan as well as other countries to explore ways in which we might cooperate to curb the flow of illicit opium. Mr. Gross will be visiting Pakistan shortly, and I hope that he will have an opportunity to exchange views with you.

As you know, drug abuse has spawned a multitude of social ills in the United States, the most serious of which is a dramatic increase in the incidence of drug-related crime. It is such a grave threat that I have initiated a comprehensive program to reduce the flow of illegal drugs into this country, eliminate their sale, and rehabilitate drug users.

The United States is not alone in experiencing acute social disruption because of drug addiction. The epidemic of abuse has spread to young people in many industrialized countries, and there is mounting concern in developing countries as well that if these abuses are not ended, their development may be seriously affected.

Of all the drugs which we are seeking to control in the United States, the most destructive is heroin, a by-product of opium. You are doubtless aware that neither opium nor heroin is produced in the United States, and heroin enters the country illegally. For this reason, we are particularly concerned about the international production and trade in opium and its by-products. I have asked the Secretary of State to take charge of the United States’ efforts to strengthen international narcotics control and to offer our assistance to cooperating countries

I know that you have many pressing matters on your mind at this point and appreciate the opportunity to share these concerns of ours with you. I hope that we can work together in this field.

Sincerely,

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 760, Presidential Correspondence File, Pakistan, President Bhutto. No classification marking. Rogers sent the President a draft of this letter under cover of a February 5 memorandum. (Ibid.)

219. Telegram 1366 From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 219. Telegram 1366 From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State1

Islamabad, February 11, 1972, 1100Z.

Subj:

Gross Discussion With Pres. Bhutto on Narcotics

Ref:

State 23446

1. On Feb 10 evening Gross and Charge met with Pres. Bhutto at Governor’s House in Karachi. Charge introduced Gross and delivered letter (reftel) from Pres. Nixon, which Bhutto read with interest.

2. Gross expressed appreciation for meeting. He reviewed Pres. Nixon’s concern with international narcotics control, mentioned that the subject had been elevated to a foreign policy level and described the Cabinet Committee chaired by Secretary Rogers. Bhutto expressed full understanding of the problem and stated that what was of concern to the U.S. was also of concern to the GOP.

3. Gross said that the Embassy had been formulating a possible plan of action for narcotics control whereby our government could help devise a method by which the GOP could interdict illicit narcotics traffic. Gross said the Embassy would discuss their thoughts with the GOP administration and looked forward to constructive dialogue. Bhutto was receptive and positive in his reaction. Gross further said that he had met with GOP FonSec in Washington in November and at that time had mentioned the possibility of advancing the 1979 date for termination of opium production. Gross reported that FonSec indicated he would relay the suggestion to Islamabad, but obviously events had overtaken the subject. Bhutto indicated an interest and asked what Gross had in mind in terms of advancing the date. Gross said that perhaps opium production could be banned in 1973 and that appropriate steps could be taken to make such an action feasible. Bhutto asked that Gross discuss this subject in detail with the Health Minister. He advised that he would ask Health Minister to meet with Gross in Islamabad the following day, along with the Finance Minister, with whom an appointment had already been arranged.

4 Gross brought up the subject of the Single Convention, indicating that the proposed amendments thereto were very important, but that we could anticipate some difficulties, particularly with India. Gross surmised that the GOP could substantially benefit from a public relations viewpoint by advocating the amendments, and at the same time could help the U.S. achieve its objective of building a momentum in favor of greater controls over illicit production and traffic. Bhutto’s response was generally affirmative, he stated that he would very much like to cooperate with the U.S. and asked that Gross describe the specifics to the Foreign Secretary. In conclusion Bhutto asked that Gross relay his desire to be cooperative to Pres. Nixon.

5. Comment: Believe Bhutto meeting was useful as kick-off to our discussion this subject with senior officials of his new government. Bhutto had agreed to meet Gross at Charge’s personal plea that it was important for presidential blessing to be given in principle to our proposed cooperation with GOP on narcotics control.

Sober

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, ORG 7/NM. Confidential. Repeated to Kabul, Tehran, and the consulate at Karachi.

220. Airgram A-2333 From the Department of State to all Diplomatic and Consular Posts 220. Airgram A-2333 From the Department of State to all Diplomatic and Consular Posts1

Washington, March 7, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Congressional Testimony by Nelson Gross on International Narcotics Control.

Attached for your information is the text of a statement on United States Government efforts in International Narcotics Control made by Nelson Gross, Senior Adviser and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters, before the Subcommittee on Drug Abuse, Committee on Armed Services, U.S. Senate. The statement while dated February 29, 1972, was submitted into the record on March 2.

Rogers

Attachment

NOT TO BE RELEASED BEFORE 10:00 A.M. FEBRUARY 29, 1972

STATEMENT BY NELSON GROSS
SENIOR ADVISER TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
AND COORDINATOR FOR INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS MATTERS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON DRUG ABUSE
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
UNITED STATES SENATE
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 1972

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT EFFORTS IN INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL

Mr. Chairman:

The President has made drug abuse control a national objective of first priority in our foreign relations. In his message to the Congress on June 17, 1971, he stated: “No serious attack on our national drug problem can ignore the international implications of such an effort, nor can the domestic effort succeed without attacking the problem on an international plane.”

In addition to a comprehensive program to combat the problem of drug abuse on the domestic front, the President therefore called for a world-wide cooperative approach. The use of drugs by members of U.S. military forces overseas, a subject of primary interest and concern to this Committee, was of course an important consideration in his appeal and a major factor in the need to discover and undertake urgent solutions.

Since the President’s message of eight months ago, there has been marked progress in our efforts to broaden and strengthen controls over narcotics and other dangerous drugs. A high degree of coordination has been developed among Federal agencies to deal with both the demand and the supply side of the problem. I can also report that our efforts are generating support from other countries in the attack against drug abuse.

The Department of State has the primary role in mobilizing and coordinating U.S. efforts to deal with the foreign supply and international trafficking elements of the drug problem. The Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, established formally in September 1971, is chaired by Secretary of State William Rogers. The organizational structure of the Committee, shown in the accompanying chart, provides complete interagency coordination from Cabinet level down through the Executive Branch. The State Department’s activities have also been intensified through the upgrading and expansion of the Secretary’s Office of Narcotics Matters. Moreover, Drug Control

[CHART]

Coordinators have been designated for the Department’s geographic and functional bureaus, and each of the five geographic bureaus has established an Interagency Narcotics Control Committee with representation from State, Agency for International Development (AID), Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD), Treasury and the Bureau of Customs, Defense, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and United States Information Agency (USIA). For our overseas operations, Drug Control Officers have been designated by missions to coordinate the Country Team efforts.

To systematize our bilateral approach to drug control, the Cabinet Committee has directed the preparation of Narcotics Control Action Plans for more than 50 countries considered to have a current or potential involvement in the production, processing, consumption, or transshipment of illicit hard drugs. Prepared by the Country Teams in the various countries, the plans focus on heroin and cocaine destined for the U.S. market or U.S. personnel abroad. The action plans include a description of the drug situation in the country in question, a statement of goals, the strategy to achieve such goals, estimated costs, priorities, and a general timetable for implementation. After review and approval in Washington, the action plans are returned to Foreign Service posts to serve as a basis for opening discussions with host governments for the negotiation of bilateral narcotics control agreements or programs. While U.S. cooperation will be multi-faceted, the thrust of our efforts abroad will be to increase local enforcement capabilities and to gather and exchange intelligence with foreign governments with a view to curtailing supplies and interdicting the flow of illicit drugs. In areas where the reduction of opium poppy cultivation is practicable, this will be encouraged. Where the presence of U.S. military forces are a factor, the detection and rehabilitation of drug users are the responsibility of the U.S. military authorities.

The most heartening news in the battle against drug abuse in 1971 was the decision announced on June 30 by Turkey to ban the cultivation of the opium poppy following the harvesting of the 1971-72 crop. For hundreds of years, thousands of Turkish families have raised the opium poppy as a legitimate cash crop and for its edible oil and seed. Unlike most opium-producing countries, Turkey does not have an addiction problem. Moreover, prior to the ban, the Turkish farmer had little, if any, knowledge of his part in the spread of an addiction epidemic in the United States or elsewhere. A strict opium licensing and control has been passed in Turkey to enforce the ban. In response to the Turkish decision, the United States Government has assured Turkey of financial assistance to offset foreign exchange losses from legitimate exports of opium gum and poppy products and to help establish development activities in the affected areas.

The action by Turkey is particularly significant in that it will remove the present major source of opium for heroin marketed in the United States. However, with the elimination of the Middle East source, illegal traffickers will look elsewhere, and we are now focusing on cooperative action plans with the governments of countries in Southeast Asia to prevent that area from serving as the alternative source for heroin.

Southeast Asia is the world’s largest source of illicit opium, with an estimated annual output of 700 tons grown in the upper reaches of Burma, Thailand, and Laos—in the so-called Golden Triangle area. The bulk of the supply is consumed by Asians, but as is well known to this Committee a portion of it has been reaching U.S. troops in Vietnam in the form of #4 heroin. Our short-term goal is to stem the flow of illicit opium and opiates both to our military forces in Southeast Asia and to the continental United States. In the long-term, we would like to see the elimination of poppy growing. To achieve these goals, we must stimulate local government action. Let me cite a few examples.

Burma-Burma is the largest producer of opium in Southeast Asia, accounting for an estimated 400 tons annually. While opium-smoking is fairly common among various hill tribes, most of the crop is smuggled out of the country into Laos and Thailand for local use or for refining into morphine base or heroin for shipment abroad. Production and trafficking is concentrated in the Shan States and Kachin State of northeast Burma which are dominated by dissident hill tribes or insurgent (Communist and non-Communist) groups whose activities are beyond the Government’s control. Highly organized groups arrange for the trafficking and refining of opium from Burma and eventual distribution to various parts of Southeast Asia.

Burmese leaders have recently become more aware of the seriousness of the problem and are increasingly concerned with means by which to control the traffic. The Burmese Government has been urging crop substitutes (primarily pyrethrum, corn and cotton) and an end to opium use for several years. They have experienced some success in areas they control, but the primary growing and trafficking areas are unaffected by any government presence.

A traditional non-aligned foreign policy and self reliance have led the Burmese Government to forego foreign assistance. However, there are now indications the government intends to increase its narcotics control activities and we are hopeful that, as the magnitude of the problem becomes clearer, outside assistance will be accepted.

Thailand-In August 1971, our Ambassador to Thailand signed a joint statement with the Thai Foreign Minister which publicly expressed concern over the growth of drug addiction and drug abuse. On September 28 a U.S.-Thai Memorandum of Understanding on international narcotics control was signed here in Washington, laying the groundwork for increasing our cooperative efforts. I am gratified to report that these high-level statements of intent are being translated into action.

I should like to note particularly the fine cooperation between our BNDD personnel in Thailand and the Royal Thai Police Department. This cooperation has been an essential element in a number of seizures and arrests of both Thai and U.S. citizens. Several rings involved in smuggling heroin to American consumers-including U.S. servicemen-have been smashed, and we have made a start in our objective to make life sufficiently risky for the traffickers to discourage others who may be tempted to smuggle illicit narcotics.

The Thai campaign against the illegal traffic in opium and its derivatives has several elements. The primary interest on the part of the U.S. Government has been in improving law enforcement since the legal bases-the actual laws-are already in effect. In addition, steps are being taken to find economic alternatives for the hill tribes which, throughout Southeast Asia, are traditional growers of opium.

A major step in this direction was the signature of a drug abuse control project agreement in Bangkok on December 7, 1971, by the head of the Thai police and UN narcotics officials. The project calls for a contribution by the UN Fund for Drug Abuse Control of approximately $2 million and an RTG contribution of approximately $5 million in kind and cash spread over the period 1972-76. The initial country program (formulated in December 1971) had four principal aims to be implemented simultaneously: (a) opium poppy cultivation replacement; (b) drug addict treatment; (c) law enforcement; (d) drug abuse education and information. However, the agreed UN program notes US-RTG cooperation in the enforcement field and specifies simply a UN offer of “whatever technical aid may be required”, such as seminars and fellowships sponsored by the Division of Narcotic Drugs in Geneva. Although the negotiation of this program was accomplished with dispatch, operations will be undertaken only when a Work Plan has been prepared by the UN and Thai program directors. The preamble to the program also notes the necessity for new Thai legislation concerning land tenure and civic rights in the tribal areas, and for revision of Thai legislation dealing with the “treatment, rehabilitation and social reintegration” of addicts.

Opium-growing in Southeast Asia, its processing, and transport out of the Golden Triangle area apparently have not involved American citizens. However, the illegal onward movement of opium and its derivatives, especially heroin, to the big cities of Southeast Asia and the distribution in South Vietnam and to other American consumers in East Asia and the United States has been sufficiently profitable to attract American traffickers, mostly ex-servicemen. For example, on January 21, 1972, an ex-GI, Andrew Price, was arrested in Bangkok while almost simultaneously William Henry Jackson, a long-time American resident of Bangkok, and Sgt. Jerald Ganius were arrested in the United States. The arrests followed many months of investigation by the Thai police and BNDD agents in Thailand, and were the consequence of a shipment of 17 pounds of high-quality (No. 4) heroin from Thailand via U Tapao Airbase to the U.S., using forged military documentation. Price and Jackson were mentioned in the Murphy-Steele report of last May.

Laos-Attention was first focused on Laos as a source of heroin supplied to U.S. forces in South Viet-Nam early last year when on two occasions smugglers arriving from Vientiane were apprehended with heroin at Tan Son Nhut airport in Saigon.

Since that time, with the encouragement of our Mission in Vientiane, the Royal Lao Government has initiated a narcotics control program aimed principally at interdicting the flow of opium and heroin through Laos from Burma. We believe that nearly all of the limited amount of opium grown in Laos is consumed by the hill tribesmen who cultivate it.

The Royal Lao Government started from scratch in setting up its control program. Opium smoking has been tolerated by Lao society in roughly the same manner as alcohol consumption is in our own society. Until September 23, 1971, when the first Lao narcotics control law was signed by the King, there were no legal sanctions against the cultivation, transportation or sale of opium and its derivatives. The new law, which took effect on November 15, imposes heavy penalties for any commercial activity involving opium or heroin.

Concrete results so far have included several important seizures of opium and heroin and acetic anhydride, the main catalyst in refining opium into No. 4 heroin. Our intelligence sources indicated a virtual halt in the movement of heroin through Laos. In addition, a refinery near the Burmese border, which apparently supplied much of the heroin smuggled to South Viet-Nam, has been abandoned.

The most recent development directly affecting the supply of heroin to South Viet-Nam occurred on January 6 when Lao police, acting on information developed by BNDD agents, arrested a dealer who admitted he had supplied the heroin seized at Tan San Nhut early last year. Ten kilograms of heroin were in his possession when he was arrested.

The Lao program should become even more effective when their enforcement agencies are staffed to full strength with specially trained personnel. The American training and advisory effort was doubled earlier this month with the arrival in Vientiane of a party of Customs advisors who had completed orientation and language courses at the Foreign Service Institute.

Viet-Nam-Viet-Nam is, of course, a victim nation-not a producer of opium and its derivatives. Despite the Government of Viet-Nam’s obvious preoccupation with political and military matters, it is actively engaged in a nation-wide anti-narcotics campaign under the leadership of Admiral Chung Tan Cang. Initiation of the second phase of that campaign, which was scheduled to begin after Tet, was pushed forward to January 1, 1972. The Government of Viet-Nam, with the assistance of American Public Safety, Customs and BNDD advisors, is trying to upgrade the performance of the Vietnamese customs and police personnel by training them in the techniques of narcotics detection and intelligence gathering. The effort has paid off: in 1971 arrests of narcotics violators increased 70 percent over 1970; the confiscation of heroin rose from 5 kilos in 1970 to 123 kilos last year.

There is still much room for improvement, especially at the middle echelons of the bureaucracy. The U.S. Mission in Saigon continues to consult with the Government of Viet-Nam on ways to improve the anti-narcotics effort. An active rewards system, passage of the pending narcotics law, and stiffer sentencing of offenders by courts are all items of priority interest.

On the American side steady and encouraging progress has been made. A comprehensive narcotics control plan for Viet-Nam sets forth goals and approaches for both the Government of Viet-Nam and the U.S., unilaterally, bilaterally, and regionally.

MACV’s drug suppression and treatment program has succeeded in discouraging drug use among the U.S. military personnel. MACV has intensified educational and rehabilitative approaches, and today 1,800 personnel are involved in various aspects of MACV’s campaign.

Given the difficulties of developing an effective anti-narcotics program in a country whose society is as disrupted as South Viet-Nam’s 1971 can be judged a year in which a promising start was made.

The Philippines-In the Philippines, until recently, drug abuse has not been considered a serious problem, but it has been spreading rapidly in the last two years among Philippine youth. Philippine police officials estimate that 200,000 Filipinos regularly use some form of narcotic or dangerous drugs, of whom 7,000 are opium and heroin addicts.

U.S. Navy and Air Force servicemen at the large Clark and Subic bases provide a continuing, but modest demand for all varieties of narcotics and dangerous drugs. While there is some drug use by U.S. military personnel and their dependents in the Philippines, its scale is considerably smaller than that among U.S. Forces stationed elsewhere in Southeast Asia.

All elements of the U.S. Mission, including BNDD, and representatives of the military commands, cooperate in the drug control effort. In addition to coordinating in-house American activities, the Mission has developed a program to provide assistance to the Government of the Philippines in the drug abuse field, particularly as it affects the American community.

As you know, the various military commands have their own active drug abuse programs focusing on testing, education, and treatment/rehabilitation. These programs are coordinated within the overall Mission program. The military commands are also working with the local communities to restrict the supply of drugs in the areas around our bases.

The Government of the Philippines has recently begun to devote greater attention to the drug abuse problem. Last year President Marcos organized the Inter-organizational Council on Drug Abuse Prevention, under the Solicitor General, to coordinate the Government of the Philippine’s drug abuse efforts. He has also urged priority enactment of legislation to replace antiquated laws; the proposed legislation would inter alia impose stiffer penalties on drug traffickers. Although law enforcement agencies have greatly increased their drug control activities in the last two years, they are handicapped by lack of trained personnel, funds, and logistical support. The U.S. assistance program will focus on improving law enforcement and intelligence capabilities, particularly in the areas near U.S. bases.

Korea-In Korea, with a few minor exceptions (such as limited use of opium in rural areas), the Korean people do not generally use narcotics or dangerous drugs. The drug problem in Korea is thus limited to relatively minor use by American servicemen and sporadic efforts by these servicemen to smuggle drugs into the United States.

Although there have been some crude efforts by Koreans catering to American military personnel to convert morphine base into heroin, the heroin problem in Korea is virtually negligible. There is a small but increasing problem with the use of barbiturates and amphetamines, some of which can be obtained in Korea without prescription.

Under the Status of Forces Agreement a joint U.S.-Korean subcommittee is working on the drug problem and cooperation between U.S. and Korean authorities has been excellent. The U.S. Mission has also put together a Narcotics Control Program based upon potential rather than actual drug abuse.

In addition to our bilateral efforts in Southeast Asia, we are also looking into regional schemes to curtail the flow of illicit drugs and narcotics. For example, effective plans must be developed for closing off air and sea traffic as avenues of smuggling. Adequate control is also required over the various APO’s in the area.

I should like to shift now to West Germany where more than 200,000 U.S. troops are stationed.

In West Germany a variety of drugs may be obtained from both legal and illicit sources. Hashish, which enters the country largely from the Middle East, is readily available from illicit sources in metropolitan areas as well as communities adjacent to troop complexes. Since there is no exact method of determining whether a person is using hashish, other than finding evidence of it in his possession, estimates of usage vary; but certainly it is a widespread problem among our troops, as it is among the German populace. Amphetamine-like products and some sedatives are available without prescription at German drug stores. LSD and other hallucinogens can be procured at low cost from a variety of illicit sources. Cocaine and heroin are available, but on a limited basis, and crude opium also has become available. However, tests show that opiate use among our troops in Germany is still very limited.

The drug control and prevention efforts of our forces include, along with important programs of education and rehabilitation, an aggressive suppression effort. All of the military enforcement efforts involve close coordination with local German police officials. The degree of cooperation by German officials consistently has been excellent and has contributed significantly to our military drug prevention and control efforts. In addition to cooperation on the local level, which is particularly important since almost all enforcement activity in Germany is the responsibility of the State (Land) and local governments, we are working in close cooperation on drug matters with German Government officials at the Federal level.

We have been greatly aided by the growing attention which the German Government is devoting to the narcotics problem. Within the context of its comprehensive “Action Program against Drug Abuse,” instituted in November 1970, Germany, among other measures, has tightened its drug laws-particularly against pushers-and stepped up its enforcement efforts. The number of narcotics enforcement personnel at all levels of German Government has been increased and the effectiveness of its police and customs officials substantially improved. The German Government is also working closely with law enforcement agencies of neighboring countries in an effort to reduce the flow of narcotics into Germany. German Government officials have met with counterparts from the U.S. and in a number of European countries and agreed on the intensification of information exchange and other support. Germany also has bilateral information exchanges with such countries as Turkey, Greece, and Iran and has assigned a narcotics officer to the staff of its Embassy in Ankara. In addition to its active role in UN and Common Market drug efforts, Germany cooperates on drug enforcement matters with members of the Brussels Customs Union. An effort is also being made to increase the effectiveness of the Federal Crime Office (Bundeskriminalamt) in Wiesbaden, which now has about ten men working solely on drug problems. The Crime Office maintains records on suspected narcotics traffickers and hopes to computerize this information by the end of 1972 to assist liaison efforts both with the local and international police.

An important part in our bilateral efforts to attack the military drug problem is played by the ongoing meetings between a U.S. forces/Embassy Task Force chaired by General McCarthy, USAREUR Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, and a German inter-ministerial working group on drug abuse, which were instituted in Bonn on November 22, 1971. As a result of a U.S. proposal made in the initial meeting of this group, Germany has indicated that efforts will be made to utilize the Crime Office as a centralized point for better and more systematic information exchange on a number of drug-related enforcement problems in Germany. Currently under discussion are proposals for tightening up the availability of Germany prescription narcotics to GIs, finding ways to deal with ex-servicemen who return to Germany to engage in illicit drug traffic, and developing institutions to facilitate a coordinated approach to military drug problems.

Cooperation with German narcotics enforcement agencies receives top priority in our bilateral program of cooperation on narcotics matters with the Germans. During the past year, the BNDD increased its staff in Germany from two to five officers and approved offices for Munich and Bonn, in addition to that in Frankfurt. Our exchanges on narcotics matters continue to be excellent at all levels of government. Our program embraces increased cooperation with the Germans on training and education programs, the sharing of narcotics control techniques, an increased exchange of intelligence data, mutual cooperation in social policy, international youth activities and drug rehabilitation efforts, coordination of narcotics-connected scientific research, and further coordination of U.S.-German diplomatic efforts in producer countries.

Concurrently with these and other bilateral efforts, we support three major multilateral initiatives in drug control. First, the Department of State has mounted a world-wide diplomatic effort to bring about better control of production and distribution of opium and to reinforce the powers of the International Narcotics Control Board to cope with illicit production and traffic through proposed amendments to the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotics Drugs. I shall head the U.S. Delegation to the UN plenipotentiary conference scheduled for March 6-24 to consider amendments proposed by the U.S. and other countries.

Second, the United States joined with over 70 countries a year ago to negotiate the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances designed to bring under international control such drugs as amphetamines, barbiturates, hallucinogens, and tranquillizers. On June 29, 1971, President Nixon sent the Convention to the Senate for advice and consent to ratification. The Committee on Foreign Relations held hearings on the Convention on February 4. I hope the Senate will give early consideration to the treaty and that the United States will ratify it promptly.

Third, the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, established in April 1971, originated as a resolution introduced by the United States and co-sponsored by eight other countries in the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The U.S. has contributed $2 million, while pledges and contributions from other countries have brought the Fund up to $3 million. Through increasing financial support from the other developed countries, the Fund is becoming an authentic international initiative with substantial capabilities. We shall, subject to Congressional authorizations, give continuing support to the Fund and encourage other countries to do likewise. The Fund will provide resources to finance projects under the UN Plan for Concerted Short-Term and Long-Term Action Against Drug Abuse. The agreement with Thailand which I mentioned earlier was the first major country project under the UN Plan.

Let me close by saying that we have made a good beginning in facing up to the international problem of drug abuse control. The organization of the U.S. Government for the achievement of effective international controls over narcotics and other dangerous drugs has been set; the responsible Federal Agencies are all faced in the same direction and are proceeding to attack the problem in a coordinated manner. During 1971 we have succeeded in alerting other nations to the universality of the drug problem and in pointing up the need for international cooperation in a comprehensive attack upon it. Through a systematic bilateral approach and an active participation in multilateral programs, we shall continue and intensify our efforts.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-1973, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Lawrence and approved by Wellman.

221. Airgram A-3078 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts 221. Airgram A-3078 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1

Washington, March 28, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Amendment of Single Convention On Narcotic Drugs

The Secretary of State issued on March 27 a statement regarding the adoption by the UN Conference by an overwhelming vote and with no opposition of the amendments to strengthen the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.

A copy of his statement is attached. In addition, a fuller statement containing background information regarding the amendments is provided.

Rogers

Attachment 2

BACKGROUND INFORMATION

United Nations Conference to Consider Amendments to The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 Geneva—March 6 to 25, 1972

President Nixon has repeatedly stressed the importance of more effective international action against illicit drug traffic as an indispensable counterpart to the greatly increased efforts we are putting into the fight against drug abuse here at home. Strengthening the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs has been one of the President’s important objectives in the international area.*

The Single Convention

The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 is the basic multilateral treaty governing international control of narcotic drugs, including opium, heroin, and coca. It was adopted in New York on March 30, 1961 to consolidate earlier treaties on this subject. It entered into force for adhering states on December 13, 1964. There are already ninety parties (see attached list), and additional countries are in the process of becoming parties.

For the United States, the Senate gave advice and consent to accession on May 8, 1967; formal accession was communicated to the U.N. Secretary General on May 25, 1967; and the Convention entered into force for the United States on June 24, 1967.

Plenipotentiary Conference

At the initiative of the United States, the U.N. Economic and Social Council on May 20, 1971 called for a plenipotentiary conference to consider all amendments proposed to the Single Convention. Eligible to participate were parties to the Single Convention and members of the UN and UN specialized agencies. In all there were ninety-seven participants at the conference, including three observer countries. The United States Delegation was headed by Ambassador Nelson G. Gross, the Secretary of State’s Senior Adviser and Coordinator for International Narcotics Matters.

The United States initiated the amendment process in March of 1971 when Ambassador George Bush formally presented a group of proposed amendments to the UN Secretary General. Additional amendments were proposed in October 1971 by France, Peru and Sweden.

As a result of extensive consultations between the United States and many other interested countries in all regions of the world, a set of revised proposals was introduced by nineteen cosponsors1 shortly before the Conference convened. An additional eleven countries2 became cosponsors during the Conference.

Conference Achievements

The Conference voted 71 in favor, none against, with 12 abstentions to adopt an amending protocol which is open to signature by countries which have either signed or become parties to the Single Convention. The Protocol will enter into force for adhering countries when forty have accepted it. The most noteworthy improvements embodied in the amending protocol are:

1. Assignment to the International Narcotics Control Board of new responsibilities for attacking illicit traffic in narcotic drugs. Heretofore the Board’s authority has been concentrated primarily on the licit cultivation, production, manufacture, trade and use of narcotic drugs; the Board will now be explicitly charged to join the fight against illicit trafficking.

2. The Board’s powers will be substantially increased to carry out this new responsibility. --It will have at its disposal information from a wider range of sources, including the UN and its Specialized Agencies and certain inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations having direct competence in the drug field;

--It will be reorganized and strengthened by enlarging its membership to make it more representative, by assuring continuity through staggered terms, and by strengthening the independence of its administrative Staff;

--It will be authorized to recommend to competent UN organs and Specialized Agencies that technical and financial assistance be provided to governments in support of their efforts to carry out their obligations under the Single Convention;

--If it has reason to believe that the aims of the Single Convention are seriously endangered by the failure of a country to carry out its obligations or if there is evidence that a country has become or is in danger of becoming an important center of illicit cultivation, production, manufacture or consumption of narcotics, the Board will be able to ask the government in question for explanations, or consultations, or take the initiative in proposing an on-the-spot study of the situation designed to develop remedial measures where those appear necessary;

--If a country fails to provide satisfactory explanations or to adopt remedial measures when requested to do so, or if the Board believes a serious Situation exists which requires cooperative remedial action, it may call this to the attention of the parties to the Single Convention, the UN Economic and Social Council and the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, with appropriate recommendations. This process could also include consideration of the matter by the UN General Assembly. It is significant that for the first time parties to an international drug treaty consider the drug situation to be so serious and so universal that it may merit the attention of the most representative UN political organ. Importantly, the Board is now required to make a reference to ECOSOC if the aims of the Convention are endangered and the matter has not been satisfactorily resolved; and

--If in any country producing licit opium there is evidence of diversion into illicit traffic, the Board may, 90 days after notifying the government concerned, require that country to reduce its production in the following year.

3. The new amendments would apply to narcotics offenses the same kind of improvements in the area of extradition that have recently been accepted in multilateral conventions on air hijacking and other offenses against civil aviation.

Our efforts to obtain extradition of illicit traffickers from foreign countries have been hampered on occasion because many of our older extradition agreements do not cover narcotic offenses or are limited to acts which take place within our territory. We have been negotiating new agreements as rapidly as possible to close these gaps, but this is a detailed and time consuming process. The new extradition provisions in the Single Convention will have the effect of including the full range of modern narcotics offenses in existing extradition agreements between the United States and other countries ratifying the amendments.

4. All parties to the Single Convention will be committed to give special attention to the prevention of drug abuse, to the treatment, education, rehabilitation and social reintegration of persons affected by drugs. Consistent with this is the provision for making available to abusers of narcotic drugs, either as an alternative to conviction or punishment or in addition to punishment, measures of treatment, education, after-care, rehabilitation and social reintegration.

The amendments which the UN Conference has approved will make the Single Convention more responsive to the current world narcotics situation. They will promote more effective international cooperation in the global effort to combat drug abuse. Their adoption by an overwhelming majority should inspire governments to proceed promptly with ratification of the amending protocol so that these major improvements will be in full force at an early date.

Drug abuse has now reached epidemic proportions in many areas of the world. It is a disease which is no respecter of national frontiers. Its eradication will not only require determination, persistent attention and the investment of adequate resources by national governments. A successful campaign to end drug abuse will also require prompt, cooperative action on the part of governments in a collective attack on the problem. An important new step has been taken at this Conference.

Amending Protocol of Geneva Has Been Signed Subject to Ratification by Following Countries

Argentina

Belgium

Brazil

Chile

Costa Rica

Cyprus

Denmark

Ecuador

Egypt

Federal Republic of Germany

France

Ghana

Greece

Guatemala

Haiti

Holy See

Indonesia

Iran

Israel

Italy

Ivory Coast

Jordan

Cambodia

Liberia

Liechtenstein

Luxembourg

Madagascar

Monaco

Nicaragua

Norway

Philippines

South Africa

Spain

Sweden

Togo

Turkey

United Kingdom

United States

Venezuela

Viet-Nam

Yugoslavia

Parties to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961

Afghanistan

Algeria

Argentina

Australia

Barbados

Belgium

Botswana

Brazil

Bulgaria

Burma

Byelorussian S.S.R

Cameroon

Canada

Ceylon

Chad

Chile

China

Costa Rica

Cuba

Cyprus

Czechoslovakia

Dahomey

Denmark

Ecuador

Egypt

Ethiopia

Fiji

Finland

France

Gabon

Gambia

Ghana

Guatemala

Guinea

Guyana

Holy See

Hungary

India

Iraq

Israel

Ivory Coast

Jamaica

Japan

Jordan

Kenya

Korea

Kuwait

Lebanon

Lesotho

Malawi

Malaysia

Mali

Mauritius

Monaco

Morocco

Nauru

Netherlands

New Zealand

Niger

Nigeria

Norway

Pakistan

Panama

Peru

Philippines

Poland

Senegal

South Africa

Spain

Swaziland

Sweden

Switzerland

Syria

Thailand

Togo

Tonga

Trinidad and Tobago

Tunisia

Turkey

Ukrainian S.S.R.

U.S.S.R.

United Kingdom

United States

Upper Volta

Venezuela

Viet-Nam

Yemen (Aden)

Yugoslavia

Zambia

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman on March 27 and cleared by Gross. The press statement was attached but not published.

* President’s Report to Congress on “U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970’s-Building for Peace,” February 25, 1971.

President’s Special Message to Congress on Drug Abuse, June 17, 1971.

President’s Report to Congress on “U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970’s-The Emerging Structure of Peace,” February 9, 1972.

1 Argentina, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Iran, Italy, Laos, Norway, Panama, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States and Uruguay.

2 Brazil, Cambodia, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Ireland, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Thailand, and Venezuela.

222. Memorandum From Richard R. Peterson to the Open Forum Panel 222. Memorandum From Richard R. Peterson to the Open Forum Panel1

Washington, April 21, 1972.

SUBJECT:

The Department’s Role in International Narcotics Control

The President has repeatedly committed himself and his Administration to the fight against the illicit international trafficking in narcotics. In response to the President’s commitment, several Federal agencies concerned with the drug problem have proposed elaborate overseas programs and are requesting substantial numbers of positions and large sums of money to implement them.

Unfortunately, these mushrooming efforts do not appear to be resulting in a well-thought-out, well coordinated interagency program. Each agency seems to be viewing the problem from its own perspective, intent on promoting its own interests and creating its own overseas bureaucracy to the detriment of the overall US government attack on illicit narcotics. Indeed, there is reason to suspect that personnel already assigned to some of these programs are neither trained nor qualified to function effectively overseas. This conclusion seems implicit in the April 13 memo (attached) from Mr. Krogh, the Executive Director of the Cabinet on International Narcotics Control to Messrs. Macomber, Ingersoll, Rain and Ludlum, regarding the need for specialized training for narcotics agents assigned overseas. It is also apparent from a reading of the incoming traffic that there is still considerable interagency controversy as to the real requirements of these proliferating programs.

The Secretary, at the March 20, 1972 meeting of the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, stressed the importance of improving the coordination of government anti-narcotics programs. Our ambassadors have consistently emphasized this same requirement and have pointed out the need for better handling of the sensitive political issues involved in obtaining the cooperation and support of host governments. The ambassador has general supervisory responsibility for each post’s narcotics plan but it is doubtful that most have either the time or the requisite expertise to exercise effective review and control over the whole spectrum of US Government involvement in most producing, transit or victim countries.

The Department has, of course, already achieved a good measure of success in the war on narcotics, particularly in the recently concluded renegotiation of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. I believe, however, that consistent with the Secretary’s role as Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, it is incumbent upon the Department to move even more vigorously into the narcotics control area and try to bring order out of the growing chaos.

The Department is endowed with a reservoir of highly intelligent, politically sensitive officers who have the requisite language facility and the proven ability to function effectively in a foreign environment. I believe that it would be far more sensible to train experienced foreign service officers to handle most narcotics matters than to provide political, cultural and language training to other agency personnel as suggested in the Krogh Memo (attached). Of course, I do not envisage the FSO/Narcotics Control Officer as undertaking the collection of covert intelligence or the training of local anti-narcotics forces. However, such officers reporting directly to the ambassador and working under his authority, could provide the necessary internal coordination and political guidance now sadly lacking at many posts. In addition the FSO/Narcotics Control Officer would assume primary responsibility for political liaison with the host government on narcotics matters.

New positions should be created specifically for narcotics officers and the officers assigned to these positions should not be encumbered with other responsibilities. Furthermore, both pending and future requests for additional positions by other agencies should be re-viewed to see if the proposed functions could be better carried out by FSOs trained in narcotics control matters.

The problem of international narcotics control poses a challenge to the Department’s ability and determination to respond enthusiastically and imaginatively to the President’s priorities and to the changing foreign policy demand of the 70’s.

Below are some specific recommendations for actions the Department can and must take to meet that challenge.

Recommendations:

1. That S/NM consultation with the bureaus be asked to identify those posts at which Narcotics Control Officer could be usefully employed.

2. That the agreed number of Narcotics Control Officer positions be established immediately, and the Department seek the requisite increase in its Opred ceiling.

3. That these officers be assigned as full time narcotics control program coordinators at posts where narcotics production, refining, transport and consumption poses a significant problem.

4. That FSI be directed to construct a three to four week course in International Narcotics Control to thoroughly familiarize the Narcotics Control Officers with all aspects of the international drug problem.

5. That an instruction be sent to the field stating the Department’s intention to undertake overall coordination and supervision of overseas narcotics control programs, and informing posts of the role of the new Narcotics Control officers.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. No classification marking.

223. Airgram A-4489 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts 223. Airgram A-4489 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1

Washington, May 3, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Turkish Ban on Opium Cultivation, and U.S. Assistance

The enclosed statements have been prepared for use in responding to numerous inquiries on this subject by members of Congress, the public and the press. They provide accurate orientation on this significant development in international narcotics control, and may be drawn upon in public and private discussions of the subject.

Irwin II, Acting

Enclosure 1

February 25, 1972

THE TURKISH OPIUM SITUATION

Turkey’s Part in the International Illicit Opium Traffic

Authoritative sources estimate that 1,200 tons or more of opium are available for the world’s illicit trade. Turkish illicit opium is thought to constitute about 5 to 6 percent of this. From 40 to 60 tons of opium are estimated to be sufficient to supply the annual American illicit demand after processing to produce from 4 to 6 tons heroin. Turkey’s geographic location and historical connections with Europe have resulted in European processors obtaining most of their opium supply from Turkey, passing it on through their smuggling teams to consumers in Europe, Latin America, and principally the U.S.

Why is Turkey’s decision to ban poppy cultivation so important if great bulk of illicit opium originates elsewhere?

Removal of Turkey as a source of illicit supply will cause serious disruption to established patterns of smuggling of opium and its derivative, morphine base, through Europe. It removes a product particularly high in quality. It forces processors to try to develop new sources of supply, taking additional risks of detection as they are obliged to use new contacts and transport their wares over longer and untested routes. This exposes them to the impact of other aspects of a coordinated program of strengthening enforcement activities throughout the world. Turkey’s action also sets an important example which can encourage other nations to act with similar vigor in the common interest of controlling the narcotics scourge.

Why did Turkey declare a total ban?

Turkey has been a party to the international agreements and conventions, principally the 1961 Single Convention, calling for the improved control of narcotics. Successive Turkish Governments have been aware of the need to institute more stringent controls over opium production in Turkey. Legislation which eventually passed in August 1971, had been introduced in the Turkish Parliament in the summer of 1970 for this purpose. But it became clear that the dimensions of the narcotics problem were expanding much more rapidly than the implementation of fully effective control measures. The Government of Prime Minister ERIM therefore concluded that for humanitarian reasons, at the price of giving up Turkey’s legal share of production of narcotics to meet legitimate world needs, a total ban would be implemented at the earliest possible date. A total ban could more easily be enforced with the resources available than could any other form of control. By law, the Turkish Government must announce restrictions on poppy cultivation one year in advance, making the announcement in June of one year covering planting anticipated to take place during late summer of the following year. The decree of June 30, 1971, was the strongest and most direct action legally possible for the Turkish Government to take. It confirmed the limitations of the previous forecast, which allowed poppy cultivation in only four provinces, and stated that a total ban would apply thereafter.

What has this decision cost the Turkish people?

The great majority of farmers who have grown poppy are as honest and hard-working as their counterparts anywhere else. They have for centuries grown small plots of poppy, seldom more than an acre or so. Not all poppy grown is incised and bled for opium gum. Normally, perhaps 20 to 30 percent of production is grown for the seed only. The seed is used by many for baked products, and is also used to produce edible oil traditionally used in the region. Residual oil cake is excellent animal feed. Neither seed nor oil has narcotic content. The hulls of the poppy head, once the seeds are removed, are sold for legal export from Turkey to sophisticated processing plants, primarily in Europe, for the extraction of residual alkaloids for legitimate medical purposes. The farmer thus profits from the opium gum, from the seeds and their oil and cake, from sale of poppy head hulls, and from the use of the remaining stalks for fuel. These farmers do not fully understand why they are called upon to abandon what to them is legitimate enterprise, when it is smugglers and the misuse of narcotics in other parts of the world which create untold misery. Turkey itself has virtually no problem of addiction, with the result that farmers feel the root causes as well as the cures of the drug abuse problem lie with those who abuse the product, not with those who produce it.

The Turkish Decision and International Narcotics Cooperation

The decision of the Turkish Government to serve broad humanitarian interests by a total ban is subject to argument and challenge from a number of sources in Turkey. Some maintain that Turkey should not accept the economic loss without the commitment of massive compensatory assistance. Some say that the promise of additional help from the U.S. has a hollow ring because of the widespread reports of reductions in both economic and military assistance affecting Turkey as well as many other friends of the U.S. A few, in the hope of injuring the fundamentally good relations that exist between the Turkish and American peoples, seek to characterize the situation as Turkish capitulation to purely American pressure, thus preying on valid historical grievances and the, at least partially, consequential Turkish sense of pride and honor. But though such pressures are troublesome, the Government of Turkey and a large segment of informed Turkish opinion understand the broader picture of international cooperation required to break the grip of narcotics hucksters on the youth of the world. The U.S. has pledged substantial financial and technical assistance to Turkey to find ways to develop new sources of income for those legitimate farmers who will suffer the consequences of a total ban on raising the traditional poppy crop.

Poppy Cultivation During the Final Year

The Turkish Government has acted vigorously within its legal limits to be certain that only legitimate growers are allowed to plant poppy, and to make sure that opium gum is turned into government purchasing offices. The Government of Turkey is reinforcing the measures that last year substantially reduced the amount of opium gum flowing into illicit channels, resulting in the collection of the highest percentage of the crop ever obtained. This was achieved as a result of a number of Turkish measures instituted in the spring of 1971, including: (a) substantial increase in the price of government purchases or opium gum; (b) an increase in the number of collection points in the growing provinces; (c) cash payments to the farmers at the time of gum collections rather than the old voucher system; (d) and the widely publicized fact that legal sales to the government would be the basis for computing the compensation to be paid to farmers following the total ban to assist them through a transition period while new sources of income are developed. In August 1971, a new licensing law was passed by the Turkish Parliament. This further strengthens the government’s authority over the growing process. Now farmers legally are required to supply much greater detail about the location and extent of the areas planted. This law provides stiff penalties against those who fail to comply or who knowingly violate the new procedures. The number of farmers planting will be smaller than last year, and although a substantially larger area is being planted this final year, reinforced control efforts by the Government of Turkey are expected to produce positive results.

Enclosure 2

Washington, April 1972

U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TURKEY IN CONNECTION WITH TURKISH BAN ON POPPY GROWING

When the Government of Turkey decided in June 1971 to declare a total ban on growing of opium poppy in Turkey, to take effect at the earliest legally possible date (in effect, following the harvest of the 1971-72 crop),it was clear that both the Government of Turkey and a majority of Turkish farmers would be giving up legitimate sources of income in order to bring an end to illicit production and smuggling. American offers of assistance were formulated with the idea of helping Turkey to meet such legitimate problems. It was anticipated that other nations and international organizations would also contribute in various ways to help in the development of alternative sources of income for Turkish farmers and hopefully for the government as well.

The U.S. pledge of $35 million, supplemented from the outset by the President’s declared intention to make the best technical brains we have available to assist Turkey, is in concept divided into two parts. $20 million is intended as a financial resource for programs and projects which could in a reasonable period of time produce new sources of income for the poppy farmer and the region in which he lives. $15 million spread over three to four years to the Government of Turkey will help replace losses in foreign exchange the Government of Turkey would incur as a consequence of no longer being able to market its legitimate opium and related poppy product exports.

With American technical advice and assistance, the GOT has designed a special regional authority for central areas affected by the poppy ban, which will put developmental funds to work on selected activities, most of which are outlined in a joint report prepared in October and November 1971 by a U.S.-Turkish team. The U.S. team was led by former Secretary of Agriculture, Clifford Hardin. During the spring of 1972, the GOT has been establishing a regulatory and legislative base for this new regional development organization and making appointments to its key positions, hoping to utilize this operation as a model for agricultural development perhaps applicable to other areas of Turkey as well. Some American personnel will be recruited to work with this regional authority: $400,000 in additional grant funds has been made available to the Turkish Government to help meet expenses of such personnel. In other related areas, the U.S. has also made available $300,000 to assist the Soil Products Office, the responsible agency under licensing and control legislation passed in the fall of 1971, in mounting an intensified campaign to control and collect the opium harvest during the final growing season ending in August 1972. Under a loan of $3 million made to Turkey in 1968, the U.S. is assisting Turkish enforcement agencies in equipment and training aimed at detection and apprehension of illicit narcotics traffic. This loan is also supporting certain agricultural research and extension activities connected with crop substitution.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman, cleared by Ogden, and approved by Gross.

224. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Treasury Schultz 224. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Treasury Schultz1

Washington, June 20, 1972.

Dear George:

Prior to his departure, John Connally wrote to me concerning the commitment of funds to the Burmese and Turkish narcotics programs.

I concur that coordination with full exchange of information and views on funding matters is essential. In fact, one of the reasons for the establishment of the Cabinet Committee structure was to ensure coordination of our international narcotics programs, as well as to bring major policy differences to the Cabinet level for decision.

With regard to assistance to Burma, Nelson Gross, my Senior Adviser on Narcotics Matters, reported on his meeting with Ne Win at the Cabinet Committee Working Group meeting of February 7, 1972. In return for a Burmese promise to undertake action again illicit opium processing and trafficking, Mr. Gross offered to provide detailed narcotics intelligence to the Burmese and to furnish equipment and material for use in narcotics suppression. While no assistance amount was mentioned at the meeting, the proposal was agreed to in principle by the members of the Working Group. Subsequently, when the amount of assistance for Burma was being considered at the working level, Treasury indicated there would be no objection to an amount not to exceed $3 million.

On Turkey, I regret that through an oversight the $400,000 grant was not discussed with Treasury. The $400,000 will be used to fund a resident group of U.S. experts who will provide support for the Turkish regional organization established in the former poppy growing area. The amount does not add significantly to our $35 million commitment. Moreover, in the December 16, 1971, Cabinet Committee meeting it was agreed that everything possible should be done to ensure the success of the current crop eradication effort in Turkey. We felt it was necessary to provide these additional funds in order to get the agricultural program moving. I think we all recognize that the permanency of the opium ban depends in large measure on the success of the agricultural program to provide alternate income to those farmers affected by the ban.

We understand the concern with respect to the several Turkish requests for quantities of narcotics enforcement equipment, and we have declined to provide the magnitude desired by the Turks. However, I think we should take a careful look at requests for equipment that the Turks demonstrate they can utilize, and that is needed to enforce the opium ban or to prevent Turkey from becoming a bridge for narcotics traffic from neighboring countries destined for the United States. We will, of course, consult with your Department on any such requests.

Sincerely,

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-DRUGS BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Malcolm Lawrence (S/NM) and Ogden, and cleared with Davies, Gross, AID, A/NM, and Dexter.

225. Airgram A-8787 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts 225. Airgram A-8787 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic and Consular Posts1

Washington, August 28, 1972.

SUBJECT:

The President Expands Drug Abuse Prevention Program

When releasing the World Opium Survey 1972, on August 16, 1972, the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control issued the enclosed fact sheet on the above subject. In addition to summarizing activities against the illicit traffic by domestic and foreign law enforcement agencies and the resultant pressures on the illegal market, the fact sheet contains information concerning the commitment of substantial additional U.S. resources to the campaign to reduce drug abuse in the United States. At the time that we are requesting and receiving cooperation from foreign countries in efforts directed against the illicit production and trade, these actions of drug abuse prevention and treatment demonstrate that the United State is making an extraordinary effort to bring drug abuse in the United States under control and thus to reduce the illicit demand for narcotics and other dangerous drugs.

Also in connection with the release of the World Opium Survey 1972, the Cabinet Committee issued a fact sheet on the Drug Situation in Southeast Asia. A copy is enclosed.

Rogers

Enclosure

August 1972

FACT SHEET

THE PRESIDENT EXPANDS DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION PROGRAM

The President, labeling the drug abuse problem “America’s Public Enemy Number One,” has increased by one-fourth the current federal budget to finance the Administration’s anti-narcotics program.

The President sent to Congress an urgent recommendation for a supplemental drug abuse prevention appropriation of $135.2 million for Fiscal Year 1973. The sum raised his budget from $594 million to $729 million. The expanded program tops federal anti-drug expenditures of $65.7 million in FY 69 by 1,000%.

PROGRAM PROGRESS TO DATE

The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs reported at mid-summer a sharp decline in the supply of heroin along the East Coast in the last 12 months.

The wholesale price of heroin almost doubled. In Boston, the cost of one gram of heroin jumped from $418 to $785 in the year. (A gram is equal to about one twenty-eighth of an ounce.)

The quality of the heroin available in New York City declined in purity from 5.1% to 3.1%. Addicts, deprived of heroin, stood in line at methadone maintenance centers in Washington.

In Baltimore, the heroin shortage boosted prices from $10 to $15 a bag. The amount of pure heroin in each bag decreased from 4% to 1%. Police gave credit for the decline in the supply to local drug enforcement and to seizure abroad of large caches of heroin headed for the East Coast.

LAW ENFORCEMENT ACHIEVEMENTS

The heroin drought-albeit perhaps a temporary curtailment of the supply-coincided with marked success in antinarcotics law enforcement in FY 72.

Domestic heroin seizures by the BNDD and the U.S. Customs Bureau increased from 1,161 pounds in FY 71 to 1,626 pounds in FY 72.

Total seizures in the entire program attack on the illicit drug traffic almost doubled in the 12-month period: an increase from 241,663 pounds seized in FY 71 to 472,640 pounds in FY 72.

The street value of the seizures did double: from $1,063 million to $2,132 million.

Arrests rose: 12,947 in FY 71 to 16,144 in FY 72

LAW ENFORCEMENT AT HOME

The Customs Bureau is responsible for interdicting the drug traffic at U.S. borders. The Bureau seized 181,974 pounds of heroin, opium, cocaine and other drugs in FY 71. Seizures sharply increased to 302,645 pounds in FY 72. Arrests edged up from 7,810 to 7,860. Sixty percent of the Bureau’s arrests are made along the Mexican border.

The Bureau seized 16,240,449 dosage units of dangerous drugs in FY 72 compared to 6,310,060 in FY 71.

Customs now has 532 patrol officers. The President’s recommended supplementary appropriation will increase the force to 862.

Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs domestic seizures accounted for 49,264 pounds of heroin, cocaine and other drugs in FY 72. The figure was more than three times the 14,430 pounds seized in FY 71.

BNDD also seized 207,094,393 dosage units of hallucinogens, depressants and stimulants in FY 72. The total was almost 15 times the 14,366,666 dosage units taken in FY 71.

BNDD has 1,446 special agents and 140 compliance investigators within the country and abroad.

The Office for Drug Abuse Law Enforcement and the Internal Revenue Service are high priority agencies dealing with narcotics traffickers.

The President created DALE by Executive Order on January 28, 1972, as an innovation in the law enforcement campaign against street pushers and narcotics distributors-"those who would profit from the misery of others.”

DALE “task forces” operate in 34 target cities though investigation prosecution teams which include, altogether, 250 to 350 federal investigators, some 106 attorneys and Assistant U.S. Attorneys, and more than 1,000 state and local police officers. Thirty-eight special grand juries have been impaneled to consider indictments. Current grand jury investigations top 1,200.

DALE has made more than 1,000 arrests and identified some 3,000 pushers. DALE operates the HEROIN HOTLINE (800/368-5363) whereby citizens may report information regarding alleged narcotics law violators in strict confidence and toll free. Five thousand Hotline calls have been classed as “valuable.”

The Internal Revenue Service has completed the first year of its intensive campaign. Since IRS already has seized $9.9 million in currency and property, the cash gain to the Government so far is $2.4 million.

The President reviewed domestic law enforcement progress in FY 72 and summarized: “We started on the 10 yard line and they had the ball. Now, we are on the 50 yard line and we have the ball.”

LAW ENFORCEMENT ABROAD

In Europe: The French seized three heroin refining laboratories within one week in July. One of the laboratories produced enough heroin to supply one-fifth of this country’s addicts for a year. The three seizures brought to five the French heroin refineries uncovered this year-a number equalling the five uncovered by French agents in the entire period 1964-71.

European heroin seizures by mid-1972 topped the amount taken during all of 1971. The 1971 European seizures already had increased 300% over those of 1970.

In Southeast Asia: The Royal Government of Thailand burned 26 tons of crude opium-equal to 2.6 tons of heroin-turned in by the Chinese Irregular Forces. The Thais agreed, in return, to grant land to the CIF for resettlement. The BNDD regional director and a chemist tested each sack of opium to make certain the product was genuine before it was doused with jet fuel and ignited.

The Thais also have seized 850 pounds of heroin since October 1971. Other seizures were 493 pounds of morphine base (the equivalent of 493 pounds of heroin when refined) and 60,393 pounds of crude opium.

Since April of this year, the Thais seized narcotics contraband with a U.S. street value of $347,455,488. But obviously, none of the illicit drugs reached this country.

In Vietnam, heroin became widely available to U.S. servicemen in early 1971. Ambassador Bunker and General Abrams voiced this Government’s deep concern to President Thieu. The Vietnamese President replaced the chief of the narcotics bureau of the National Police Force, and expanded the bureau from 26 to 52 agents. Customs inspection was tightened with U.S. cooperation at the Tan Son Nhut airport and at all ports.

Since January 1971, Vietnam has seized 783 pounds of heroin, 40 pounds of opium, 7,828 pounds of marijuana and large quantities of dangerous drugs. Arrests numbered 2,785.

Army Secretary Robert F. Froehlke estimated that, at the height of the problem among servicemen, drug abuse ran as high as 5% to 6% in some units. The Defense Department then inaugurated its urinalysis campaign.

The latest cumulative average of urinalysis tests “clinically confirmed positive” was 1.8% (July 1, 1972).

In the Near East, Turkey has been the major source of heroin, via France, reaching this country. The Turkish Government has agreed to ban cultivation of opium poppies after this year’s crop.

Iran is a “victim” of opium smuggled into the country by Afghanistan. The government adopted a tough new anti-narcotics law 1969 providing the death penalty for smugglers. By early 1972, 133 traffickers had been put to death. Iran has seized since last March 21 (the beginning of the Iranian new year) 10 tons of opium along the Iranian-Afghan border.

All foreign aspects of the Administration’s anti-drug program are directed by the special Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control. The Committee, chaired by Secretary of State William P. Rogers, oversees not only law enforcement, but the gathering of intelligence on illicit opium production and trafficking, and directs anti-narcotics diplomacy. International control efforts have a $50 million budget.

A major Committee project has been the formulation or “narcotics control action plans” for the 59 nations which either produce opium or whose borders are crossed by international smuggling routes. These programs are in an active state of implementation.

THE PROBLEM-AND RENEWED PRESIDENTIAL ACTION

The President reviewed his program’s accomplishments-and resurveyed the problem. He found that:

New and refined statistical estimates placed the number of heroin users in the country at from 500,000 to 600,000. Abusers of other dangerous drugs, such as amphetamines and barbituates, number far more.

In New York City, drug abuse is the largest single cause of death for persons between 15 and 35 years. Last year, there were 1,259 confirmed drug-related deaths in New York City.

Addicts spend a estimated $17 million a day on heroin, or $6 billion a year. The average addict must spend $30 daily for heroin-some spend more than $100. A large majority must turn to crime to support their habits.

The President decided, on the basis of those hard facts, that the Government must increase its anti-drug abuse efforts.

THE PRESIDENT’S EXPANSION PLANS

The resulting White House request to Congress for the $135.2 million supplemental appropriation included:

$millions

Office of National Narcotics Intelligence 2.5

Drug enforcement research & development 5.0

Customs patrol officers and IRS auditors 7.7

Treatment, education & research 120.0

HOW THE MONEY WILL BE SPENT

The Office of National Narcotics Intelligence will provide key information essential to the apprehension of international smugglers and traffickers. The intelligence office will collect narcotics information collected by BNDD, Customs, and other agencies. The Center will provide up-to-date analysis and evaluation of the intelligence to enforcement agencies in the form of coordinated action reports. Information also will be furnished state and local enforcement forces.

Drug enforcement research and development projects will be accelerated in fulfilling their assignment to develop new techniques to detect clandestine sites where narcotics are produced and distributed; also for interdicting the traffic of illicit drugs directed to this country.

The requested $5 million appropriation will approximately double current R & D operations of BNDD, Customs and the Department of Agriculture. Technical manpower will be increased by 50%.

Customs and IRS personnel added to the anti-narcotics drive will number 568. Customs will expand from 532 to 862 its force of patrol officers to provide increased surveillance at entry points, and intensify inspection routines at airports and seaports.

IRS now has 410 agents assigned to drug trafficker tax cases. The additional 238 positions will enable IRS to concentrate Special Agent and Revenue Agent personnel on increasing narcotic traffic targets and support the expanding operations of the Office or Drug Abuse Law Enforcement.

The Special Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention will receive the major portion of the supplemental appropriation. The new $120 million will raise to $328 million the funds available for treatment and rehabilitation in FY 73. The sum is an increase of more than 1,200% over the $25 million available in FY 69.

SAODAP has already treated at the end of its first year of operation, more patients than the government cared for in the previous 50 years. With the supplemental appropriation, treatment capacity will be available in federally funded, state and local projects at the end of the calendar year to treat and rehabilitate about one-half the country’s estimated number of addicts.

SAODAP deals with drug-related crime through a special project entitled TASC-Treatment Alternative to Street Crime. The plan provides for immediate treatment of drug abusers arrested for certain street crimes.

SAODAP initiated the National Drug Abuse Training Center in cooperation with other agencies. The Center conducts education and training programs for teachers, medical personnel and laymen engaged in drug abuse centers and projects. SAODAP and the National Institute of Mental Health help medical schools to provide drug abuse training to students. Training included 1,750 persons in 1971. Training capacity is being increased this year to more than 16,000.

Aid to states is provided through new technical assistance in combating drug abuse. SAODAP has teams of professionals to aid communities with special drug abuse problems. The National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information is being expanded to provide information on drug abuse to states, local governments, interested professionals, and individuals with questions. The Clearinghouse now answers more than one million inquiries a year.

Research evaluation, and support will now be intensified in efforts already under way to develop more effective narcotics antagonists which block the euphoria (the “highs”) and subsequent effects of narcotics. Antagonists will be a marked aid in rehabilitation of addicts-and in abuse prevention. The expanded budget in this vital field is $105.8 for FY 73. That is 583% more than the total of $15.5 for FY 69.

CONCLUSION

The stepped-up narcotics abuse prevention program reflects the fact-and the Administration’s recognition of the fact-that eradication of the scourge of dangerous drugs is a formidable undertaking. It will require a determined, cooperative effort both by governments at all levels and by concerned citizens. President Nixon is leading the fight.

Enclosure

August 16, 1972

CABINET COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL NARCOTICS CONTROL DRUG SITUATION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

The remote Golden Triangle area of northern Thailand, western Laos and eastern Burma, constitutes the world’s major producing area for illicit opium (an estimated 700 tons). The vast majority of that opium is consumed in Southeast Asia by the hill tribesmen who cultivate it, and by ethnic Chinese living in urban centers of Asia, particularly Hong Kong. A very small percentage of this opium is transformed into heroin and much of this, too, is consumed by users in Southeast Asia. Some of the heroin which formerly supplied our troops in Vietnam is now being directed towards addicts in this country, but our best estimates are that only a small share-probably less than 10 percent-of the heroin flowing to our shores now originates in Southeast Asia.

Thus, Southeast Asia presently constitutes a significant but secondary source of our existing drug problem. However, as drug control efforts improve elsewhere in the world, it looms as a serious potential source. It is also quite clear that the region has a drug problem of its own which demands a solution.

It was with these two concerns in mind that the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control in November of 1971 directed our Chiefs of Mission in Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, and other principal Southeast Asian countries to develop Narcotics Control Action Plans.

In attempting to block the flow of narcotics across borders and within the area, the governments of Southeast Asia must cope with several unique problems, such as internal security, a difficult topography, and a value system which tolerates drug use and trade by segments of their societies.

The governments of Laos and South Vietnam are engaged in wars of national defense, while the governments of Burma and Thailand are threatened by insurgent groups which control or harass large areas of the opium growing regions. In spite of their commitment to solving the drug problem, these governments have limited resources and trained personnel available for narcotics control. In addition, the lack of internal security hampers police action and intelligence operations against traffickers. The Government of Burma, for example, does not have effective administrative control over significant portion of the area where most Southeast Asian poppies are grown.

The topography of the Golden Triangle area is mountainous wild, and, uncontrollable. When one smuggling route is uncovered and plugged by police and customs teams, the traffickers can easily detour to alternate routes and modes of transportation. We need only look at the difficulties that our own well-trained and equipped law enforcement agencies have in blocking narcotics traffic across our clearly-defined, militarily-secure border with Mexico to gain a better appreciation of the difficulties in Southeast Asia.

Opium is an accepted part of the area’s culture and has been regarded as a legitimate commodity of commerce for centuries under both indigenous and colonial governments. For the hill tribes, opium is still the principle source of medicinal relief for endemic diseases, and is also the most lucrative crop to sell or barter for basic necessities. Furthermore, addicts are not ostracized in Southeast Asia since violent criminal action is rarely necessary to secure narcotics. An addict is usually looked upon as a fool, not a threat to society, and drug abuse is viewed there much as we regard drunkeness or alcoholism here.

Despite these problems, U.S. Government efforts to encourage the governments of the region to take effective action against the international drug traffic have led to substantial progress, particularly in Thailand, Laos, and Vietnam. The passage last November of an anti-narcotics law in Laos-the first in its history-and the recent announcement of South Vietnam’s tough, new law providing the death penalty for major traffickers, are good examples of changes in attitude. The Royal Thai Government’s new Special Narcotics Operation is a mobile strike force that has been making the life of drug traffickers in northern Thailand difficult, costly, and dangerous during recent months. A description of the current situation in Burma, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam follows.

BURMA

Most of Burma’s illicit opium production (estimated at 400 tons annually) and trafficking takes place in remote, mountainous areas of the Shan and Kachin States where the hill tribes have grown opium poppies for centuries. These areas are plagued with insurrection as well, and insurgency and opium have become almost inextricably mixed, for the drug trade brings arms to the rebels. Insurgencies defy government law enforcement efforts in many areas and even in areas under government control, divert government attention and limited resources away from vigorous anti-narcotics activities. As long as the Burmese continue to place highest priority on their internal security needs the major source of illicit opium in Southeast Asia will continue unchecked.

Since the Burmese Government adheres to a rigid policy of nonalignment and minimal international involvement, it is extremely wary of foreign influence and designs. The Burmese have been extremely reluctant to accept outside advice or assistance on narcotics problems from other nations, including the U.S. On the other hand, recent discussions between representatives of the United Nations and the Burmese offer the hope of increased multilateral cooperation on their drug problem in the near future.

LAOS

Prior to the late 1960’s, as much as 100 tons of opium was thought to be produced annually in Laos. Since then, the war situation has forced many hill people into lowland areas with the result that production has dropped to about 30 tons. Almost all that amount remains in Laos where it is consumed by local addicts. However, Laos is used as a transit point for caravans moving opium from Burma to Thailand, and thus continues to play a part in the international trafficking picture.

One year ago, Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma welcomed our suggestion that we develop a bilateral narcotics control action plan for Laos. In November, 1971, the first Narcotics Control Law in the kingdom’s history went into effect. It prohibits any commercial transaction involving opium or its derivatives, including heroin.

The U.S.-Lao narcotics control program has already registered a number of significant actions. Over the past five months, operations by customs, local police, and a special narcotics unit have seized more than 660 pounds of opium, some of it on military aircraft. They have also discovered substantial amounts of heroin and acetic anhydride. The new narcotics unit in Vientiane has fearless and honest leadership which has made it the primary factor in recent seizures.

THAILAND

Last September, the Thai Government signed a joint memorandum with the U.S. on drug control, and they created a multi-agency subcommittee to map out increased efforts aimed at suppressing illicit narcotics traffic. The three major smuggling rings responsible for drug trafficking to U.S. troops in Vietnam have now been smashed.

Chinese Irregular Forces (CIF) remain in the border area and have been active in the processing, trade, and transportation of opium in Burma and northern Thailand. The Thai Government has undertaken a program to resettle certain CIF forces in Thailand. In return for land and resettlement assistance, these groups agreed to turn over their opium stocks and cease drug trafficking activity. Twenty-six tons obtained from the CIF were burned by the Thai Government on March 7, 1972. The resettlement project involved a contribution of $850,000 from the Thai Government and $1 million from the U.S. Government.

Thailand was the first country to sign a major agreement with the new United Nations fund for drug abuse control. The program will be financed by $2 million in U.N. funds and the equivalent of $5 million by the Thai Government, and its immediate objectives include crop substitution and reduction in drug addiction throughout the country.

A special narcotics organization (SNO), which is an elite, mobile strike force operating in northern Thailand, began operations in April, 1972. This joint U.S.-Thai effort has made 15 arrests and seized more than 8 1/2 tons of opium in the past two months. These raids confiscated 3,500 pounds of opium with trucks and chemicals on June 10, a heroin laboratory with 50 pounds of heroin on July 18, and the largest seizure in Thai history-more than 5,000 pounds of opium-on July 23 and 24 in the Mai Sai area of northern Thailand.

SOUTH VIETNAM

Vietnam is neither a grower nor a major trafficker in illicit narcotics. Moreover, with the departure of U.S. combat troops, the demand for heroin has been reduced significantly. At the same time, with narcotics abuse growing among ethnic Vietnamese, President Thieu has taken a tough stand on narcotics by signing a new law demanding the death penalty for organized trafficking in hard drugs (August 12, 1972).

Although preoccupied with national security problems, the Vietnamese police have organized a 60-man narcotics squad which arrested several important traffickers last month, breaking up a major smuggling organization. Officials have stepped up customs inspections, raids on opium dens, and general harassment of dealers and users. The stepped-up activity of Vietnamese prosecutors and the judiciary system in narcotics matters has helped to control the situation.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Unclassified. Drafted by Wellman on August 23, cleared by S/PRS, and approved by Gross.

226. Circular Telegram 162821 From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Posts 226. Circular Telegram 162821 From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, September 7, 1972.

Subject:

Washington Conference on International Narcotics Matters.

1. With the Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control approaching the end of its first year of operation, the Secretary has approved a Washington conference for senior level officers with responsibility for narcotics matters abroad to review our progress to date and to identify future priorities. The President will address the conference on its opening day.

2. In order to accommodate the schedule of the President and the Secretary the conference will be held in Washington during the three day period September 18-20. Officers from more than 50 countries will participate including most countries for which narcotics control action plans have seen developed, as well as others which play a key role in international narcotics control.

3. The conference will provide the participants with briefings by top-level officials from member agencies of the Cabinet Committee. It will also give the Washington officials concerned with world narcotics control first-hand detailed accounts of the progress in our programs abroad, which mission representatives should be prepared to make.

4. The first day of the conference will be devoted to presentations by Washington officials. In the second day the field participants will meet in regional workshop sessions in which country reports will be presented by field participants and discussed and regional problems evaluated. The third day will be devoted to conclusions and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of our programs abroad. A separate telegram will transmit fuller program information. Bureaus will be communicating directly with field posts regarding the second days program.

5. Missions are requested to designate the senior officer [DCM or other officer] who advises the Chief of Mission on narcotics matters and coordinates the activities of the mission in narcotics control to attend the conference, and to confirm his name to the Department.

6. Travel funds will be provided by Department. Allotment will be indicated in separate message.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Wellman on September 6; cleared in substance with Krogh; cleared with ARA, EA, AF, EUR, NEA, and IO; and approved by Gross. Repeated Priority to Rabat, Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli, Kabul, New Delhi, Tehran, Islamabad, Ankara, Mexico City, Panama City, Bogota, and La Paz.

227. Memorandum From the Secretary’s Special Assistant for Narcotic Matters (Gross) to the Director of the Office of Asian Communist Affairs (Jenkins) 227. Memorandum From the Secretary’s Special Assistant for Narcotic Matters (Gross) to the Director of the Office of Asian Communist Affairs (Jenkins)1

Washington, October 4, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Narcotics Control, People’s Republic of China.

The PRC has now been approached on several occasions on the question of narcotics control. The first exchange was Marshall Green’s initiative with Hsiung Hsiang-Hui, Chou’s Private Secretary for Foreign Affairs, during the President’s visit to China.

Subsequently the PRC delegation at the United Nations participated in the ECOSOC debate on narcotic items last May 17. This was followed immediately by discussions held between the President of the International Narcotics Control Board and Chinese representatives. President Greenfield made a statement on the subject of China at the ECOSOC meeting on May 15 as follows: “Both the INCB and its predecessor body the PCOB have repeatedly called attention to major gaps in their information regarding the movement and control of narcotic substances in extensive and populous areas of the world. … Today it is a matter for profound satisfaction that, following the participation by the People’s Republic of China in United Nations affairs, the most important of these gaps will hereafter be closed. The Board has already, through the appropriate diplomatic channels, sought to obtain collaboration with the Chinese authorities; and within the last few days the Secretary, Mr. Dittert, and I have met with a response which we interpret as encouraging. This must be a matter for general satisfaction. For, on the most modest assessment of the advantages which cold accrue to the Board for such collaboration, the addition to its fund of knowledge would in itself be a considerable gain; but the potential benefit derivable from this major reinforcement of the international narcotic control system is obviously great.”

Thereafter, pursuant to instructions from the NSC, Nelson Gross and Ambassador Phillips met in New York with PRC Deputy Permanent Representative Wang (meeting reported in USUN 2887). Representative Wang was quite forthcoming, and the opportunity was provided for dialogue in depth concerning the willingness of the USG to set the record straight concerning unsubstantiated allegations that the China Mainland is an important source of narcotics for the illicit drug market overseas. It was quite apparent that on that score the Chinese Representative was quite desirous that the PRC not be the brunt of such allegations. Since that time, Congressman Halpern (R-N.Y.) has had a similar lengthy meeting with the Chinese in New York.

The Chinese stated at the Gross meeting that their participation at the ECOSOC session had been a “signal” that they were interested in exploring the subject matter and in determining the role their Government would play internationally. It is evident from these recent conversations that the Chinese are continuing to assess the position that they will adopt. It seems to me that sufficient time has elapsed for us to inquire again as to their attitude, particularly on the following points: 1. Possible PRC accession to the Single Convention and to the Amending Protocol opened for signature on March 25. 1972. The timing is appropriate since the Senate has now approved the Protocol. The PRC indicated some hesitancy since Nationalist China is a party to the Convention and that obstacle must be overcome. Talking points on this issue as prepared by L are attached.

2. PRC membership on the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The next election of members will not take place until the May 1973 ECOSOC meeting, but we might continually explore this with the Chinese in order to provide very opportunity for them to join. Membership would be a plus since there would then be a vehicle for constant exchange and liaison.

I would suggest that your channel might now be the best area for discussion of these items. At the time the subject is raised, I think it would be most constructive if an exchange of experts could be discussed. For example if Gross or Jaffe could visit China or their experts visit with us (their Health Minister apparently attended the ECOSOC meeting), it would facilitate mutual contacts. The reason to anticipate a possible affirmative PRC response would be sensitivity to criticism of the PRC and its alleged opium transit. Obviously it would be most helpful to the PRC if the Administration affirmatively were able to say that the PRC in no way contributed to the illicit market.

It would be a tremendous advantage if you were able to arrange for continued discussions between our experts, since at some point we might be able to discuss actual enforcement. For example if the PRC were prepared to cooperate in suppressing the illicit narcotics traffic by trawlers moving from Thailand through Chinese territorial waters off Hong Kong, we could create a serous impediment to the traffic. Then there is even the question of PRC willingness to assure the Burmese of Peking’s opposition to illegal narcotics trafficking in order to encourage more vigorous efforts against the illicit production and traffic in that country. In short, there is an important gap in international controls which could be filled by cooperative action between the Chinese Government and ourselves. Anything that can be done to expedite discussions in substance would be most welcome.

Attachment

Presumably, the USG would not want to agree with the PRC’s position that previous adherence by the ROC to the Single Convention (and other international agreements) is null and void. This is the kind of legalistic issue, however, which need not stand in the way of developing cooperative relationships between the PRC and the international community in general and the USG in particular as we move toward normalization of relations. We are reliably informed that the United Nations Secretariat no longer accepts ROC instruments of ratification for international agreements for which the UN is depositary. Unquestionably, the UN Secretariat would accept the PRC’s instruments of ratification or accession without any problem whatsoever. The 1971 UN publication on parties to multilateral agreements contains an introductory note concerning signatures, ratifications, accessions etc. on behalf of China (copy attached). We would hope this would provide a satisfactory practical solution to the PRC’s concern about the status of the ROC’s earlier ratification of the Single Convention.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SOC 11-5. Secret; Nodis. The memorandum was cleared in IO and by Boyd. The attachment was drafted by Boyd and cleared by Bevans. A copy was sent to L/EA. Talking points related to the PRC’s accession to the Single Convention and Amending Protocol opened for signature on March 25 were attached but not published.

Chapter 4. International Cooperation in Space, 1969-1972Chapter 4. International Cooperation in Space, 1969-1972

228. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, March 14, 1969.

As requested, Rogers sent the President a staff study entitled, “New Initiatives in Space Cooperation.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SP 1-1. Limited Official Use. No drafting information information appears on the memorandum. Cleared in draft by Hillenbrand, EA/J, and J/PM, and in information by DEPALMA. Copies were sent to DuBridge and Burns. Nixon’s February 21 request asked Rogers to review recommendations proposed by the President’s Task Force on Space, chaired by Dr. Charles H. Townes. (Ibid.)

229. Letter From the Acting Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to President Nixon

Washington, August 22, 1969.

Paine provided a status report on NASA’s plans to increase international space cooperation in a post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, Foreign Cooperation. No classification marking. Also printed as Document I-14 in John M. Logsdon with Dwayne A. Day and Roger D. Launius (eds.), Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program, Vol. II, External Relations (Washington, D.C.: NASA History Office, 1996). On February 12 Paine sent the President a letter summarizing European space programs in conjunction with Nixon’s forthcoming trip to Europe and suggested positions the President might take during the trip on European and cooperative space activities, ibid., Document I-13.

230. National Security Study Memorandum 72

Washington, September 4, 1969.

President Nixon specified the creation of an ad hoc group on international space cooperation with friendly countries and the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-162, NSSM Files, NSSM 72. Confidential. Copies were sent to Laird and Flanigan.

231. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1969, 11:45 a.m.

President Nixon specified the creation of an ad hoc group on international space cooperation with friendly countries and the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-162, NSSM Files, NSSM 72. Confidential. The meeting took place in Kissinger's office. Copies were sent to Laird and Flanigan.

232. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 5, 1969.

Behr provided Kissinger with a report on U.S. Government activities on multinational participation in future space flights and discussed the activities of the interagency group.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs. Sent for action. No classification marking. Attached but not published were Tabs A and B. On December 15 Kissinger wrote the following note on the first page: “Why can’t I get a coherent report for everything over a 5-year period. There was a Borman report earlier. State will just turn it into a negotiating exercise.”

233. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine)

Washington, December 8, 1969.

Kissinger passed on a personal suggestion, received from an ambassador, that NASA should implement President Nixon’s “all-mankind” theme by including representatives of various races in the space program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. No classification marking.

234. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, December 23, 1969.

Kissinger summarized the highlights of NASA Administrator Paine’s European trip to promote international space cooperation in post-Apollo programs.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. No classification marking. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. Nixon wrote on the first page: “Good report.” Kissinger wrote: “Tell Paine in a note from me.” In a January 12, 1970, memorandum to Paine, Kissinger stated that the President had reviewed Paine’s letter of November 7 and “he endorses your approach and is pleased with results you have reported so far. (Ibid.) Attached but not published was Tab A. It is printed as Document I-15 in Exploring the Unknown, Vol. II, External Relations. For a report of Paine’s trip to Australia and Japan, see ibid., Document I-16.

235. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, February 2, 1970.

Kissinger summarized NASA Administrator Paine’s report on his trip to Canada and other developments in international space cooperation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, and Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. Nixon wrote on the end of the second page: “Particularly follow up on program we could announce soon for Germ, Japan, British, French astros to participate in ′75 or whatever is earliest feasible year. This is a must.” Attached but not published was Tab A.

236. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, February 2, 1970.

Kissinger offered a summary of the NSC Under Secretaries’ paper on international space cooperation with the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Confidential. Sent for action. Tabs A-D were attached but not published. Tab A is a draft of Document 238. Nixon initialed his approval of the draft NSDM.

237. National Security Decision Memorandum 70

Washington, July 10, 1970.

President Nixon directed that cooperation with the Soviet Union in space should be pursued, but that a direct approach to Soviet Premier Kosygin should not be undertaken.

National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files, (H-Files), Box H-217, NSDM Files, NSDM 70. Confidential. Copies were sent to Shultz and Flanigan.

238. National Security Decision Memorandum 72

Washington, July 17, 1970.

President Nixon authorized the establishment of an ad hoc interagency group to create a program of exchange technical data between the United States and the international space community, with an initial concentration on Europe.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Confidential. Copies were sent to David, Shultz, and Flanigan.

239. Letter From the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to the President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union (Keldysh)

Washington, September 4, 1970.

Paine suggested that Keldysh discuss common docking equipment for Soviet and U.S. spacecraft during Keldysh’s planned trip to Washington in 1971.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 392, Space Programs, 1970. No classification marking. Paine’s July 31 letter to Keldysh, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Unknown, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-44.

240. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 21, 1970.

Behr reported on Chairman of the European Space Conference Lefevre’s meeting with Department of State officials to discuss European participation in the U.S. post-Apollo space program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Tab A was attached but not published.

241. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 24, 1970.

Pollack informed Rogers that President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union Keldysh had invited U.S. specialists to visit Moscow to begin a dialogue on compatible docking equipment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Webber. Cleared in draft by Burgess and Dubs. Copies were sent to J, EUR, and PM. Tabs A and B were attached but not published. Tab C is Document 237. On September 25 Low sent Keldysh a letter accepting an invitation to come to Moscow and suggesting topics for discussion (Text in telegram 158937 to Moscow, September 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR)

242. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre)

Washington, October 2, 1970.

In response to a request from Lefevre, Johnson spelled out the U.S. position on specific space-related questions, including the availability of U.S. launch services, decision-making, post-Apollo cooperation, and access to information and facilities.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking.

243. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 13, 1970.

Behr explained that the United States could guarantee satellite launch services to the Europeans if European participation in the post-Apollo program was substantial, the launch was for peaceful purposes, and it was consistent with the terms of the Intelsat agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. For Official Use Only. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. Tab A is Document 240. Tab C is Document 242. Tab B was attached but not published.

244. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 14, 1970.

Behr reported that a team of NASA experts was traveling to Moscow to discuss common docking possibilities. He suggested that the United States should keep scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union insulated from current political circumstances.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Official Use Only. Sent for action. In Tab A, an attached October 22 memorandum to Flanigan, Kissinger stated: “While I, too, am sensitive to the character of our present relations with the Russians, I believe that international scientific cooperation is an area where we can operate effectively in furtherance of long-term objectives.” Attached but not published was Tab B, an October 7 memorandum from Flanigan to Kissinger. Tab C is Document 237. For Tab D, see Document 236.

245. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, November 2, 1970.

Kissinger reported on the positive results of the U.S.-Soviet technical meeting on compatible docking equipment.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. No classification marking. Sent for information. Attached but not published at Tab A was an October 25 letter from Low to Kissinger. Nixon placed an exclamation point next to the second paragraph.

246. Intelligence Note SAN-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, November 10, 1970.

Intelligence note entitled, “European Space Conference Splits on Post-Apollo Cooperation.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Herbert Spielman (INR/Science Affairs).

247. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 1, 1970.

Johnson argued that European participation in the post-Apollo program (if it were to happen) would reduce the U.S. budget requirements by $1 billion, generate U.S. cooperation in other scientific and technical projects, and strengthen NATO.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. Drafted by Robert Packard.

248. Memorandum From Michael H. Guhin and Helmut G. Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 8, 1971.

Guhin and Sonnenfeldt provided briefing materials for Kissinger in advance of a meeting with acting NASA Administrator Low, who had planned a trip to the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. II. Confidential. Sent for information. Kissinger met with Low from 3:20 to 4:05 p.m. on January 12. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box 438, Miscellany, 1968-1976, Record of Schedule) No other record of that conversation has been found. Tab A is Document 237. An account of the NASA mission to Moscow, October 26-28, 1970, is printed in, Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-45.

249. Telegram 232 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, January 22, 1971, 1727Z.

Embassy Brussels reported ESC Chairman Lefevre’s concerns about the European response to potential participation in the post-Apollo program as evidenced by their recent discussions in Brussels. Ambassador Eisenhower asked that background on these concerns be passed to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson on a confidential basis.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential; Exdis.

250. Telegram 237 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State

Brussels, January 23, 1971, 1045Z.

The Embassy transmitted the text of a letter from ESC Chairman Lefevre explaining the official European positions on participation in a post-Apollo space program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rome, Bonn, Bern, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Madrid, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Stockholm, Tokyo, Canberra, and the U.S. Mission Geneva.

251. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President of Communications Satellite Corporation (Charyk)

Washington, January 23, 1971.

Johnson responded to Charyk’s concerns about the provision of launch facilities for the Europeans.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Johnson sent this letter to Charyk under cover of a January 23 memorandum in which he stated: “I have used the language which you passed to my office yesterday, although I have made slight revisions in the wording in the interests of continuity. I think, however, that this language preserves the substance of your suggestion, with which I am in full accord.” Attached but not published was a copy of circular airgram CA-5237, October 9, 1970.

252. Memorandum From the Director, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, (Pollack) to Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand)

Washington, January 26, 1971.

Summary of the results of a meeting between officials from NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences.

Source: National Archive, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Confidential. Copies were sent to E, IO, P, H, J, EUR/SOV, EUR/SES, EUR, L/SCI, INR/DRF, S/PC, and E/TT. Attached but not published were Tabs A-C.

253. Telegram 19915 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium

Washington, February 3, 1971, 0246Z.

The telegram contains a copy of a letter from Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson to ESC Chairman Lefevre asking the Europeans to prepare responses to specific U.S. questions about the Europeans proposed involvement in the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archive, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Immediate; Limited Official Use. Drafted by Baker and Webber on February 3; cleared by S, Intelsat, EUR, E, OTP, L, in substance by Behr and EUR/FBX, and in information by Frutkin; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson.

254. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, February 9, 1971.

Behr informed Kissinger of an upcoming meeting with a European Space Conference delegation under ESC Chairman Lefevre and reviewed the contentious issues that would be raised during the discussions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Initialed by Haig.

255. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 10, 1971.

A transcript of an NSC senior staff meeting that includes a discussion of the upcoming discussions on the post-Apollo program with the Europeans.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1272, Saunders Chronology, NSC Operations Staff Meetings. Secret.

256. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 4, 1971.

Behr informed Kissinger of the outcome of the talks with ESC Chairman Lefevre in Washington on cooperation in the post-Apollo program. Also included are a 12-page overview of the issues with policy discussion points and a 2-page summary of European reactions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject File, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. An extensive report of the meeting with the Europeans is in telegram 30947 to Bern et. al., February 24. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US)

257. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 16, 1971.

Behr pointed out to Kissinger the difficulties of carrying on political negotiations on European participation in a post-Apollo program of space cooperation when that program had been neither defined nor fully approved within the U.S. Government.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for action. Kissinger wrote the following note on the first page: “OK-Put on agenda with David. Should see him soon.” The note was dated March 18. Attached at Tab A but not published was a copy of telegram 774 from Brussels, March 6.

258. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 17, 1971.

Prior to another round of talks, David communicated to Kissinger his concerns about negative factors of space cooperation with the Europeans.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Sensitive; Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Flanigan.

259. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, March 23, 1971.

Rogers highlighted the political issue of European insistence on assurances for launching of their regional telecommunications satellites if they gave up their own launcher program. Rogers asked Nixon if the basic Department of State position to engage the Europeans in the U.S. program was in accordance with his views.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. No drafting information appears on the letter. A typed notation on the memorandum reads: “Guidance provided in memo from Mr. Kissinger to Secretary dated August 18, 1971.” In a March 18 memorandum to Pollack, Rein objected to a draft of this memorandum on the grounds that it did not adequately frame the issues for the President. “The real question,” Rein stated, “is the extent to which the President is willing to permit our negotiating position in any Qseries negotiations’ on launch guarantees to threaten conflict with out Intelsat obligations or endanger the economic viability of the Intelsat system.” (Ibid.)

260. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 24, 1971.

Behr updated Kissinger on the question of European cooperation in the post-Apollo program prior to a meeting with the President’s Science Adviser David. He also recommended that Kissinger advise the President not to take a position at this time.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is Document 259.

261. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, March 26, 1971.

Extract of a memorandum of a discussion between the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger and the President’s Science Adviser David on post-Apollo program cooperation with the Europeans.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 270, Agency Files, OST, Vol. III. Secret. No drafting information appears on the memorandum.

262. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, April 2, 1971.

Behr described Rogers’ March 23 memorandum to the President and explained the nature of Secretary of State Rogers’ nervousness over the on-going negotiations with the European Space Conference. Behr also suggested that Kissinger provide guidance to Rogers.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnefeldt. Tab B is Document 259. Tab C was attached but not published. For the guidance as sent to Rogers, see Document 270. There is no indication that Kissinger saw the memorandum. A notation on the front page of the memorandum reads: “OBE”

263. Summary of Discussions

Washington, April 23, 1971, 6 p.m.

Minutes of Kissinger’s meeting with officials from NASA, OST, NSC, and other White House staff on post-Apollo space cooperation with the Europeans.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.Behr prepared talking points for Kissinger for this meeting. (Ibid.)

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, May 5, 1971.

Pollack provided Johnson with talking points for an upcoming White House meeting on the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollack and cleared with James D. Phillips (EUR/RPE). Attached but not published was a compilation of Presidential public views on European cooperation.

265. Airgram A-420 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, May 20, 1971.

Assessing U.S.-USSR space cooperation in the historical context, the Embassy concluded that the Soviets were after specific technical information and were not interested in genuine cooperation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by William N. Harben, scientific officer at the Embassy on May 20, cleared by DCM Boris H. Klossen, and approved by Lewis W. Bowden of the Economic section.

266. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, June 4, 1971.

Pollack’s assessment of NASA memoranda, prepared at Kissinger’s request, on Technology Transfers in the Post-Apollo Program and Alternatives to Post-Apollo European Participation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Tab A, “Introduction to NSA Presentation” and Tab C, “Alternatives to Post-Apollo Participation” were attached but not published. Pollack suggested that Johnson read the “Conclusions” printed on page 7 of Tab B. Page 7 of the attached Tab B is published. According to a handwritten notation on a subsequent June 5 briefing memorandum Pollack sent to Johnson (Document 267), the meeting scheduled for June 7 was postponed until August 9.

267. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, June 5, 1971.

Pollack provided a report on the status of the post-Apollo program negotiations in advance of a Johnson meeting with Kissinger.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Tab A is Document 259. Tab B is attached but not published. Tab C is Document 264. Tab D was attached but not published. The NASA report of June 2, dated June 1, Tab E, is summarized and extracted in Document 266.

268. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)

Washington July 23, 1971.

David indicated that he was opposed to European participation in the development of a space transportation system and favored separating the issue of launch facilities from that of space cooperation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. No classification marking. The summary of the NSA paper was attached but not published.

269. Memorandum From Michael Guhin of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, August 6, 1971.

Guhin provided briefing materials for Kissinger on a meeting with key U.S. officials to agree on guidelines for further discussions with the Europeans on post-Apollo space cooperation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. An informal account, prepared by Low, of the meeting that took place at 11:30 a.m. on August 9 is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-21. Also attached but not published were talking points for Kissinger.

270. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, August 18, 1971.

Kissinger informed Rogers that the President confirmed his support for international space cooperation in general and especially with the Europeans, but concluded that there was an insufficient basis for a final decision on Europe’s participation in the Space Transportation System.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential.

271. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre)

Washington, September 1, 1971.

Meeting participants discussed the European reactions to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson’s September 1 letter to Chairman Lefevre concerning the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Packard and cleared by Pollack and Edward L. Peck, Johnson’s Special Assistant. Johnson’s letter is Document 271.

272. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 6, 1971.

Meeting participants discussed the European reactions to Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Johnson’s September 1 letter to Chairman Lefevre concerning the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Packard and cleared by Pollack and Edward L. Peck, Johnson’s Special Assistant. Johnson’s letter is Document 271.

273. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 20, 1971.

The Department reminded Kissinger of the potential foreign policy benefits of a joint space docking agreement with the Soviet Union.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Curtis W. Kamman (EUR/SOV). James Carson signed for Eliot. A copy was sent to Fletcher. A report of the NASA Delegation to Moscow, November 5, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-45.

274. Transcript of a Conversation between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher)

Washington, December 1, 1970.

Fletcher reported on his conversation with President Nixon concerning the space shuttle and the foreign policy benefits vs. the cost of international cooperation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. Fletcher and Low met with the President and the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs Ehrlichman at the Western White House in San Clemente, California on January 5, from 10:01 to 10:35 a.m. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) On November 29 Nixon sent Flanigan a memorandum asking: “Is there still no feasible way to get multi-national participation in some of our future space flights?” Nixon stated he knew there were technical problems, but it was “a pet idea of mine and I would like to press it.” The full text of the conversation is in Document I-23, Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations.

275. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, January 19, 1972.

Rogers provided the President with an update on the status of negotiations with the Europeans on both the post-Apollo program and the proposed European communication satellite system.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 EUR. No classification marking. Drafted by Robert T. Webber (SCI/SAM), and Frank J. Haendler (EUR/RPE); concurred in by Abraham Katz (EUR/RPE) and Frutkin. Also printed as Document I-26 in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations. Johnson’s September 1, 1971, letter to Lefevre is Document 269. Attached but not published were Lefevre’s December 23, 1971, letter to Johnson and the January 11, 1972, NASA Report on Technical Discussions with the European Space Conference.

276. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, February 17, 1972.

Kissinger elaborated upon negotiating parameters for future discussions with the Europeans on cooperation in a post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA, Vol. II. Limited Official Use.

277. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, March 17, 1972.

Pollack alerted Rogers that cooperation with the Europeans in the post-Apollo program was endangered because the White House staff was skeptical that European participation in the development of hardware for the space shuttle and other elements was desirable.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by Pollack. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson, Samuels, and Hillenbrand. In a separate March 17 memorandum to Flanigan, March 17, the Executive Secretary of NASA, outlined in detail the NASA position on European participation. Printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, as Document I-25.

278. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 28, 1972.

The Department informed Kissinger of its requirements for US-USSR technical discussions to ensure that a viable agreement on a joint space docking mission would be ready by the May 1972 summit.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1, US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by O. E. Anderson (NASA); concurred in by Jack Matlock, Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs and Richard T. Davies; and cleared in draft by Webber (SCI/SAM). Parker Borg signed for Eliot. A typewritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Memo from Gen. Haig to Mr. Eliot received 4/3/72.” A report of the NASA delegation to Moscow, April 4-6, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-46. Attached but not published were the draft principles. On April 3 Haig sent a memorandum to Eliot, approving Low’s statement in Moscow of draft principles for a possible U.S.-Soviet space docking mission, but with the understanding that it would not commit the United States to such a mission. (Ibid.)

279. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, April 29, 1972.

Rogers called President Nixon’s attention to the negative attitudes developing within the U.S. Government toward European participation in the post-Apollo program, and the need for prompt U.S. decisions.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollard and Packard.

280. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)

Washington, May 18, 1972.

David commented on points made by Rogers in his April 29 memorandum to the President. He suggested that the U.S. Government could accept the Europeans if their role was limited to RAM and Sortie payload modules; eaving open the possibility of participation in the Space Tug would only create “false hopes.”

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1972. No classification marking. Rogers’ memorandum is Document 279.

281. Telegram 4915 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, May 24, 1972, 0630Z.

The Embassy transmitted the agreed draft text of a US-USSR agreement on space, scheduled for signature on May 24.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Confidential; Immediate, Exdis. The May 17 memorandum from Kissinger to Nixon, recommending that the President sign such a statement during the Moscow summit is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-47. The agreement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 26, 1972, pp. 924-925.

282. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher)

Washington, June 1, 1972.

Kissinger transmitted President Nixon’s decisions on the extent of European participation in the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential; Noforn. The text of Fletcher’s May 5 memorandum is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-27. Rogers’ memorandum is Document 279. In transmitting these two memoranda to Kissinger, John B. Walsh of the NSC staff disagreed with David’s recommendation that discussions concerning European participation in Shuttle tasks should be terminated on the basis of cost and management complications. Walsh thought the tasks were simple and represented minimal fulfillment of implied U.S. commitments. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1972)

283. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin

Washington, July 12, 1972.

Pollack reported that President Nixon’s response on European cooperation in the post-Apollo program met the Department’s “essential” request and had provided guidance for a meeting with European Space Conference representatives in June.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by Pollack and Packard and concurred in by Katz. Tab A is Document 282 and Tab B is Document 279.

284. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Stoessel) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin

Washington, October 5, 1972.

Stoessel reported that the Europeans had been unable to reach a decision on cooperation in the post-Apollo program.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alexander T. Liebowitz (EUR/RPE), cleared with Webber and in EUR. The statement is published in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Vol. 8, p. 1508. Attached but not published is telegram 182573.

285. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, November 13, 1972.

Pollack reported that the impasse between the Germans and the French had been broken, and an agreement within the European Space Conference on participation in the post-Apollo program was a real possibility.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Pollack. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Stoessel.

286. Translation of a Letter From the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) to Secretary of State Rogers

Brussels, December 27, 1972.

Lefevre announced that the Europeans had agreed to develop the space shuttle’s sortie within a common European framework.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. A notation on the letter indicates that Lefevre signed the original.

228. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon 228. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, March 14, 1969.

Subject:

International Space Cooperation

There is enclosed a staff study responsive to your request of February 21, 1969 that I review the January recommendations of your Task Force on Space as referred to in the report of Arthur Burns’ group. In preparing the staff study we have had discussions with Dr. DuBridge.

We have examined the report of the Task Force and agree with its conclusions and recommendations concerning international cooperation in space matters.

Because of the inherent global character of most space activities and their international involvement and efforts, there is a close relationship between our space program and our foreign policy objectives. From the viewpoint of those objectives there is a clear need for an ongoing and successful American space program — one designed to afford opportunities for expanded international cooperation in space matters. We are interested in space cooperation, not only for its intrinsic scientific merits, but also to further specific foreign policy objectives. Thus in the case of the USSR our objectives are an improvement in the political climate and new contacts with an influential segment of Soviet society. In Western Europe we seek to further intra-European multilateral cooperation in this field. In, the developing countries, we view the use of space technology as an aid in development.

Our interests in international cooperation in this field will be served best, within a balanced space program which would meet other U.S. national objectives as well, by (1) projects which afford maximum opportunities for direct foreign participation and (2) projects which yield economic and social benefits for other countries as well as ourselves. The U.S. has by now developed capabilities which would permit a major commitment to projects in which we dedicate our skills to explore further the earth and its resources, to improve communications, and to enable better understanding and use of our atmospheric and marine environment. The successful completion or our—initial manned landing on the moon (hopefully this summer) will afford a special opportunity for you to make a major public statement on the international values of our ongoing space program. We are examining the possibility of a statement along these lines at that time.

A basis for future projects of this sort lies in existing cooperative arrangements such as those for space research, and the uses of satellites for meteorology and communications. We expect major new opportunities for international cooperation over the next few years to derive from: (1) expanding arrangements to use meteorological data; (2) new arrangements for other environmental studies and for earth resource surveying, including new international institutional arrangements; (3) direct broadcast via satellite of TV instructional and educational programs, particularly in developing countries; (4) experimental development of air-traffic-control/navigation satellites; (5) collaboration in lunar and planetary exploration, and (6) foreign participation in the U.S. manned flight program, including foreign scientist-astronauts as well as foreign experiments.

Our ability to take new initiatives will depend, not only on the extent to which the future U.S. space program is designed and funded to provide such opportunities, but principally on the development of foreign interests and capabilities in this field. In view of the level of capabilities and resources abroad in space activities, the cooperation developed thus far in this field has been quite remarkable both as to its depth and variety. Nonetheless, the cooperation we have sought has been beyond that which the countries have been prepared to take up.

In the case of the USSR our efforts thus far to bring the Soviets to significant working cooperation in space activities have not been successful. Nor are prospects for future cooperative ventures particularly good. Nevertheless, new attempts should be made at a high level and in confidence to engage the Soviets in this kind of cooperation. Our proposals should emphasize coordination of separate efforts rather than corporate efforts, i.e.: joint planning and sharing of results; not joint efforts. We must also be careful to avoid the impression that the super-powers are dividing space between them without sufficient regard for the interests of other advanced countries, particularly those allied with the U.S.

Most of the other advanced countries are now in considerable disarray as to the scope and organization of their future space programs. We cannot expect them to respond to major new U.S. initiatives until they have themselves reached decisions on these matters. New initiatives with the developing countries will depend largely on the extent to which we are prepared to provide satellite services related to their economic and social needs and on their interest in participating in international institutional arrangements for the ‘use of space technology to meet these needs.

The enclosed staff study contains suggestions as to areas of activity for new initiatives and conditions under which such initiatives might be taken. These conditions are not static, either in terms of the international situation or the development of space capabilities. We will, therefore, continue within the Department and the Government to study urgently further possibilities for specific cooperative proposals.

William P. Rogers

Enclosure

March 10, 1969

NEW INITIATIVES IN SPACE COOPERATION*

General Observations

The report from the Arthur Burns’ group (item XVIII-7) refers to the recommendations of the President’s Task Force on Space under the chairmanship of Dr. Charles H. Townes. We have examined the report of the Task Force submitted on January 8 and agree with its conclusions and recommendations concerning international cooperation in space matters, e.g.: 1. That “many aspects of space work stimulate and offer new opportunities to promote world unity and cooperation” (Preamble, page 2).

2. That “space operations put in a new light many international questions and also lead naturally toward some areas of international cooperation”; that they offer opportunities for initiatives; and that we should “exploit these opportunities with both care and vigor” (Summary of Issues and Conclusions, page 6).

3. That with respect to the USSR we should remain in a competitive position on the basis of plans which reflect concurrent Soviet activity, but that our own space goals should reflect U.S. program needs rather than being a mirror of Soviet space goals. That we should seek cooperation, but without becoming dependent upon the Soviets for major areas of important scientific information (Competition with the USSR, pages 8-9).

4. That broader space cooperation with selected nations or groups of nations would be valuable, including the creation of international laboratories to analyze and interpret data of earth applications satellites and collaboration with the USSR in unmanned planetary exploration (International Cooperation, pages 22-24).

Because of the inherent global character of most space activities and in view of their international involvement and effects, there is a close relationship between our space program and our foreign policy objectives — in the conviction abroad that we have the capability to assure our security and will not be taken by surprise in space technology; in the world-wide application of economic and social benefits from space technology; in opportunities for international cooperation, including cooperation between ourselves and the Soviets; in unique possibilities for eventual arms verification and arms control; and in the effect of our space activities on the impression abroad of American leadership in science and technology. Thus, from the viewpoint of foreign policy objectives there is a clear need for an on-going and successful American. space program. The accomplishments of the past decade have produced capabilities and opportunities which should lead to broader and more intensive cooperation over the next decade. We should taken full advantage of these opportunities.

Our interests in international cooperation will be served best by (1) projects which afford maximum opportunities for direct foreign participation and (2) projects which yield economic and social benefits for other countries as well as ourselves. In this respect, manned flight will probably be less relevant than unmanned flight.

It appears that the major new opportunities for international cooperation over the next few years will derive primarily from: 1. Expanding arrangements to use meteorological data;

2. New arrangements for other environmental studies and for years resource surveying, including new institutional arrangements through the U.N., its specialized agencies and regional organizations. These arrangements could include (a) internationally planned use of satellites in connection with programs such as the Global Atmospheric Research Program and the International Decade of Ocean Exploration and (b) international centers or laboratories for the interpretation of satellite data and study of its application;

3. Direct broadcast via satellite of TV instructional and educational programs, particularly in developing countries.

4. Experimental development of air-traffic control/navigation satellites;

5. Collaboration in lunar and planetary exploration;

6. Limited foreign participation in the U.S. manned-flight program (both foreign scientist-astronauts and foreign experiments).

Opportunities for fruitful new initiatives over the next few years will depend primarily on: 1. The measure of foreign interest and capabilities. Thus far, our proposals for cooperation have exceeded the willingness and ability of other countries to respond.

2. The extent to which the U.S. effort is designed and funded to provide such opportunities. Several of the most attractive opportunities for future cooperation will depend on basic decisions, yet to be made, as to the scope and direction of our own space program over the next decade. For example, whether it will be possible after the Apollo program has been completed to devote a larger percentage of NASA’s effort and budget to research and applications tasks in which other countries can participate or which will yield direct economic and social benefit.

3. The willingness of the U.S. to share technology, particularly in sensitive areas such as launch vehicles (because of their relation to strategic weapons delivery systems) and communication via satellite (because of its possible use to compete with the INTELSAT global communications satellite system). Our present policies in these respects have been a deterrent to some useful cooperation with advanced countries.

Cooperation with the USSR

The world of space activity is essentially bipolar (U.S. and USSR). No other countries, individually or in combination, will approach the level of U.S. and Soviet leadership in these activities for some years to come. Thus, from the viewpoint of our foreign policy as well as our space program objectives, the Soviets are the main chance.

Our efforts thus far to bring the Soviets to significant working cooperation in space activities have not been successful. Agreements were reached in 1962 and 1965 for limited cooperation through exchange of information and coordinated experimental research in communications satellites, meteorological satellites, measurement of the earth’s magnetic field and in space bio-medicine. None of these projects has been fully implemented because of Soviet inability or unwillingness to do so. Since 1965 the Soviets have not been responsive to many overtures for discussion of a broader range of cooperation. The Soviet space program remains wrapped in secrecy and directed toward essentially national purposes. There is no significant international cooperation in Soviet space activities, even with the communist countries.

We will continue to be in a competitive position vis-a-vis the Soviets while, at the same time, seeking cooperative arrangements. We cannot expect early access to Soviet space technology or launch sites or other space facilities which they consider sensitive from the viewpoint of their own national security. Yet, a prerequisite to useful cooperation will be more detailed knowledge about their program than they have been willing to make available thus far.

We doubt that the Soviets will readily undertake substantial programs of space cooperation with us in the near future. They appear to attach great importance to the propaganda value of their unilateral space exploits, continue to shy away from visible examples of cooperation with the U.S., and worry about giving away secrets. Nevertheless, we feel that we should continue to try, at a high level, to interest the Soviets in space cooperation. Such cooperation would be beneficial from a scientific standpoint and could be a useful way of improving the political climate. It also would enable a more accurate evaluation of their space program.

At the outset efforts to this end should be made in confidence and without publicity. Our proposals should not include activities which, from the Soviet point of view, impinge upon their national security. Nor should they be such as to affect the Soviet competitive position adversely or make one party dependent on the other in activities of particular importance to national objectives. We should continue to emphasize collaboration through coordination of separate efforts rather than through corporate efforts, i.e.: joint planning and sharing of results; not joint efforts. Hopefully this would lead eventually to some division of labor and saving of expenditures. However, we should avoid the impression that the super-powers are dividing space between them without sufficient regard for the interests of other advanced countries, particularly those allied with the U.S.

The following possibilities for further cooperation should meet these criteria and merit further serious consideration: 1. In space research—earth orbital investigation of atmospheric dynamics and earth’s magnetic field; astronomical observations from earth satellites or lunar stations; satellite observation of solar phenomena, including maintenance of a continuing solar patrol for warning of major solar disturbances; and lunar and planetary exploration.

2. In practical applications—coordination of a continuing network of satellites to provide data for world-wide weather prediction and early warning of natural disasters; the development of capabilities for earth resource surveying via satellites.

3. In manned flight—bio-medical research, space rescue, coordination of experiments and flight parameters for earth orbiting space stations, lunar exploration, and exchange of astronauts.

4. In tracking—to supplement each others net-works.

Although the most dramatic among these possibilities would be an exchange of astronauts and a joint capability for space rescue, the most useful and intriguing would seem to be collaboration in practical applications and in unmanned lunar and planetary exploration. In view of the heavy commitment of the Soviets to planetary exploration and the difficulties which they have encountered in this program, this latter area appears to offer unusual opportunities to complement each other’s capabilities (e.g.: in experiments, tracking and communications) and to share expenses as well as results.

It should be noted that several of these possibilities lend themselves to multilateral, as well as bilateral, cooperation. In the face of general Soviet objectives and problems it may be that we can engender earlier Soviet cooperation in space programs within the context of broad international participation than through bilateral collaboration.

Cooperation with Other Advanced Countries

In Western Europe it has been our policy, with respect to space activities, to encourage broadly based multilateral programs. We believe that such programs will provide an alternative to proliferation of strictly national launch vehicle capabilities and will contribute toward European cohesion. Clearly they should be the most effective by virtue of scale and competence, and would offer the best possibilities for useful U.S.-European cooperation. However, we have not excluded bilateral cooperation which benefits U.S. interests and space activities. It would not be to our advantage in the long run to make European efforts in this field dependent upon the U.S.

The European program is as yet not clearly defined, because the Europeans have not reached agreement as to the scope and organization of their future space activities. Until they do, we cannot expect them to respond to major new initiatives for cooperation. We should, nonetheless, make new opportunities for cooperation clear to them, and work with them in their forward planning to the extent that they seek our advice.

1. Each of the countries except Portugal conducts national space activities. These vary from the French program, which has launched French satellites using their own launch vehicles, to programs in Scandinavia and the Low Countries which have been limited to sounding rocket experiments and ground-based scientific research. These programs have not represented a heavy investment—a total of some $300 million annually.

2. In addition the Europeans have developed two intergovernmental regional bodies—the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO)—which are as yet beset with severe internal divisions as to purpose, structure, funding and contract-sharing. The Europeans have recently agreed to attempt to formulate a plan which would place all of their multilateral space activities, including ESRO and ELDO, in a single organization, and are making a serious effort to solve their management-and funding problems.

NASA has already developed significant cooperative arrangements with all of the European national programs as well as ESRO, involving extensive joint satellite projects, sounding rocket projects, research experiments, space tracking, formal joint graduate and postdoctoral training, and highly sophisticated information exchange arrangements. NASA has already launched twelve foreign satellites and has agreements in being for half a dozen more; others are under consideration. For instance, NASA and the Federal Republic of Germany are in the final stages of defining an agreement on the largest bilateral cooperative project thus far undertaken—a solar probe which will involve the expenditure of approximately $60 million by Germany for two satellites and $20 million by NASA for the supply of two launches. This project was initially proposed to the Europeans several years ago as a multilateral undertaking, but did not attract participation by other countries or by ESRO.

In addition we have made clear our willingness to cooperate further: (1) by continuing to make launch vehicles or launch services available for European satellite projects; (2) by continued support for the ESRO space research program through launch assistance—three ESRO satellites have already been launched by NASA—cooperative projects and technical advice; (3) through technical assistance for the ELDO launch vehicle program; and (4) by examining jointly the possibility for further cooperation in research and development on future projects.

The spectrum of possible areas for new cooperative initiatives with Europe include all the possibilities suggested above for cooperation with the USSR, except bio-medical space research and space rescue. In addition, it may be possible to work with the Europeans in experimental satellite technology for navigation/air-traffic-control, in the development of a geostationary meteorological satellite to serve European regional needs, and in the development of a more advanced European launch vehicle capability. In TV communication via satellites and possibly in other telecommunications requirements the Europeans will surely wish to meet their regional needs by themselves, save for the possibility of American launch services and the acquisition of some advanced American technology.

With Japan we are now negotiating an agreement providing for cooperation by facilitating the flow of commercial technology relevant to their space program as they have projected it through the mid-1970s—a program which includes development of a Japanese launch vehicle capability and of satellites for space research and practical applications in meteorology and communications. Like the Europeans, the Japanese have until recently been quite uncertain as to the organization and scope of their space program. The program which they have now defined will take up their efforts in this field for several years. However, in the long run the opportunities for cooperation with Japan should be similar to those with Western Europe.

Cooperation with Developing Countries

The possibilities for major new cooperative initiatives with the developing countries lie primarily in (1) our willingness to provide satellite services relevant to their economic and social needs and (2) their willingness to participate in international institutional arrangements to meet these needs—in the use of space technology for environmental study and prediction, for surveying earth resources and, possibly, for the use of television via satellite for instructional and educational purposes. Adequate institutional arrangements for, these purposes have yet to be established. They will require the active support of advanced countries. The developing countries cannot be expected to participate extensively in space flight programs per se. They can, however, become involved actively and usefully in developing terrestrial facilities (e.g.: community television receivers), in the analysis, interpretation and use of data derived from satellites, and in the international planning involved in using satellites in world-wide or regional atmospheric and marine programs.

NASA has already developed pilot cooperative projects with Brazil and Mexico in the aircraft phase of earth resources survey experimentation designed to prepare them for future involvement and utilization of data derived from earth resources satellites. Experiments in the use of meteorological data derived from satellites is now widespread as a result of NASA’s development of the inexpensive APT system for direct receipt locally of cloud cover pictures taken by U.S. weather satellites passing overhead.

In the area of satellite telecommunications, NASA and Indian space officials are currently considering an experimental program to explore possibilities for major advances in educational and social development through instructional television. Using the capabilities of one of NASA’s Advanced Technology Satellites to broadcast to small village receivers in several thousand rural communities, India hopes to demonstrate the feasibility of reaching broad areas of its population will instructional material directed to such crucial and fundamental problems as population control and ways to increase agricultural production.

In addition it should be possible and reasonable to expand the cooperation already underway with several developing countries in sounding rocket programs and in the design of foreign experiments to be flown in U.S. satellites, both unmanned and manned. Opportunities for scientist-astronauts from these countries to participate in manned flights would seem marginal.

A Proposal

The accomplishments of the past decade have produced capabilities in space science and technology which would enable the U.S. to make a major commitment to projects which serve directly the economic and social needs of all countries. Such a commitment need not, and should not, be the single or overriding objective of our ongoing space program. In view of its international values it should, however, be a major objective. When the Apollo program has been completed it should be possible to undertake such a commitment within a balanced ongoing space program which would meet other U.S. national objectives as well.

In commenting upon the imminent achievement of our goal to land men on the moon and to explore it, Dr. Walter O. Roberts, President of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, has put it as follows: “When this moment of success comes, our nation will have an unparalleled opportunity to take a bold step in another direction in space. Richard M. Nixon can place his stamp of identity on an equally inspiring objective. He can call upon our nation and the world to exploit man’s presence in space and his new-found skills in space for the benefit of earth and its peoples. He can call for commitment of the principal thrust of our future space efforts to research and engineering programs designed to explore the earth; to improve the communications links among continents; to study the earth’s resources of oil, minerals, forest, and water; to plot the changing, global patterns of the oceans and the air, so that we may better understand, predict, and conserve our atmospheric and oceanic environment.

“In making such a commitment, President Nixon will have still another challenging opportunity. By aiming the skills of space toward earth-oriented and peaceful uses, not only can be serve the tangible interests of people in every corner of the globe but he can call for the attainment of this goal through a world-cooperative research and engineering effort in which nations in many stages of development can participate. By this step he will greatly advance international understanding. Everyone will benefit if the Soviets, Americans, and others conduct peaceful space research in concert, with joint planning and joint execution. It is a rare chance for initiative.”4

We are examining the possibility of a Presidential statement along these lines, possibly upon the successful completion of our first manned lunar landing. That event will afford a special opportunity for a major public statement on the international values of our ongoing space program.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, SP 1-1. Limited Official Use. No drafting information information appears on the memorandum. Cleared in draft by Hillenbrand, EA/J, and J/PM, and in information by DEPALMA. Copies were sent to DuBridge and Burns. Nixon’s February 21 request asked Rogers to review recommendations proposed by the President’s Task Force on Space, chaired by Dr. Charles H. Townes. (Ibid.)

* Prepared in response to the President’s memorandum of February 21, 1969 to the Secretary of State requesting that the Secretary “review the recommendations on international space cooperation contained in the report from Arthur Burns’ group (see Item XVIII-7 of that report)”.

4 “The Next Objective in Space, Science, Vol. 163, No. 3867, February 7, 1969.

229. Letter From the Acting Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to President Nixon 229. Letter From the Acting Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to President Nixon1

Washington, August 22, 1969.

Dear Mr. President:

This is a brief status report on our current efforts and immediate plans to find new ways to increase international participation in space programs in the favorable atmosphere generated by Apollo 11.

1. On August 11 I met with Professor Hermann Bondi, Director-General of the ten-nation European Space Research Organization (ESRO), briefed him fully on U.S. post-Apollo thinking, and urged him to begin serious consideration of new approaches to achieve more substantial European participation in the manned and unmanned exploration and utilization of major space systems in the 1970’s and 1980’s. European thinking with respect to space activity has been relatively restricted heretofore;ESRO’s current annual budget is slightly over $50 million and the European Launch Development Organization budget is slightly over $90 million. In addition, individual national efforts total some $160 million, for a total European space effort of something in excess of $300 million.

Professor Bondi agreed that a series of presentations should be made by top NASA personnel to senior space officials in Europe within the next few months to raise their sights to more advanced projects of greater mutual value.

2. To initiate these presentations and to conduct more direct and private discussions with officials in the best position to respond positively, I plan a short visit to Europe, probably some-time in October. I plan to brief senior (government) officials of the European Space Conference on future U.S. programs and the concrete opportunities they will offer for rewarding participation. I will also talk with Ministers of Science in the three principal countries but especially with Minister Stoltenberg in West Germany, which is probably in the best position to consider substantial new participation. While we cannot achieve immediate commitments of a major character from these first discussions, we do hope to gain early agreement to an arrangement which could involve the Europeans ever more closely with us and place the benefits of participation constantly in their view. To this end, I plan to propose to the leading European space agencies that they associate their top space experts with us in phased program studies which we will be undertaking for important post-Apollo missions. The knowledge and interest which we jointly develop should then open the door to more substantial participation in specific projects which flow out of these studies, and which would be suitable for European involvement. We would intend also to direct European attention to the opportunities which would then develop to associate their own astronauts with us in future programs in the context of substantive joint contributions to space exploration and application. This could generate greater public interest and support abroad for participation with the United States in this venture.

3. Professor Bondi’s mission to the U.S. was to obtain information needed to decide whether the European Launch Development Organization should continue the costly development of an already-outmoded medium launch vehicle, duplicating those we have had for years, or should halt this work and rely on reimbursable launch services from NASA. Europeans have heretofore feared that the U.S. would not provide launchings for regional communications satellites, which has motivated them toward small independent efforts rather than major joint ventures along the lines we will be proposing. A forthcoming response to Dr. Bondi has now been obtained from the Department of State and will, we hope, remove a long-standing negative element in the environment and facilitate our discussions looking to more significant cooperation. If Europe should now decide to abandon its trouble-plagued and obsolescent launch vehicle program in favor of purchasing U.S. launchings, European funds would be freed for more constructive cooperative purposes, a modest additional dollar market created for our vehicles and launch services.

4. Among other promising near-term prospects for significant cooperation with Europe are a prototype North Atlantic Air Traffic Control and Navigation Satellite Program, and a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Program. NASA would develop the former in partnership with ESRO to meet requirements defined by the Department of Transportation (FAA) and its European counterparts. The latter would be developed with the French Space Commission as a contribution to the Global Atmospheric Research Program. We are pursuing both these prospects energetically.

5. We have recently significantly extended our data exchange arrangements with ESRO to the point where they now constitute, we believe, the most extensive and sophisticated international data system in existence. ESRO uses NASA computer software systems and formats to collect the European technical literature and feed it into their own and into NASA’s computer banks making possible a totally integrated space publication and search system. ESRO has also introduced the NASA Recon (Remote Control) System to Europe. An international on-line computerized aerospace information network is thus enabling researchers at a number of scattered locations in Europe and in the U.S. to retrieve from the NASA-ESRO data bank in “real-time,” scientific and technical information for immediate use. This is the first international system of its kind and is being studied both in Europe and in this country as a model for similar systems.

6. NASA welcomes and will participate enthusiastically in the review called for by Dr. Kissinger to consider U.S. policies on space and other technology exports. This is a timely opportunity to clear away unnecessary restrictions which could seriously obstruct the increased international activity which you have called for.

7. With regard to potential cooperation with the Soviet Union, I have recently written top Soviet space authorities offering to discuss carrying Soviet scientists’ experiments on future NASA planetary probes. I am now inviting Soviet scientists to attend a preparatory briefing next month for scientists from many other countries on our Viking Mars mission with a view to discussing possible participation in that mission and the achievement of some measure of coordination between U.S. and Soviet planetary programs. Whether the Apollo 11 success will moderate past Soviet negativism in this area is not yet clear.

8. Japan, Australia, and Canada are the principal remaining areas whose potential for greater participation will be carefully explored. I believe NASA has contributed to a reasonable formulation of the new agreement with Japan to facilitate that country’s purchase of certain space technology here, and we will play a role in providing for the implementation of that agreement. Under your recent directive, we will provide Canada launch services for her planned communications satellite system; this action has clearly improved relationships in this area, and we are already discussing with Canadian officials their active interest in passible participation in our advanced earth resources technology and satellite series. I discussed yesterday With our new Ambassador to Australia the great services that have been rendered through Australian operation of our large tracking and data acquisition complex there and our strong interest in further participation. I expect to visit these three countries at the earliest opportunity after the European talks in order to develop new opportunities for greater international cooperation in those quarters.

I will, of course, report to you the results of my forthcoming visit to Europe immediately upon my return.

Respectfully yours,

T. O. Paine
Administrator

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, Foreign Cooperation. No classification marking. Also printed as Document I-14 in John M. Logsdon with Dwayne A. Day and Roger D. Launius (eds.), Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program, Vol. II, External Relations (Washington, D.C.: NASA History Office, 1996). On February 12 Paine sent the President a letter summarizing European space programs in conjunction with Nixon’s forthcoming trip to Europe and suggested positions the President might take during the trip on European and cooperative space activities, ibid., Document I-13.

230. National Security Study Memorandum 72 230. National Security Study Memorandum 721

Washington, September 4, 1969.

TO:

Secretary of State

Director of NASA

Assistant to the President for Science and Technology

SUBJECT:

International Space Cooperation Committee

The President has directed the creation of an ad hoc group on International Space Cooperation. The President has directed that the Committee prepare a report on possible forms of International Space Cooperation with friendly countries as well as with the Soviet Union. The report should discuss alternative possible approaches and their costs and gains.

The Committee should also coordinate on approaches to other governments on the subject of space cooperation.

The President has directed that the Committee be chaired by a representative of the Secretary of State and include representatives of the addressees of this memorandum and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-162, NSSM Files, NSSM 72. Confidential. Copies were sent to Laird and Flanigan.

231. Memorandum of Conversation 231. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10, 1969, 11:45 a.m.

Participants:

Dr. Thomas Paine, Administrator, NASA

Mr. Arnold Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, NASA

Dr. Henry A. Kissinger

Mr. William Watts

Dr. Paine called in advance of his forthcoming trip to Europe for a general discussion with Dr. Kissinger on space activities and international space cooperation.

Kissinger started the discussion by saying he hoped there was no misunderstanding concerning his clearance role related to Astronaut travel. The purpose of this is to make sure that when senior NASA officials do go abroad, and particularly when they visit such countries as the Soviet Union they check with Kissinger to get a briefing on key policy developments and general guidance.

Specifically, as concerns the Soviet Union, Kissinger noted we are not encouraging any high level travel there, with the idea we want the Soviets to understand we expect them to be more cooperative on Vietnam before we deal with them in other areas. The Soviets seem perfectly happy to have Vietnam continue as a bleeding sore for us, and we wish to bring home the idea that activities in other areas are inter-related with the Vietnam issue.

Paine noted he is going to Europe to visit England, Germany and France to undertake very preliminary discussions on areas of cooperation in space activities. There is much frustration in many quarters of Europe, as well as Japan, over the slowness of their advances and indeed their more noticeable failures. This, coupled with the astonishing American successes, has put a crimp on interest in investment in space activities.

Paine said it was NASA’s approach to try to get other countries to buy into our effort on a cooperative basis—not necessarily with cash, but with technical and other cooperation in kind (including the supplying of Astronauts). For example, in establishing our manned orbiting laboratory, the Japanese may build a giant telescope for placing in the laboratory—something all scientists want.

Kissinger said this sounded precisely right and would be something we could dangle in front of the Soviets to whet their appetite and push them into being more cooperative in other areas.

The President, Kissinger stressed, is prepared to support this kind of cooperation fully. Among other things, such achievements help divert attention away from other problem areas.

Beyond this, Kissinger asked, how do you go about internationalizing the space program—developing multiple country activities with all the impracticalities involved..

Paine suggested it might be necessary to come up with some broad new ways of thinking. Why not consider that we must, in effect, create a new nation in space, the price of, entry to which would be to pay for the 17,000 mile per hour velocity increase in order to get. there. This new nation could ultimately develop its own economic balance sheet. It would handle much TV broadcasting, most data processing exchange, communications and weather. It could set precedents for internationalizing problem solving here on Earth.

Returning to Paine’s forthcoming European trip, Kissinger asked him to come in with a specific proposal upon his return for cooperative space ventures which would include foreign participation. Kissinger reiterated the President’s strong interest and a desire to get something going by the first of the year. It is this kind of major achievement and peaceful goal that can help to unite the country and give its citizenry—particularly young people—something to get excited about and something which will spur them into genuinely creative efforts in other areas.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-162, NSSM Files, NSSM 72. Confidential. The meeting took place in Kissinger's office. Copies were sent to Laird and Flanigan.

232. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 232. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 5, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Multinational Participation in Future Space Flights

Peter Flanigan has written a note (Tab B) to you, Dr. Paine, Dr,. DuBridge and Frank Borman reminding of the President’s interest in multinational participation in future space flights and inquiring about the current and future status of the program.

As you know, an interagency group chaired by State is studying foreign participation as a part of their response to NSSM 72 (International Space Cooperation). There will not be one-time report on all aspects of international space cooperation. Rather, the group will produce, incrementally, papers on specific subjects (such as earth resource surveying, cooperation with the Soviet Union, etc.). Moreover, the group views its mandate to be on-going. It can therefore see to it that future possibilities for multinational participation in space flights are not overlooked.

Additionally, the current NASA program for international space activity is both energetic and level-headed. They are avoiding “oversell” tactics and are proceeding at a pace best suited to accommodate those governments interested in programs of cooperation. I am confident that there has not been foot-dragging on our part. If there has been any lack of progress, I would attribute it—in foreign nations—to fiscal constraints, competing priorities, and differing perceptions of the utility of space operations.

In the area of space policy and program coordination, the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council can be expected to make significant contributions. The expanded staff, under Bill Anders, has a small section organized to handle international matters. We maintain a close working relationship with these people.

Finally, you should know that Senator Proxmire has submitted a resolution (S. Res. 285) which would authorize a study of the possibilities for international cooperation and cost sharing in the exploration of space.

The resolution was referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations, which in turn sent it to State for comment by the Executive Branch. BOB will clear the proposed response with us before sending it back to the Committee. As far as I can ascertain, there is not, on the Hill, overwhelming enthusiasm for the resolution.

I have prepared a brief reply (Tab A) from you to Peter Flanigan. Because Dr. Paine, Dr. DuBridge and Colonel Borman will also comment, your suggested response is confined essentially to NSC related activities. The memorandum (1) describes the work of the NSSM 72 Committee and (2) calls attention to the proposed Congressional study on international space cooperation.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs. Sent for action. No classification marking. Attached but not published were Tabs A and B. On December 15 Kissinger wrote the following note on the first page: “Why can’t I get a coherent report for everything over a 5-year period. There was a Borman report earlier. State will just turn it into a negotiating exercise.”

233. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) 233. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine)1

Washington, December 8, 1969.

The following suggestion was sent to me on a personal basis by one of our Ambassadors. I thought it might be of interest to you: “Standing of United States in world of science has never been higher and this has distinct bearing on our security. Am not so much concerned with keeping Russians on ropes psychologically as in increasing respect of mankind generally for our attitude.

“In our space program, as far as rest of world is concerned, two things in particular stand out in addition to our. mastery of laws of physics, chemistry, biology and communications. They are theme ‘We came for all mankind’ and fact that a civilian first set foot on moon.

“With Apollo 12 on way home, it may now be possible to consider another step in psychological field. This would be to announce that we look forward to admission to our space program of representatives of various world races (black, brown, yellow as well as white) in addition to Americans who would naturally participate. It would be in keeping with our traditions if first of them stood on another world in company of our countrymen.

“President’s ‘-all mankind’ theme would then be implanted not only on moon but in minds everywhere on earth with such clear evidence of American intention to share experience of deep space with others. Obviously, not more than token selection is practical at present, but I believe we would derive psychological benefits from even limited gesture of this nature, just as we have from providing others with access to our universities, service academies, and USG programs.

“Am aware that this idea may be either premature or impractical.”

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. No classification marking.

234. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 234. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, December 23, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Dr. Paine’s Recent Trip to Europe

Dr. Paine has sent you a letter (Tab A) reporting both the results of his recent three day visit to Europe and other related activities seeking to promote greater international participation in future space programs. These are the highlights of his report: -- In meetings with senior Western European space officials, emphasis was placed on opportunities for cooperation in our space station/shuttle program. The net result of these meetings was a clearer perception on the part of the Europeans of the utility of manned space flight and of the benefits and economies achievable through greater identification with U.S. programs.

-- Following your remarks at the UN on earth resource satellites, educational programs are getting underway which will acquaint other nations with the potential value of earth resource surveys and which will prepare the way for meaningful foreign participation as the satellite technology develops over time.

-- Several initiatives to the Soviet Union have gone unanswered, but the exchange of astronaut/cosmonaut visits may foreshadow greater Soviet receptivity in the future.

-- Dr. Paine intends to follow his European trip with visits to Canada, Australia and Japan.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. No classification marking. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. Nixon wrote on the first page: “Good report.” Kissinger wrote: “Tell Paine in a note from me.” In a January 12, 1970, memorandum to Paine, Kissinger stated that the President had reviewed Paine’s letter of November 7 and “he endorses your approach and is pleased with results you have reported so far. (Ibid.) Attached but not published was Tab A. It is printed as Document I-15 in Exploring the Unknown, Vol. II, External Relations. For a report of Paine’s trip to Australia and Japan, see ibid., Document I-16.

235. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 235. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, February 2, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Dr. Paine Reports on International Space Cooperation

Dr. Paine has sent you a letter (Tab A) reporting the results of his recent trip to Canada and highlighting other developments in international space cooperation since his letter of November 7, 1969. These are his main points: -- The meeting with Canadian space officials was held for the purpose of acquainting them with U.S. space planning for the next decade and laying the groundwork for more substantial Canadian participation during the 1970’s. The conversations went well and are cause for optimism regarding Canadian involvement in our future programs.

-- In Europe there is growing evidence of a desire for greater participation in U.S. programs, especially NASA’s proposed space station and space shuttle. Plans are being laid for European association with us in the preparatory studies relating to these two programs.

-- In March, NASA will hold its quarterly review of future programs. Agents of the European Space Conference and representatives of other interested nations (Canada, Australia and Japan, for example) will be invited. One of the results of this meeting may be a first move toward an informal “International Space Council”. This would not be a U.S. initiative (our sponsorship might be counterproductive), but a logical product of the conference agenda and related discussions.

-- The Soviets (USSR Academy of Sciences) have now acknowledged our overtures and are receptive to discussions on the subject in “three or four months”. Their concept of cooperation, at this juncture, appears to be both tentative and limited — independent but coordinated programs, with an exchange of information on the results.

The most significant area for space cooperation appears, for the present, to be with the European community. This is, I believe, the consequence of first, your very positive statements on the subject, and then Dr. Paine’s low-key but eminently statesman-like visits to the European space community (and their reciprocal visits here). Specifically illustrative of what has come of the dialogue is the interest being shown within the new government of the FRG. Our Embassy in Bonn has reported that consideration is being given within the FRG to a level of participation in our post-Apollo program of up to 10% of the cost. This is an encouraging sign.

I will send a note to Dr. Paine advising him that you have noted his report.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, and Agency Files, NASA Vol. I. Confidential. Sent for information. Nixon wrote on the end of the second page: “Particularly follow up on program we could announce soon for Germ, Japan, British, French astros to participate in ′75 or whatever is earliest feasible year. This is a must.” Attached but not published was Tab A.

236. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 236. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, February 2, 1970.

SUBJECT:

International Space Cooperation: US-Soviet Activities

The NSC Under Secretaries Committee has forwarded the second of a series of interagency papers on international space cooperation (Tab D). This paper (Summary at Tab C), prepared by the Ad Hoc Committee on International Space Cooperation, is concerned with the possibilities for future cooperation between the US and the Soviet Union.

The interagency group, taking account of your policy favoring increased international space cooperation, reached general agreement that the prospects for expanding cooperation with the Soviets, in contrast with other countries such as Germany, continue to be limited. There are, nevertheless, a number of areas of space cooperation which could be mutually advantageous and which we could take without harm to our national security interests.

These areas, some of which could be pursued in a multilateral as well as a bilateral context, include the following: -- The exchange of scientific information and experts;

--Coordination of separate national efforts possibly including complementary tasks in unmanned lunar and planetary exploration and other fields of scientific space research;

--Complementary tasks in practical applications of space technology;

--An exchange of astronauts;

--Cooperation in such activities as tracking and communications;

--Projects looking toward improved safety and desirable commonality in instrumentation and operating procedures (e. g., development of compatible docking equipment and communications arrangements for reciprocal space rescue).

While there is agreement within the Under Secretaries Committee as to the desirability of cooperation and the possible scope of cooperation with the Soviets, there are differences of view as to the value, prospects and means of attempting to bring the Soviets to useful cooperation in this field.

The report presents three basic options with respect to our effort to achieve cooperation with the Soviets.

Option 1. To curtail our efforts. DOD believes that, after 15 years of trying without significant success to get the Soviets to cooperate, we should pursue a different tack. DOD would not, however, oppose continuing our efforts at their current level for a limited period of time before deciding whether to curtail our efforts or to raise them from the technical to the government-to-government level.

Option 2. To continue our efforts at the current level until they have been fully explored and have contributed further to our understanding of Soviet attitudes towards space cooperation before deciding whether to curtail our efforts or to raise them to the government-to-government level. The Office of Science and Technology, NASA and the Executive Secretary of the Space Council support this option as a means of moving toward a later, more intensive effort at the top level of government.

Option 3. To make a renewed and more intensive effort at the top level of government. State recommends this option, believing that the US will have to increase its effort if there is to be any serious possibility of expanding cooperation. This would include a direct communication from you to Premier Kosygin at an opportune moment. Congressional consultation would be prerequisite to such an initiative. (CIA, the Arms Control Agency and the US Information Agency, though not involved in the preparation of the report, support this view.)

The Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee, in his memorandum of transmittal (Tab B), adds his personal endorsement to Option 3 and attaches a draft letter for Premier Kosygin.

My own view falls between the positions of NASA and State. While I do not believe you should expend political capital by direct communication with Premier Kosygin at this juncture, I do support the notion of bolstering Dr. Paine’s efforts by high-level (but low-key) diplomatic initiatives. My reasoning follows these lines: -- The Soviet space program is controlled largely by the military and there is undoubtedly great reluctance within the leadership to risk compromise of military space programs. The marshals are aware that NASA programs are open and that we would expect reciprocal candor. They may be willing to make such concessions.

-- If the reticence of the Soviet military is to be broached, the pressures to do so are more likely to have effect if they come from the Soviet politicians than from the technicians.

-- Although there may be a strong coincidence of interest between technical agencies (NASA and the Soviet Academy) in cooperative ventures, the views on the Soviet side may not be fully supported by the decision-makers. An appeal for cooperation from, you to the Soviet leadership, couched in general terms, may go unheeded.

-- If the efforts of NASA and State appear to be fruitful and if realistic program opportunities can be identified, you could then solidify our gains by making a concrete proposal to the Soviet leadership.

I recommend, therefore, that you not communicate directly with Premier Kosygin at this time, but that we bolster Dr. Paine’s efforts by high-level (but low-key) diplomatic initiatives.

Attached at Tab A is a draft NSDM giving effect to my recommendation by stating (1) that you wish efforts toward US-Soviet space cooperation to be pursued through both technical agency and diplomatic channels, and (2) that if significant progress occurs, you will at a later date consider forwarding a specific proposal to Premier Kosygin.

RECOMMENDATION

That you approve the draft NSDM at Tab A.

Approve Draft NSDM

Approve Option 1 - Curtailing our efforts

Approve Option 2 - Continuing present efforts

Approve Option 3 - High level diplomatic effort with letter now from you to Premier Kosygin

Mr. Flanigan concurs in the above.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Confidential. Sent for action. Tabs A-D were attached but not published. Tab A is a draft of Document 238. Nixon initialed his approval of the draft NSDM.

237. National Security Decision Memorandum 70 237. National Security Decision Memorandum 701

Washington, July 10, 1970.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

The Director, Office of Science and Technology

The Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council

SUBJECT:

International Space Cooperation: US-USSR Activities

The President has decided that space cooperation with the Soviet Union should be pursued simultaneously through high-level. diplomatic and technical agency channels. He has noted and approved the scope of a US-USSR cooperative space. program forwarded from the Ad Hoc Committee on International Space Cooperation through the NSC Under Secretaries Committee.

The President does not, at this time, desire to send a formal communication to Premier Kosygin urging closer space cooperation. He will, however, consider such a message whenever it appears likely that a concrete program proposal will be favorably received by the Soviet Union.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files, (H-Files), Box H-217, NSDM Files, NSDM 70. Confidential. Copies were sent to Shultz and Flanigan.

238. National Security Decision Memorandum 72 238. National Security Decision Memorandum 721

Washington, July 17, 1970.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

The Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council

SUBJECT:

Exchange of Technical Data between the United States and the International Space Community

The President has reiterated his desire that the United States should encourage and provide ample opportunities for international cooperation in space activities such as the post-Apollo program.

In furtherance of this objective, the President has directed the establishment of an ad hoc interagency group to review the policy aspects of, and establish procedures for, a program of technical data exchange between the United States and those foreign governments and agencies desirous of entering into cooperative arrangements with us.

Initially, but not exclusively, the group will concentrate on guidance and procedures for future European cooperation in the space program of the United States. The guidelines and procedures so devised for the post-Apollo and other cooperative programs will be designed to provide for timely and effective interchange of technical information between the parties, while at the same time insuring protection of the U.S. national interest.

The Group will be chaired by a representative of the Administrator, NASA, and will comprise senior designees of the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, and the Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council.

An initial report will be submitted for consideration of the President by August 1, 1970.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Confidential. Copies were sent to David, Shultz, and Flanigan.

239. Letter From the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to the President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union (Keldysh) 239. Letter From the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (Paine) to the President of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union (Keldysh)1

Washington, September 4, 1970.

Dear Academician Keldysh:

Frank Borman has told me of your interest in further pursuing the matter of common docking equipment for U.S. and Soviet spacecraft when you visit Washington early next year.

NASA looks forward to discussing this matter with you at that time. Our invitation to you in my letter of July 31 to send Soviet specialists to the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston to view our docking arrangements and to initiate technical discussion is, of course, still open, and we hope you will accept.

In our discussions, we will propose to you that, in addition to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. development of common docking equipment, we consider together a more immediate opportunity. We believe that we could readily install a Soviet docking fixture in the Multiple Docking Adapter of our Skylab scheduled for launch in November, 1972.

Soviet spacecraft could then utilize this docking device to rendezvous and dock with the Skylab. Such an arrangement would create a wide range of possible further cooperative activities, including joint work by U.S. and Soviet scientists in Skylab during 1973. A summary of the Skylab space station prototype is enclosed.

Sincerely,

T.O. Paine

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Subject Files, Box 392, Space Programs, 1970. No classification marking. Paine’s July 31 letter to Keldysh, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Unknown, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-44.

240. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 240. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 21, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Visit of Minister Lefevre

Minister Lefevre and his colleagues of the European Space Conference have come and gone. The meeting at State (September 16-17), chaired by Under Secretary Johnson, was an exploratory review of the possibilities for European participation in our post-APOLLO space program.

There were no surprises on either side. The dialogue was frank, pointed and noticeably devoid of luminous abstractions about the benefits of cooperation. Both sides recognized the explicit potential for a mutually advantageous program.

At the outset M. Lefevre reported Europe’s inability to fund both their own launcher development and a part of the US Space Transportation System (STS). Cooperation with us would, therefore, be contingent upon US assurances regarding continued availability of launch services.

Ambassador Johnson replied by describing a US formulation for these services, should a suitable agreement be negotiated between the two parties. The US would provide launch services for peaceful purposes consistent with relevant international agreements—with only one qualification. In the event that a European proposal for a communications satellite failed to pass the INTELSAT General Assembly by more than 2/3 of its membership, the US could not, in those circumstances, assure launch services. This qualification raised a red flag.

The Europeans, suffering from a five-year case of dyspepsia over what they regard as US (read COMSAT) heavy-handedness in managing international communications satellites, are hypersensitive about preserving complete flexibility in their own programs over the coming years. Because of their vulnerability to being outvoted (there are some 80-odd members) in INTELSAT, they sought unsuccessfully to obtain iron-clad assurances from us that, regardless of how the consortium votes, we would still guarantee to launch their communications payloads. These importunings were perhaps over-reactions, but nevertheless understandable since the Europeans see regional communications as the primary objective of their space program (however it proceeds). This issue may prove to be a very real stumbling block during future negotiations.

Another potential problem area is the degree to which technology would be exchanged. As system manager we would expect full access to relevant European technology. They, on the other hand, would be granted access in depth only to those elements of the program for which they have a need-to-know in conjunction with their specific tasks under the agreed collaboration. This asymmetry may prove unacceptable to the Europeans.

With regard to the magnitude of European participation, they appeared to be comfortable with the notion that we would hope for at least a 10% contribution to what is now estimated to be a $10 billion program.

A final observation is that while the Europeans were businesslike and, I believe, sincere in exploring the modalities of cooperation, they were scrupulously careful to avoid even a suggestion of firm commitment to the post-APOLLO program at this juncture.

We can expect a better signal o their intentions at the conclusion of the ministerial meeting of the ESC * in early November. Meanwhile, we are proceeding with the development of proposed guidelines for a cooperative program and identification of areas of particular sensitivity from the standpoint of US security interests.

At Tab A are an agenda outline for the September 16-17 meeting together with a list of the participants.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Tab A was attached but not published.

* European Space Conference

241. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers 241. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 24, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Space Cooperation with the Soviets - Compatible Docking for Spacecraft

A noteworthy development has just occurred in U.S.-Soviet space cooperation with the favorable response from the Soviets to a U.S. proposal that we discuss compatible docking arrangements in space. This was first proposed informally to the Soviets last Spring by Dr. Philip Handler, President of our National Academy of Sciences, and the proposal was confirmed on July 31 in a letter to the Soviets from Dr. T.O. Paine, Administrator of NASA (Tab A). Dr. Paine suggested that a first step might involve a visit to NASA’s Houston laboratories by two Soviet engineers for technical discussions of the problems which would need solution.

The President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, Professor Keldysh, has now responded to Dr. Paine endorsing the compatible docking concept with some enthusiasm and inviting three or four American specialists to visit Moscow at an early date to initiate detailed discussions. A translation of the Keldysh letter is given at Tab B; a substantially identical letter has also been received by Dr. Handler.

The willingness of the Soviets to enter into these discussions stands in sharp contrast to their previous reluctance to engage in significant cooperative activities in space. Our efforts to interest them in such cooperation date back to the first planning of space projects in 1955 and included an exchange of letters between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in 1962. The meager net result of this fifteen years of effort has been four modest projects agreed to by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences, none of which have yet been fully implemented. The attached letter from Dr. Keldysh may thus mark the start of a more productive phase in U.S.-Soviet space relationships.

Compatible docking systems on spaceships and space stations would enhance the safety of space flight by making possible rescue operations, and may also facilitate other forms of space cooperation along the lines laid down by the President in NSDM-70 of July 10, 1970 (Tab C).

We are recommending to NASA that an early and favorable reply be sent to Professor Keldysh.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Webber. Cleared in draft by Burgess and Dubs. Copies were sent to J, EUR, and PM. Tabs A and B were attached but not published. Tab C is Document 237. On September 25 Low sent Keldysh a letter accepting an invitation to come to Moscow and suggesting topics for discussion (Text in telegram 158937 to Moscow, September 26; National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR)

242. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) 242. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) 1

Washington, October 2, 1970.

Dear Minister Lefevre:

At the conclusion of our discussion on September 16-17 concerning possible European participation in the post-Apollo space program you requested that we provide a statement of our present views on several specific questions which you and your colleagues put to us, as well as on three of the general subjects which were discussed, i.e.: (1) availability of launch services and launch vehicles, (2) decision-making; and (3) access to information and facilities. These views are set forth in the numbered paragraphs which follow.

As I stated during the discussions, our views on these matters at this time are preliminary. Our ultimate views will depend on choices yet to be made in Europe as to the measure and character of European participation and on further development of our own plans for the Space Transportation System and Space Station.

Availability of U.S. Launch Services and Launch Vehicles—

1. We recognize the concern expressed by the European delegation with regard to the availability of launch services for European payloads in the event Europe chooses to participate substantially in the post-Apollo program.

2. In the event Europe so chooses, the U.S. would not exercise arbitrary or unilateral judgment regarding the acceptability of European payloads. On the assumption that European participation would be substantial, the U.S. would, as part of an international agreement governing such participation, be prepared to assure on a reimbursable basis: (a) Launch services by means of the new Space Transportation System in the conduct of European space programs for any peaceful purpose consistent with relevant international agreements.

(b) During the period before the new Space Transportation System becomes operable, availability of U.S. launch services for any peaceful purpose consistent with relevant international agreements.

3. In further explanation, by “substantial” ‘European participation we mean, for purposes of these assurances, a commitment of at least 10% of the resources required for the development of the Space Transportation System (estimated at about $10 billion over a ten-year period). Such a commitment would be commensurate with the measure of the overall European space effort relative, to that of the U.S. It could be met by the provision at European expense of significant new technology, the development of a major system or sub-systems, or some combination of these.

4. By “consistent with relevant international agreements” we mean, the obligations of the U.S. and European countries as contained in such agreements as. the Outer Space Treaty and the INTELSAT agreement. (For a more precise explanation of our views as to the bearing of the INTELSAT Agreement upon the availability of U.S. launch services, see paragraphs 11-15 below).

5. With respect to your question whether U.S. launch services would be available to individual European countries which participate in the development of the Space Transportation System, as well as to the participating European regional space organization,1 we expect that those members of the regional organization which participate in the development of the Space Transportation System would have the same rights with respect to launch services for their payloads as would the organization itself for its payloads.

6. Thus, the U.S. would no longer determine availability of launch services for European payloads on a unilateral case-by-case basis, but would provide the blanket assurances described in paragraph 2 above. European and U.S. interests would, therefore, be on an equal footing with regard to the availability of launchings for possible commercially competitive purposes.

7. With respect to your question as to the financial conditions under which the U.S. would provide launch services for European payloads,2 the U.S. would follow existing procedures which involve reimbursement for actual costs of (a) the purchase of launch vehicles from commercial sources, (b) transportation of vehicles to the launch sites, and (c) supporting services required in connection with the launch. The U.S. would not seek to recover the development costs of vehicles. Charges for support services would normally include the costs for range services, vehicle preparation and checkout, launch crews and administrative overhead. Other reimbursable services which might be agreed to on a case-by-case basis could include, for example, tracking and data acquisition, payload test and check-out, and procurement and assembly of special payload shrouds.

8. With respect to your question as to the priority and scheduling of U.S. launches of European payloads,3 we would deal with these launchings on the same basis as our own. Each launching would be treated in terms of its own requirements and as an individual case. Wheni, we know when a payload will become available and what its launch window requirements will be, we would schedule it for that time. We expect that conflicts would rarely arise, if at all. If there should be a conflict, we would consult with all interested parties in order to arrive at an equitable solution. On the basis of our experience in scheduling launchings, we would not expect any loss of time because of such a conflict to be significant.

9. In lieu of launch services, we would also be prepared to sell appropriate U.S. launch vehicles from our family of available expendable vehicles for use by the European countries in launching their payloads from launch sites available to the Europeans. In this circumstance we would consider that the same arrangements would apply as for launch services, i.e.: those described in paragraphs 1-6 above and 11-15 below.

10. With respect to your question as to licensing the production in Europe of standard U.S. launch vehicles,4 we consider this matter separate from that of European participation in the post-Apollo program. Such a question would have to be judged on its own merits and in terms of a specific proposal. We would be willing to receive such a proposal and would consider it carefully without a priori reservations. Such a proposal would be largely a commercial matter and, since it would not involve new technology, would not be of interest to the U.S. as a cooperative project.

Bearing of the INTELSAT Agreement Upon the Availability of Launch Services—

11. In the case of the INTELSAT Agreement as it may bear on the availability. of U.S. launch services for European communications satellites we assume that the definitive arrangements for INTELSAT which are now being negotiated would apply. In terms of draft article XIV as it is now proposed: (a) The United States assurance described in paragraph 2 above would apply in those cases where no negative finding is made by the appropriate INTELSAT organ, regardless of the position taken by the U.S. in the vote.

(b) The only qualification to this assurance relates to the unlikely instance in which an applicant for U.S. launch services requests such a launch in the face of a negative finding by the appropriate INTELSAT organ. The U.S. could not obligate itself in advance to assure launch services in such an instance.

12. With respect to your question as to our interpretation of the expression “significant economic harm to the global system of INTELSAT” as it now appears in draft article XIV of the proposed definitive arrangements,5 we cannot anticipate now precisely what the U.S. position would be in the case of consultation by a member country with the Assembly of Parties concerning the establishment or acquisition and use of space segment facilities separate from those of INTELSAT for international public telecommunications. To do so would prejudge a hypothetical future situation. We consider that the possibility of domestic, regional or specialized communications satellite systems separate from the INTELSAT system. has been accepted in principle. In dealing with specific proposals for such systems the U.S. representatives in INTELSAT would consider the matter seriously and reasonably, and would not adopt an arbitrary position. We would expect other countries to do the same.

13. With respect to your question as to our interpretation of the expression “international public telecommunications” as it now appears in draft article XIV of the proposed definitive arrangements,6 while specific definitions have not yet been agreed, we believe there is a general understanding among the delegations to the INTELSAT Conference that, for purposes of the definitive INTELSAT arrangements, international public telecommunication includes those telecommunication. services, fixed and mobile, which can be provided by satellite to meet the communication needs of the general public or any segment thereof, including telephony, telegraphy, telex, facsimile and data transmission, relay of radio and television programs, and leased circuits for any of these purposes.

14. In contrast, specialized communication services are understood to include all telecommunication services other than public telecommunication’ services which can be provided by satellite, including, but not limited to, aeronautical, maritime, radio-navigation, space research, and broadcasting services. We consider thatin the future such specialized communications services and other satellite applications might also be provided by INTELSAT, if the members agree, but would not become a special or exclusive function of INTELSAT In any case, this would be a matter for the member countries to change.

15. With respect to your question whether we would support a change in draft article XIV of the proposed definitive arrangements in order to assure that the opinion of the Board of Governors with respect to questions of “economic harm” is adequately substantiated,7 we would be reluctant to see this question reopened. This would have to be done within INTELSAT where the matter has already been discussed thoroughly during the current negotiation of definitive arrangements. Any recommendations by the Assembly of Parties with respect to “economic harm” must take into account the advice of the Board of Governors and should be based on findings as to fact, not on political considerations If such findings should be the subject of serious debate among the member countries in both the Board of Governors and the Assembly of Parties, we would-adhere to the language and intent of article XIV, and would expect other countries to do the same.

Decision-making and Management—

16. We consider that the European role in decision-making and management should relate to, and be commensurate with, the measure and character of European participation. Although we would not expect to set any minimum level for European participation, we see’ substantial participation, and intend that the arrangements for collaboration should assure consultation in the development of the Space Transportation System and Space Station wherever of significant, mutual concern to both parties.

17. Europe should be associated with the major decision-making bodies concerned with the overall planning and management of the development of either, or both of, these systems, depending on whether Europe decides to participate in the development of one, or both, of them. There should be an extensive role for Europe in the management of those aspects of these systems in which European contractors will be involved, either directly under European governments or working as sub-contractors to American prime contractors in integrated programs. Clearly, any decisions which affect European participation directly must be made jointly.

18. In addition, wherever there is a basis for European use of the Space Transportation System or Space Stations, we would expect Europe to take part in mission planning and experimental programs in generous proportion to their use.

19. Thus, there could be a substantial role Europe in decision-making and management. If, as seems likely, the U.S. input to the development of these systems and the U.S. use of these systems when developed will be significantly greater than the European input and use, overall responsibility for management of the post-Apollo program would necessarily rest with the U.S.

20. With respect to Lord Bessborough’s question concerning the percentage of European participation in management bodies and the effect of decisions, taken in areas in which there is no direct European participation, upon European financial obligations and access to facilities,8 we feel that Europe must be a partner in reaching any decisions which have a measurable impact upon European costs or upon European tasks in discharging. their commitments to the program. Joint decision-making in these instances should not be permitted to have the effect of a unilateral veto in the case of normal over-runs which are experienced by contractors and sub-contractors on either side. There must, however, be provision for agreement by both parties in cases where changes in specifications would create different requirements than those to which they committed themselves in the initial agreement. In these latter cases that there would have to be some appropriate arrangements to pursue other alternatives in the event agreement cannot be reached.

Access to Information and Facilities—

21. One of our major objectives in suggesting collaboration in the post-Apollo program has been to make optimum use of the resources and skills of both Europe and the U.S., including the application of exisiting technological capabilities and the generation of new technology. To this end we feel, not only that each participating party must have detailed access to technical data and facilities which they would need to accomplish their specific tasks under the agreed collaboration, but should also have general access to all technology and facilities in the overall development of the program. (a) By detailed access we mean access to design, development and production data to the level of commercial know-how.

(b) By general access we mean access through visitation and published or publishable documentation, but not including detailed access as defined above.

22. In both cases access to technical data and facilities should be pursuant to terms of a government-to-government agreement providing assurance that these technical data would not be transferred to countries not participating in the agreement. Data which might be sensitive in terms of national security considerations should be exchanged, but handled within agreed security safeguards. Proprietary rights to inventions, innovations, technical data and copyright should be protected, but provision should be made for their sale or exchange among participants in the development of these systems on the basis of non-exclusive royalty-free licenses when desirable for furthering the agreed collaborative program. Arrangements for use of such proprietary rights for purposes outside the agreed program should be made according to normal commercial practices.

23. With respect to Lord Bessborough’s question as to the measure of European access to technical information, the arrangements suggested above should assure both an exchange of technical information adequate to a general understanding of the overall program by all participating countries and an exchange of detailed information9 (i.e.: to the level of commercial know-how) commensurate with the measure and character of their participation. They would not assure that all participating countries would have full access to, and unrestricted use of, all technology generated in the total-program. Rather, each participant in the collaboration would acquire detailed information to the measure of his contribution and of his needs to fulfill the tasks which he undertakes. Each participant would benefit in terms of development of technological know-how to the extent of his investment and participation, and would thus set for himself the extent of his acquisition of commercial know-how.

24. We do not expect that the effect of these arrangements would be as suggested in Lord Bessborough’s question, i.e.: “that Europe would give the U.S. detailed information about all the work it does, but the reverse would not apply.” Rather, we expect that each would provide detailed information relevant to, and needed for, the tasks of the other. Proprietary interest and production rights, premised on the successful completion of development tasks and established for some reasonable period of time to t e agreed, would provide commercial protection through commitments by the parties to acquire items from the designated developer for the full ‘period agreed.

Cost Estimates and Schedule for Development of the Space Transportation System and Space Station—

25. With respect to your question as to cost estimates and schedules,10 the following pre-preliminary estimates for the development costs of the Space Shuttle, Space Station and Space Tug were prepared for the Space Task Group Report which was submitted to the President in the Fall of 1969. These are developmental costs only and do not include cost estimates for production, facilities and operations: (Billions of Dollars)

Fiscal Years - 1972 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81

Shuttle .2 .9 1.2 1.4 1.3 1.0 =6.0

Space Tug (earth orbital and lunar landing versions) .1 .2 .5 .9 .9 .5 =3.1

Space Station (incl. experiments and experiment modules) .1 .2 .8 1.1 1.3 1.1 =4.6

.3 1.1 2.0 2.5 2.7 2.3 .5 .9 .9 .5 =13.7

26. It should be noted that under the plan developed for the Space Task Group Report, costs for development of the Shuttle and Space Station peak at about the same time. To avoid this undesirable peaking, we expect to concentrate our efforts first on Shuttle development and to proceed with Space Station development somewhat later than indicated by the funding shown above. We expect that the studies now in progress will better define costs as well as configurations, but we do not expect‘that the cost estimates will be appreciably altered. (a) The Space Tug described in the Space Task Group Report is a large multi-purpose modular system, operated in both manned and unmanned modes. Such a Tug not only could perform functions in earth orbit, but also could operate to the moon including delivery of personnel and cargo to the lunar surface. Therefore, the Tug envisioned in the Space Task Group Report is a much more extensive development than one designed to be carried as an integral unit internal to the Space Shuttle and primarily used to transfer unmanned payloads from low earth orbit to geostationary orbit. Interest in the early years. of Space Shuttle operation has now become focused on this latter much simpler Space Tug, the development cost of which are estimated at less than $1 billion.

(b) We are also considering a modular concept for the Space Station which would permit build-up of the Station from modules small enough to be transported by the Space Shuttle.

27. The Fiscal Year 1971 NASA Authorization Act contains $110 million for studies of the Shuttle-Station concepts. The Fiscal Year 1971 appropriation is still pending in the Congress.

Third Party Participation—

28. With respect to your question as to the implications of participation by third countries upon U.S.-European collaboration,11 we would like to accommodate broad foreign participation, and our suggestion for collaboration in the post-Apollo program is, as you are aware, open to non-European countries (particularly Canada, Australia, and Japan). Since we do not yet have a clear view. as to the measure of their interests, it seems premature to attempt to deal specifically with this question at this time. In principle, we would expect. third countries to participate in aspects of the program which did not duplicate those which the Europeans might previously have decided to undertake. Should third country participation require some degree of’ involvement in the European effort as well as our own, we would, of course, seek agreement with the Europeans. Third country participation would not in any event, be at the expense of Europe’s proceeding with tasks respecting which a firm European commitment had been established. I suggest that we both keep this question in mind for further consideration in the event any third country indicates a significant interest in participating.

I trust, Mr. Minister, that this statement of our present views will be useful in your preparations for the November meeting of the European Space Conference. We will await the results of that meeting. Meanwhile Mr. Pollack and his colleagues in NASA, the Office of Science and Technology and the Staff of the Space Council stand ready for. such further discussion or exchange of views as may be useful to you. He will shortly provide comments to your Conference Secretariat on their draft Summary Record of the September 16-17 discussions.

May I assure you that we, here, feel that those discussions were useful for us all.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking.

1 “Will the availability of launchers by the Government of the United States be guaranteed not only to Europe, considered as a whole, but also to each of the States participating in the program who are signatories of the Cooperative Convention?”

2 “Under what financial conditions would the United States supply launch vehicles to Europe?”

3 “What priority will be given to Europe in the assignment of launchers available at the time of its request and also in the schedule of launches?”

4 “Will the American Government authorize American firms to conclude with European firms contracts. permitting the construction under license in Europe of standard American launchers?”

5 “What is the interpretation given by the American Government to the expression ‘significant economic harm to the global system of INTELSAT’ which appears in article XIV of the intended agreement in terms, for example, of the proportion (percentage) of global income of INTELSAT?”

6 ”What is the interpretation given by the American Government to the expression ‘international public telecommunications’ which appears in article XIV of the intended agreement?”

7 “On the slight chance that Assembly of Parties might take a political decision under an ‘economic’ pretext, is it possible that the American Government would propose or support an amendment to article XIV of the intended agreement in order that the opinion of the Board of Governors which precedes these recommendations of the Assembly be substantiated?”

8 “Is it possible to be more specific about what is meant by the statement that all countries would participate in the decision-making process and management to a degree commensurate with their contributions to, and use of, the Space Transportation System and Space Station?” “Does this mean, for example, that if Europe contributed 10% Europe would have 10% of the members of all management boards or only those, including the governing board, in which it would be directly involved? In such cases, would decisions taken in areas in which Europe was not directly participating and which led to cost escalation involve increased financial participation for Europe (or alternatively reduced rights of access to facilities.)?”

9 “Could what has been said about exchange of information be spelt out more clearly? Is it implied that there will be a general exchange of technical information, but that detailed technical information will be exchanged only on those parts of the programme in which Europe participates? This would seem to mean that Europe would give the U.S. detailed information about all the work it does but the reverse would not apply.We feel that participating countries should have the right to full access to, and unrestricted use of, all know-how, design rights, etc. generated by part of the post-Apollo programme. Is this the intention?”

10 “What is the last evaluation of the cost and schedule of the program (post-Apollo)? Can the cost be divided into an annual base? In the breakdown of this evaluation of costs, what is approved at the present time, and by whom?”

11 “What would the implication be on the agreements to be concluded with the United States and Europe of the participation of third countries on the post-Apollo program?”

243. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 243. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 13, 1970.

SUBJECT:

International Space Cooperation

After reading my recent memorandum (Tab A) on the visit of Minister Lefevre, you asked why we should not guarantee launch services to Europeans in return for their commitment to participate substantially in our post-Apollo space program.

The answer is that we can guarantee such services and have done so. The United States will provide launchings for European payloads by means of the Space Transportation System (space shuttle), or, during the period before the shuttle becomes operable, by space vehicles presently in our inventory.

There are three conditions which qualify our guarantee: 1. European participation in the post-Apollo program must be “substantial”—that is, a commitment of ten percent or more of the resources required for development of the Space Transportation System (estimated at about $10 billion over a ten year period).

2. The launch must be for peaceful purposes, and,

3. It must be consistent with relevant international agreements (e. g. the Outer Space Treaty and the INTELSAT Agreement).

It is this last qualification that has given heartburn to the Europeans. They see in it a possible obstruction to their plans for regional or national telecommunications satellites. The language of the INTELSAT agreement stipulates that members may fly their own satellites if two thirds of the INTELSAT General Assembly finds the candidate system to be both technically compatible with the INTELSAT system and unlikely to do economic harm to the INTELSAT consortium. In the event that the finding of the General Assembly is unfavorable to the petitioners, we have told the Europeans that in those circumstances we could not guarantee them launch services should they choose not to heed the Assembly’s advisory opinion. Our position is not one of denial, but of reservation. We would have to judge each case on its merits. Whether this stand is acceptable to the Europeans remains to be seen.

The U.S. position on post-Apollo cooperation is spelled out in a letter (Tab C) written by Alex Johnson to Minister Lefevre after the latter’s visit here. Secretary Johnson requested that his letter be brought to your attention. I have summarized its contents at Tab B.

The next event in this exercise is a ministerial meeting of the European Space Conference in early November. At that time the Europeans will probably make a formal evaluation of the U.S. position on post-Apollo space cooperation as set forth in Alex Johnson’s letter to Minister Lefevre.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. For Official Use Only. Sent for information. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. Tab A is Document 240. Tab C is Document 242. Tab B was attached but not published.

244. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 244. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 14, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Space Cooperation with the USSR

Peter Flanigan sent you a memorandum (Tab B) calling your attention to the imminent (26-27 October 70) visit to the USSR of a NASA team of experts who will discuss common space docking possibilities.

Mr. Flanigan suggests that you may wish to review the desirability of such an exchange “in light of our other relations with the Russians” and seeks your thoughts on the matter so he can counsel NASA.

In NSDM 70 (Tab C) you announced the President’s decision that space cooperation with the Soviet Union should be pursued simultaneously through high-level diplomatic and technical agency channels.

The President noted and approved the scope of a US-USSR cooperative space program (Tab D) as forwarded by the NSC Under Secretaries Committee. Among the possible areas of cooperation identified in the report were ”… projects looking toward improved safety, and desirable commonality in instrumentation and operating procedures (e.g. development of compatible docking equipment and communications arrangements for reciprocal space rescue).”

Since it is desirable (to the extent possible) to keep international scientific cooperation insulated from current political circumstances, I believe that we should proceed with this Presidentially approved initiative.

At Tab A is a draft reply to Peter Flanigan which states your conviction that the NASA visit should take place as scheduled.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the memorandum at Tab A.

Helmut Sonnenfeldt concurs.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. Official Use Only. Sent for action. In Tab A, an attached October 22 memorandum to Flanigan, Kissinger stated: “While I, too, am sensitive to the character of our present relations with the Russians, I believe that international scientific cooperation is an area where we can operate effectively in furtherance of long-term objectives.” Attached but not published was Tab B, an October 7 memorandum from Flanigan to Kissinger. Tab C is Document 237. For Tab D, see Document 236.

245. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 245. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, November 2, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Space Cooperation with the USSR

A team of NASA experts has returned from a very successful visit (26-28 October) to Moscow where they discussed joint efforts to develop compatible space rendezvous and docking arrangements. Dr. George Low’s report of the visit is at Tab A.

The Soviet approach to the discussions marks a reversal of their previous and essentially negative attitude toward space cooperation. They were entirely direct and open, clearly intent upon reaching a positive result. Of particular note was the candor and comprehensiveness with which they briefed the US delegation on present and future Soviet docking systems.

The consequence of the meeting is an agreement soon to be signed by Dr. Low of NASA and President Keldysh of the Soviet Academy of Sciences which will form the basis for continued exploration of these procedures at the technical level.

I will report further developments as they evolve.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 392, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1970. No classification marking. Sent for information. Attached but not published at Tab A was an October 25 letter from Low to Kissinger. Nixon placed an exclamation point next to the second paragraph.

246. Intelligence Note SAN-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 246. Intelligence Note SAN-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, November 10, 1970.

EUROPEAN SPACE CONFERENCE SPLITS ON POST-APOLLO COOPERATION

At a meeting in Paris November 3-4, the European Space Conference (ESC), the governing body of ELDO and ESRO, split into three groups on the issue of whether to participate in the funding and construction of an important element in the US post-Apollo manned space program. France, Germany, and Belgium opted strongly for such participation. Italy, Spain, Switzerland, and the Netherlands expressed interest in further efforts to obtain US launchers in the context of the post-Apollo program but were unwilling to make any commitment. The remaining countries (Britain, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Australia), led by the UK, stated they could not join an effort where the costs and benefits were unclear.

Although the UK has persistently reflected lack of enthusiasm towards the proposed project, the British position expressed in the ESC meeting—perhaps not fully reflecting London’s coordinated views—was more negative than had been anticipated. Apparently the British stand was based on UK space-funding stringencies, confidence that access to American launch facilities and technology would be forthcoming in any case, and the uncertainty of US Congressional authorization for the proposed post-Apollo program funding. The more positive aspect of the ESC meeting was the decision of the three delegations to move ahead. They and others from the second (uncommitted) group plan to send delegates to Washington (perhaps accompanied by observers from the UK and Scandinavia) later this year, to discuss further specific details of the cooperative venture.

NASA is planning a $10 billion ten-year space-research program which will comprise a space transportation-system including (a) earth orbiting space stations, (b) shuttle ferries from earth to these orbiting stations, and (c) tugs to provide transport in space from station-to-station and to the moon. As proposed to the Europeans in mid-September, they are invited to participate to the extent of a projected $1 billion input. A possible role for the Europeans would be the development of the space tug. In a letter of October 2, 1970, to M. Theo Lefevre, Belgian Minister of Science and Chairman of the ESC, Under Secretary Johnson responded in detail to a series of questions posed by M. Lefevre and his colleagues when they visited Washington in mid-September to discuss this project. These replies aimed to reassure the Europeans as to (1) availability of launch services and launch vehicles; (2) decision-making; and (3) access to information and facilities. On the basis of the September visit and the Johnson letter the ESC meeting in early November took up where to go from there.

While the US offer to the Europeans focuses on participation by all or part of the ESC, it leaves open the possibility of individual country participation. This would call for individual adherence to a convention to cooperate on the project and a pledge of substantial participation on the basis of a specific formula in each case., While not entirely resolved, access to technology, either in the case of an ESC group or individual countries, would be proportionate to the specific contribution and to the extent necessary to share in the overall management and planning decisions on a “need to know” basis.

The element in the US offer which is of greatest interest to the Europeans, however, is the assurance of launch services. The French and Germans are particularly anxious to launch a European communications satellite, which would probably duplicate certain aspects of the current INTELSAT communications satellites over the North Atlantic. Having had difficulty in ELDO developing a non-US rocket to launch such a satellite, the Europeans desire to obtain one from the US with no strings attached. While other launches by the US would presently be permitted, the US position would not permit providing communications satellite launch facilities without a favorable decision in this regard in INTELSAT in conformity with procedures under the INTELSAT agreement.

As Britain is neither concerned with building nor joining construction of a communications satellite outside of INTELSAT, there is less incentive for the UK to participate in an ESC post-Apollo consortium. If the British decision not to participate stands, this could have important implications both in the European setting and in Anglo-American terms. Some Europeans, especially the French and Belgians, have indicated that the UK position would be a test of Britain’s desire to join Europe. While this is obviously an over-dramatization of the effect of British aloofness, the latter would not contribute to increased confidence as to UK intentions to cooperate with the continent.

As concerns Anglo-American cooperation, the UK might well consider that access to US launch facilities and technology unrelated to communications satellites would be available on a bilateral basis in line with past practice. This might pose problems for the US not only with regard to Britain but also in the case of other countries not collaborating in the post-Apollo program, such as Japan. In particular, if the pro-cooperation ESC members contribute funds to the project and take on important development responsibilities, then the US would face the problem of deciding whether to provide equal access to US facilities and technology to the second or third group of ESC members, or to non-members with which the US has cooperated bilaterally in the Sixties. This question would need to be resolved separately and apart from the overriding issue of whether to provide communications satellite facilities for the European participants.

One uncertainty in the post-Apollo equation is whether the Administration and the Congress will continue to support the proposed program. It has been made clear to the Europeans that the FY-71 NASA Authorization Act, which contains $110 million for studies of the shuttle/station concepts, is still pending in the Congress. Slippage in passage of this legislation would set back US-European space cooperation on the broad scale outlined above. Bilateral cooperative efforts would, of course, continue, but these would fall considerably short of the mutual commitment and interdependence envisaged in the post-Apollo program. If the latter proceeds and if the Europeans participate, we would depend heavily upon their performance in delivering an. operational tug, without which the space transport system would fall short of its full potential. The Europeans would depend upon us to provide the necessary launch capability and other technology; they would, conversely, rely on sales opportunities in the US for any subsystems they produce.

Regardless of whether post-Apollo cooperation materializes, for the Europeans a wider technological and political question would also arise: Should they continue to develop an independent space launch capability or put these funds into US-launch capability? ELDO’s difficulties in developing an independent space launch capability might well persuade the Europeans that—subject to satisfactory communications satellite ownership, management, and operation—they should opt for joint US-European cooperation. A positive decision by the US Government to proceed with the post-Apollo program and European agreement to participate in it would edge the Europeans considerably closer to such a joint launching option.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Herbert Spielman (INR/Science Affairs).

247. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 247. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 1, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Program

The Department, in consultation with the Executive Secretary of the Space Council, the NSC Staff, OST and NASA, has prepared the enclosed brief report on the relevance of the manner in which FY-72 budget decisions are made concerning the post-Apollo space program to the European approach to their participation in that program. I subscribe to the conclusion in that Report that, if we are to sustain the impetus in Europe to participate substantially in the post-Apollo program, the content and character of our FY-72 budgetary and program decisions for the space transportation system should provide a clear indication that the US stands committed to continuity and forward movement in its major space efforts.

I have no doubt that the values of foreign participation in the post-Apollo program have already been addressed in the budget proposals now before the President. Although these values are clearly not the primary consideration in our budget and program decisions, I should like to reiterate that they are, nonetheless, quite important.

From a technical point of view we would obtain the benefit of European know-how in areas where they have special technical competence. Under the terms presently contemplated, European participation would reduce United States budget requirements by approximately $l billion. From a national security viewpoint, there are obvious advantages to having the Europeans as partners in the United States program, as compared to their developing a separate and independent space launching capability which would be wasteful and over which we would have little or no influence. Politically, we have long encouraged the Western Europeans to collaborate on multinational endeavors and this would be a very large one indeed. Success in this venture would help put life into other pending proposals for intra-European cooperation and could be a useful precedent for major scientific and technical projects in the future. Participation in this program would also strengthen the technological capacity of countries who are our NATO allies and thereby enhance the strength of the Alliance.

U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure

November 30, 1970

PROSPECTS FOR EUROPEAN PARTICIPATION IN THE POST-APOLLO SPACE PROGRAM

In consultation with the Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council and representatives of the NSC Staff, the Office of Science and Technology and NASA we have assessed the current prospects for substantial European participation in our post-Apollo space program. We find that a key question affecting European decisions as to participation is the extent of the U.S. commitment to the development of a reusable space transportation system and other major elements of the post-Apollo program.

The Europeans are convinced. that they cannot afford to pursue a fully independent program to meet their own objectives for the use of space and, at the same time, participate substantially in post-Apollo developments. They have a number of options as to the timing and content of their program, but within a few months should make the fundamental choice whether to arrange their space program so as to permit participation or to pursue an independent course, particularly in the development of their own launch vehicle capability. They cannot be expected to forego independence unless our program offers an assured alternative. Thus, the manner in. which we handle our program and budget decisions for fiscal year 1972 will have a major effect on prospects for engaging their participation.

This is obviously not to suggest that the question of European participation should be a pivotal consideration in our budget and program decisions. Rather it is to note that these decisions and the manner in which they are expressed will have an obvious impact on the European approach to participation in the post-Apollo program. If we are to sustain the impetus in Europe to participate substantially in the post-Apollo program, the content and character of our FY-72 budgetary and program decisions for the space transportation system should provide a clear indication that the U.S. stands committed to continuity and forward movement in its major space efforts.

Thus, it is, important that, insofar as these decisions reflect U.S. intentions as to the post-Apollo program, our intentions emerge as clearly as possible. Should these decisions becloud our intentions, serious doubt will be raised in Europe whether our professed commitment to ongoing space activities, and to sharing their benefits and burdens, will in fact offer opportunities of real interest to Europe.

Herman Pollack
Director
Bureau of International Scientific
and Technological Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. Drafted by Robert Packard.

248. Memorandum From Michael H. Guhin and Helmut G. Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 248. Memorandum From Michael H. Guhin and Helmut G. Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 8, 1971.

Subject:Your Meeting with Dr. George Low, Acting Administrator of NASA

We understand you will be meeting with Dr. Low on Tuesday (January 12) or prior to his January 15 departure for technical discussions regarding space cooperation in Moscow.

Background

— On July 10, 1970 (NSDM at Tab A), the President decided that we should pursue space cooperation with the USSR through both high level diplomatic and technical channels.

— Additionally, the President approved the scope of a cooperative program suggested by the NSC Under Secretaries Committee. The program included (1) exchange of scientific experts and information; (2) coordination of separate national efforts, possibly tasks in unmanned lunar or planetary exploration; (3) complementary tasks in practical applications of space technology; (4) exchange of astronauts; (5) cooperation in areas such as tracking and communications; and (6) projects for improved safety and desirable commonality in instrumentation and operation procedures (e.g., development of compatible docking equipment.

— The October meetings resulted in an agreement with the USSR which provided for the exchange of technical data on docking equipment (data recently exchanged by both sides), the development of what each considers necessary steps to make the docking systems compatible (planned for January–February), and technical working group meetings to develop a common set of requirements (planned for March–April).

Dr. Low’s Visit

Dr. Low now plans about three days of technical meetings with Soviet officials (1) to advance the discussion on the docking system from technical data on “machinery” to “techniques” of how the system works and (2) to explore at the technical level new opportunities for space cooperation. The Soviet team will be headed by Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.

In your meeting, you may wish Dr. Low to do most of the talking, relating particularly the recent docking discussions and what he plans this trip.

You may wish, however, to give him some overall guidance or feeling for the President’s interest in these talks. You will recall that, in the fall of 1969, you advised Dr. Paine to be somewhat reserved in approaching the Soviets on these subjects. This was apparently a tactical position based on the overall situation vis-à-vis the USSR at that time.

In light of the successful beginning regarding docking systems and since it is generally desirable to keep international scientific cooperation insulated (to the degree possible) from current political circumstances, we see no reason to be “stand-offish” now and recommend that you encourage Dr. Low in this endeavor.

Moreover, in view of the currently difficult state of relations with the USSR, it would no doubt compound our problems were we now to walk away from these negotiations. They may indeed serve as a corrective to the spiraling series of disagreements, misunderstandings and, at least on the Soviet side, increasingly bitter polemics.

At the same time, it is important at present that we not seem overly anxious to produce forward movement since we think we must also convey to the Soviets our determination to stay the course with them even when the going is rough.

Consequently, we believe that Dr. Low should conduct his talks in a matter-of-fact, wholly substantive manner. He should give the Soviets no reason to believe we have lost interest and, should the Soviets wish to make this endeavor a victim of current difficulties, he should make sure the record shows that such was not our doing.

Also, Dr. Low should be cautioned to confine any public comment in Moscow or about his talks to the subject matter at hand and not to give them political or psychological weight beyond whatever specific progress may be achieved.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA Vol. II. Confidential. Sent for information. Kissinger met with Low from 3:20 to 4:05 p.m. on January 12. (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Kissinger Papers, Box 438, Miscellany, 1968-1976, Record of Schedule) No other record of that conversation has been found. Tab A is Document 237. An account of the NASA mission to Moscow, October 26-28, 1970, is printed in, Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-45.

249. Telegram 232 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 249. Telegram 232 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, January 22, 1971, 1727Z.

Subject:

Post Apollo Meeting

Ref

Brussels 160

1. Letter to Under Secretary from Minister Lefevre being forwarded by septel. However, Lefevre is fearful that contents of letter may come as unpleasant surprise to American side and asked us to pass on to the Under Secretary, on a confidential basis, some of the background of the letter to avoid any ill feeling. He has asked that this information be held closely and not be communicated to other European participants.

2. Lefevre had a very hard time at the recent Brussels meeting with both the British and the French. The British, for example, insisted that they will be full participants in Washington during discussions of “political issues” but must be considered as observers during technical conversations with NASA. More difficult are six new questions which will be posed in the letter which Lefevre personally considers unnecessary. His disappointment with these questions is outweighed, however, by his belief that it is necessary to proceed with discussions “while the iron is hot.” He recognizes that these questions are not in line with Frutkin’s expressed desire that we not continue to discuss political issues.

3. The first of the questions had been insisted on by the French. The Dutch have not agreed to the last phrase in that question but phrase left in owing to French insistence. Lefevre believes that the French want responses for their own purposes in order to put pressure on other Europeans to proceed with a European launcher program. (Spaey somewhat sardonically tells us French are willing to spend the money but don’t want to participate. British want to participate but don’t want to spend the money.) Minister believes best response to first question would be to ask what would be your response under similar circumstances if the questions were posed to you?

4. Fifth question has been inserted at German initiative.

5. Lefevre hopes that the US side will not get too impatient over the posing of these questions. He points out that since the coming of the talks will be composed of a larger number of country representatives, it becomes more difficult to limit areas of discussions. Belgians themselves would not have posed the questions had they had any choice. Lefevre would, in any event, like to have a separate meeting between the Undersecretary and himself (with Dr. Spaey) to discuss their problems outside of the Plenary session. He suggested the afternoon of February 10.

6. Lefevre expects party visiting Washington to consist of about nine individuals representing seven different countries or agencies.

7. We would like to emphasize again Lefevre’s desire that his views not reach any one outside of the U.S. Government. A leak would be most embarassing for him.

Eisenhower

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential; Exdis.

250. Telegram 237 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State 250. Telegram 237 From the Embassy in Belgium to the Department of State1

Brussels, January 23, 1971, 1045Z.

Paris pass NASA

Subj:

Post-Apollo: Lefevre Letter to Under Secretary

Ref:

Brussels 160, State 10786 (Notal)

1. Minister Lefevre’s office asked Embassy to transmit his reply to Under Secretary’s letter of October 1970 telegraphically. Letter generally in line with what Van Eesbeek told us earlier (Brussels 160). Translation, done in Lefevre’s office, follows para 2. Original letter in French being sent under cover airgram.

Brussels

January 21, 1971

Dear Mr. Secretary,

I wish to renew my thanks for the cordial welcome you gave in Washington to the European delegation which I led, and for your letter of 2 October 1970 which gives a summary of our talks and defines your government’s position on certain points. I circulated the text of your letter to my fellow-members of the European Space Conference and reported to them on my mission during the meeting we held in Brussels on 4 November 1970.

The conference expressed its unanimous satisfaction with the prospects that followed our first talks, which are indeed encouraging prospects for Europe and expressed its appreciation of the understanding you showed with regard to the matters that are certain to the European countries.

A certain number of countries, namely Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland have asked that talks in greater depth be held with your government, and they have made it clear that they cannot take final decisions on European participation in the post-Apollo programme and on the financial commitments resulting therefrom until after such talks.

The United Kingdom also intends to participate in the talks insofar as availability of launchers is concerned but act as observers on the question of participation in the post-Apollo programme.

In reply to the proposals contained in Mr. G. M. Low’s message of 28 December 1970 regarding the subsequent conduct of the discussions, the governments of the above-mentioned countries have agreed that there could be immediate exchanges of views, and contacts in depth, at the technical level.

To that effect, a team of European experts led by Mr. Causse and Mr. Dinkespiler assisted by experts from the member countries, shall be enabled to take the necessary contacts at all levels with NASA and American business firms in order to prepare the technical report to be submitted to the member countries of the ESC.

As I had the opportunity to tell Mr. Frutkin when he visited Brussels on the 17 December 1970, the European countries concerned consider that if you could provide clarification on these points to the European delegation during its forthcoming visit it would expedite the process of formulation of the European cooperation proposals. (Embassy comment—This paragraph is confusing. We interpret paragraph and the following paragraphs to refer to the discussion of the “six questions” which come later and not to the expert discussions mentioned in the previous paragraph. We are seeking clarification on this. End Embassy comment).

I am most keen that this exchange of views on these questions of a general nature should take place very soon, with the object of completing the information available to our respective governments and thereby reinforcing our solidarity and the spirit of cooperation that will have to permeate an undertaking whose importance and significance for the future, on the political plane as well as on the scientific and technological plane we fully recognise.

It is the view of all European countries who are interested in a possible cooperation with the United States that it should be looked upon as a joint venture undertaken by the United States and Europe for the mutual benefit of both parties, as indicated in the Space Task Group report and as underlined on the occasion of the first contacts between the Americans and the Europeans on this subject.

The European countries wish, in particular, to obtain additional information on the following points: 1) Aside from the launchings that the United States would provide from its own territory, the European countries wish to have the possibility of buying launchers from the United States for launching from non-American ranges. They would, of course, undertake to use launchers in conformity with the agreement to be concluded with the United States, but without the purchase of such launchers being submitted on international procedure. (French text: sans que l’achat de ces subordonne a des procedures internationales).

2) The question of access on commercial basis to American fabrication licences for peaceful uses should be covered by the cooperation agreement.

3) On the technical plane, Europe wishes to have access for peaceful uses, to all the technology developed within the framework of the post-Apollo programme, and not just to that part of it which is necessary for executing the tasks entrusted to Europe. The use of this information for commercial purposes would only be authorized within the framework of the cooperation projects.

The right to use outside such projects could be the subject of conventional commercial agreements in accordance with the usual rules.

4) It should also be specified that the new transportation systems to be jointly developed will be made available without restriction to each of the partners for peaceful uses.

5) The modalities of the cooperation, on the political as well as the technical plane, should also be determined on a partnership basis.

6) Lastly, there should be clearer definition of the limits of the financial commitment framework within which the participation of the European countries might be organised.

These various questions could be usefully discussed in the course of a further meeting, which I should like to see arranged very soon. I suggest that it might start on 10 February 1971, and I very much hope that this date will meet your agreement.

I look forward to meeting you and your collaborators again, and I hope, as do all of us in Europe, that we shall be able to achieve positive results.

With kindest regards,

Th. Lefevre.

3. Re: Dates for meetings, Lefevre letter written before State 10786 received. Dr. Spaey informs Embassy that February 11 is acceptable for plenary meeting with Under Secretary.

4. Re: Invitations for Apollo 14 launching, while Lefevre and Spaey will not attend, Embassy believes important that invitations be sent to them ASAP.

Eisenhower

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rome, Bonn, Bern, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Madrid, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Stockholm, Tokyo, Canberra, and the U.S. Mission Geneva.

251. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President of Communications Satellite Corporation (Charyk) 251. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President of Communications Satellite Corporation (Charyk)1

Washington, January 23, 1971.

Dear Joe:

As I indicated when we spoke over the telephone on January 13, I am writing in response to your letter of December 29, 1970 outlining Comsat’s concerns regarding the provision of U.S. launch services to other countries seeking to launch regional communications satellites. You mentioned specifically the discussions which we have had with the European Space Conference regarding possible European participation in the U.S. post-Apollo space program.

As I am sure you know, the conversations which we conducted with the Europeans Were pursuant to an instruction from the President to the Department of State and NASA to do all possible to obtain substantial international, and particularly Western European, financial and other material participation in the post-Apollo space program If such participation could be obtained it would result in substantial financial, technological and political benefits to the U.S. Government.

The authoritative U.S. Government position with respect to European participation in the post-Apollo space program is that contained in my letter of October 2, 1970 to Theo Lefevre, Chairman of the European Space Council, the text of which is contained in State Department message CA-5237 of October 9, a copy of which I am forwarding with this letter in the event you had not previously seen the full text As that letter states, the views set forth therein are preliminary and, in the case of the U.S.. assurance of reimbursable launch services, entirely subject to a substantial European participation in the post-Apollo program on mutually agreeable conditions and terms.

Prior to and during the conversations with the ESC delegation, it was quite clear that a major consideration in a European decision to participate in a post-Apollo program was whether Europe could devote the resources now devoted to developing an independent launch capability to this purpose or whether such participation would be additive to their present launch program and thus require substantial additional resources. From the standpoint of over-all U.S. policy interests, as well as from the standpoint of doing the maximum to encourage European participation in the post-Apollo program, the former was the obviously preferred choice. I felt that such a choice would also clearly be in the interest of Comsat and INTELSAT.

If Europe were to abandon its effort to develop an independent launch capability, it was obviously and clearly interested in the availability of U.S. launches, both before and after the development of the’ new space transportation system, and much of the discussion, as well as my letter to Minister Lefevre, revolved around this point. In this regard, the portions of the letter pertinent to the interests of Comsat and INTELSAT are paragraphs 2, 4, and 11. Paragraph 2 states that launch services would be made available “for any peaceful purpose consistent with relevant international agreements.” Paragraph 4 states that by “consistent with relevant international agreements” it is meant the “obligations of the U.S. and European countries as contained in such agreements as … the INTELSAT agreement.” Paragraph 11 states that in terms of draft Article XIV of the INTELSAT agreement as it was then proposed, the United States assurance “would apply in those cases where no negative finding is made by the appropriate IINTELSAT organ, regardless-of the position taken by the U.S. in the vote”, and that where there was a “negative finding by the appropriate INTELSAT organ” the U.S. could not obligate itself in advance to assure launch services.

During the informal and oral discussion which led up to these statements I made it specifically clear that I was not authorized, nor was I in any way purporting to interpret, modify or in any way negotiate on the language or meaning of Article XIV, as that was a matter solely to be handled within the framework of the INTELSAT negotiations. Minister Lefevre entirely concurred with this position.

Thus my discussion with Minister Lefevre of possible contingencies that could arise under Article XIV was entirely hypothetical. The hypothetical situation most discussed by us was that of a negative finding as to the economic compatibility of a regional communications satellite system based on a two-thirds vote of the Assembly. This followed from the language of draft Article XIV, which stipulates that “the Assembly of Parties … shall express, in the form of recommendations, its findings.” Thus the discussion of U.S. assurances of launch services was predicated on specific findings by INTELSAT, under the assumption that the absence of a specific recommendation by the Assembly of Parties would not constitute a finding, either positive or negative. I note from your letter of December 29, 1970, that this is also Comsat’s view of the range of possible outcomes under the present wording of Article XIV.

However, there is an ambiguity in the wording of Article XIV which arises from the apparent possibility under the terms of that Article as currently drafted that the Assembly of Parties might fail to fulfill its obligation to make a specific finding if it were in fact unable to make any recommendation, either positive or negative, by a two-thirds vote. On the other hand, the interpretation of the intent of this Article held by important delegations to the INTELSAT Conference (including the U.S. Delegation) is that the failure of a positive recommendation to achieve a two-thirds vote automatically constitutes a negative finding. This difference in interpretation clearly has an important bearing on the preliminary assurances of U.S. action in this contingency (that of a negative finding by the Assembly) as conveyed to Minister Lefevre and the ESC in my letter.

I believe that the resolution of this ambiguity in the wording of Article XIV is a matter for clarification within the framework of the INTELSAT negotiations and that the language of the INTELSAT definitive arrangements or the legislative history accompanying those arrangements should be clearly drawn so as to eliminate any possible ambiguity.

In an effort to resolve this problem and to reconcile the U.S. Government interests in the maintenance of a strong INTELSAT arrangement and in securing European co-operation in the post-Apollo program, I would propose now to proceed on the following course of action, which I hope will be satisfactory to you as well as to the other concerned parties: A. The U.S. will support the U.S. INTELSAT Delegation’s interpretation of Article XIV—namely—Article XIV requires the proponent(s) of a regional system to bear the burden of persuading two-thirds of the Assembly that the proposal will not cause significant economic harm to INTELSAT and will not prejudice the establishment of direct links to the global system: Failure to meet this requirement will be considered a negative finding.

B. The U.S. at an appropriate and early date, will inform the ESC of the U.S. position on Article XIV. Recognizing that this interpretation of Article XIV limits the launch commitment in my letter of October 2, 1970, and recognizing the need to enable the Europeans to make early decisions on participation in the post-Apollo program (possibly before the INTELSAT definitive arrangements have been brought into effect), the U.S. would propose to invite the Europeans now to identify the regional telecommunications satellites for which the ESC may wish to obtain U.S. launching services in the period prior to the coming into effect of the new space transportation system (e.g., over the next decade), so that the U.S. could in turn provide an advance indication of its position on the suitability of these proposals under the criteria of INTELSAT Article XIV.

With respect to the period after the new space transportation system becomes operational the ESC would be informed that the provision of U.S. launching services would continue to by governed by the principles set forth in my October 2, 1970, letter to Lefevre and in the discussions contemplated by the present proposal.

C. To implement this strategy vis-a-vis the Europeans, the U.S. would inform ESC that the U.S. Government has had the opportunity to review the meaning of Article XIV in depth and has also given further consideration to the question of the availability of launcher services pending the development of post-Apollo hardware. The U.S. would then set out its position on Article XIV and emphasize that it would help clarify the importance of the U.S. commitment to move the discussion to more specific grounds. We would therefore suggest that the European Space Conference prepare and submit to the U.S. a description of the international telecommunications satellites for which the ESC may wish to obtain U.S. launching services in the period prior to the coming on line of the new space transportation system. With respect to these proposals, the U.S. would undertake to determine, with reasonable dispatch, the position it would take in the INTELSAT Assembly were such specific proposals to be put forward. There would be every likelihood that any proposal in INTELSAT which had the support of both the European countries and the United States would obtain a two-thirds favorable vote. Correspondingly, there is only the remotest possibility that a two-thirds favorable vote would ever be attained in a situation where the United States opposed a proposal on the grounds that it would do significant harm to INTELSAT. It being clear that an absolute minimum condition for European support of a post-Apollo agreement is that the United States commit itself in advance to provide launch services in the event that a two-thirds favorable vote is obtained in the Assembly, we would propose to reaffirm-such a commitment. The U.S. would not commit itself in advance to provide launch services for any proposal which failed to attain a two-thirds favorable vote.

I hope you will find this information helpful.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Johnson sent this letter to Charyk under cover of a January 23 memorandum in which he stated: “I have used the language which you passed to my office yesterday, although I have made slight revisions in the wording in the interests of continuity. I think, however, that this language preserves the substance of your suggestion, with which I am in full accord.” Attached but not published was a copy of circular airgram CA-5237, October 9, 1970.

252. Memorandum From the Director, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, (Pollack) to Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand) 252. Memorandum From the Director, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs, (Pollack) to Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand)1

Washington, January 26, 1971.

TO:

EUR - Mr. Hillenbrand

L - Mr. Stevenson

PM - Mr. Spiers

INR - Mr. Cline

S/PC - Mr. Cargo

SUBJECT

Discussions on Space Cooperation Between NASA and the USSR Academy of Sciences

Attached are copies of the Summary of Results which was tentatively agreed between Dr. Low of NASA and Academician Keldysh of the USSR Academy of Sciences at the conclusion of their discussions in Moscow last week (Tab A), the joint Communique issued in Moscow on January 21 by the Academy and the US Embassy (Tab B) and the memorandum from Dr. Low to the President dated January 25 which reports Dr. Low’s assessment of these discussions (Tab C).

You will note that the Summary of Results is subject to review and confirmation by Dr. Low and Academician Keldysh within a period of 60 days, and does not go into effect until confirmed (paras 6-8). Dr. Low and Academician Keldysh agreed that the context of the Summary of Results and its four attachments beyond that contained in the ioint Communique. would not be made, public until confirmed.

You will note that the Summary of Results includes a Soviet proposal for cooperation in earth resources surveying involving selected land sites in both countries as well as ocean areas. During the discussion the US delegation did not accept a Soviet proposal for cooperation in space commuiications, since that proposal was directed essentially toward some integration of the INTELSAT and INTER-SPUTNIK operational communication satellite systems, which is a matter beyond the purview of NASA, and was otherwise quite inprecise with respect to cooperation in the study -of satellite communication problems involving very. high frequencies. The latter is a subject which the US may wish to reopen at some future time.

In order to advise Dr. Low whether the Department approves confirmation of the Summary of Results as it stands, I would appreciate your comments at your early convenience.

1 Source: National Archive, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Confidential. Copies were sent to E, IO, P, H, J, EUR/SOV, EUR/SES, EUR, L/SCI, INR/DRF, S/PC, and E/TT. Attached but not published were Tabs A-C.

253. Telegram 19915 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium 253. Telegram 19915 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Belgium1

Washington, February 3, 1971, 0246Z.

Subj:

Message for Minister Lefevre

Ref:

Brussels 237

Embassy is requested to pass following message from Under Secretary Johnson to ESC President Theo Lefevre:

1. Dear Minister Lefevre: I was pleased to receive your letter of January 21, 1971, outlining several questions which you and your colleagues wish to discuss in connection with the proposed cooperation in the post-Apollo program. I look forward to discussing these questions with you, and I would propose that we meet here at the State Department beginning at 10:30 a.m. on February 11. I am confident that with the cooperative spirit which prevailed at our meeting last September, we will succeed in arriving at an understanding.

2. In order to be able to be responsive from the U.S. side on the six points raised in your letter, I would hope at the start of our discussion to obtain elucidation from your delegation on several matters. Among these are: (a) We are uncertain just which “international procedures” you had in mind in drafting the first point dealing with the purchase of U.S. launchers for use outside the United States, and (B) We would appreciate knowing whether your second point concerning access to American manufacturing licenses is limited to launch vehicle technology, or whether a broader range of space technology may be involved.

3. In addition, you will recall that an important part of our discussions last September centered on the availability of U.S. launches, both before and after the development of the new space transportation system. Our formal position on this point is summarized in paragraphs 1-6 and 11-15 of my letter to you of October 2, 1970, where we affirm our willingness to assure launch services, on a reimbursable basis, “for any peaceful purpose consistent with relevant international agreements.”

As applied to the launch of telecommunication satellites within the meaning of Article XIV of the definitive arrangements for INTELSAT, we offered an assurance of launch services for those who participate substantially in the post-Apollo program “in those cases where no negative finding is made by the appropriate INTELSAT organ, regardless of the position taken by the U.S. in the vote.” This assurance remains unchanged.

4. However, since our meeting in September I have found that the generally accepted interpretation of the application of Article XIV is somewhat different from that which we discussed. It is now my understanding that the interpretation, which was implicit in the INTELSAT negotiations, and is supported by the U.S., is that the failure of a positive recommendation to achieve a two-thirds vote automatically constitutes a negative finding.

5. In this situation, it seems to me that, from your point of view, more important than a theoretical discussion of this issue would be an indication from the United States as to the position it would take on the practical questions of European telecommunications satellite proposals, separate from INTELSAT, which may become subject to consideration under Article XIV. Therefore, in our discussions I propose to suggest that we arrange for the European Space Conference to describe to the United States the international public telecommunications satellite systems for which the ESC may wish to obtain U.S. launching services in the period prior to the coming on line of the new space transportation system. The U.S. would then undertake to determine, with reasonable dispatch, the position it would take in the INTELSAT Assembly were such specific proposals to be put forward.

6. I am looking forward to meeting you and your colleagues on February 11, and I trust you will find the thoughts and suggestions summarized above helpful in establishing a basis for discussion of some of the topics which we will wish to consider.

7. Please confirm delivery.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archive, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Immediate; Limited Official Use. Drafted by Baker and Webber on February 3; cleared by S, Intelsat, EUR, E, OTP, L, in substance by Behr and EUR/FBX, and in information by Frutkin; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson.

254. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 254. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, February 9, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Second Lefevre Visit—Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

Minister Lefevre and a contingent of Europeans will meet with Under Secretary Johnson on 11 February 1971 to discuss cooperation with the U.S. in our post-Apollo space program. The meeting was requested by Mr. Lefevre. He will be accompanied by representatives of the FRG, France, the UK, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland.

The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the political and financial implications of European participation in the post-Apollo program. As they did at the last meeting, the Europeans will want to dwell in depth on what they consider to be U.S. “conditions” affecting their status as partners—especially the terms under which the U.S. will provide launch services to put up European regional communications satellites both before and after the advent of the space shuttle.

You may recall that in the September talks (later confirmed in a letter from Alex Johnson to Lefevre), we told the Europeans that we would provide launch services “for any peaceful purpose consistent with relevant international agreements”.

The contentious aspect of our proviso relates to INTELSAT and the obligations we and the Europeans would assume once definitive arrangements have been concluded (perhaps in April 1971). As applied to the launching of telecommunications satellites, we offered an assurance of launch services for those who participate substantially in the post-Apollo program “in those cases where no negative funding is made by the appropriate INTELSAT organ, regardless of the position taken by the U.S. in the vote.” In those cases where there is a negative finding, the U.S. could not in advance commit to provide launch services. Ambassador Johnson has affirmed that this assurance remains unchanged.

Notwithstanding the affirmation of our previous position, the Europeans are nervous about an emerging consensus on the meaning of a “negative finding”. In September, Alex Johnson told Lefevre informally that he understood a negative finding to mean that were the question put to vote—“does this satellite offer a potential of grave economic harm to INTELSAT”—and one-third of the voting states plus one voted that it did not, then a negative finding would not exist. Now, however, as the result of intervening INTELSAT deliberations, the view (which the U.S. has supported), is that the proposer of a regional satellite must accept the burden of obtaining a two-thirds vote of the Assembly in favor of the project.

Having been informed of the U.S. acceptance of this formulation, the Europeans are now claiming that our position has hardened rather than become more reasonable.

As a French space official has put it, we are “offering an accord which the U.S. need not violate, but merely follow, to refuse a European launcher request”. Quite naturally, the Europeans would prefer no restrictions and will argue strongly that their interests should not be held hostage by the U.S. through INTELSAT.

There is a practical way out of the dilemma (apart from the theological aspects of the issue itself—for it’s most unlikely that the U.S. and the Europeans voting together could not pull in a two-thirds majority of those voting). Alex Johnson is going to tell the Europeans to state for us precisely what they have in mind with regard to the configuration and geographical coverage of their proposed communications satellites. We will then, with reasonable dispatch, undertake to determine the position we would take in INTELSAT were such specific proposals to be put forward.

The fact is that we cannot have it both ways. We cannot be a major supporter of INTELSAT and at the same time promise our potential post-Apollo partners that we will unequivocally support their interests against those of the other Consortium members.

The real questions are these: (1) Are the Europeans more interested in commercial applications than in acquiring technological know-how in space. If the latter, we may be able to draw them aboard.

(2) To what extent is the U.S. willing to assume a protective role toward INTELSAT in the face of possible reverses in other areas of space cooperation?

I will attend the meetings with Minister Lefevre and report the highlights. (FYI: Alex Johnson has asked me to go to his office on the afternoon of 10 February to discuss the “philosophical basis for space cooperation”. He appears to think that a brain-storming session will help him fix the boundaries of his negotiating latitude.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Initialed by Haig.

255. Memorandum for the Record 255. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, February 10, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Senior Staff Meeting, Wednesday, February 10

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to international cooperation in space.]

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

Col. Behr: Lefevre and a delegation are meeting with Alexis Johnson tomorrow on post-Apollo space cooperation. It will be a difficult session since we‘re still hung up on the provision of launch services for their communication satellites. It is a question of whether the French are prepared to be reasonable.

Mr. Kissinger: How about us?

Col. Behr: We‘ve gone about as far as we can go. The issue is whether or not we are prepared to give an unequivocal commitment to provide launch services for their satellites.

Mr. Kissinger: If we‘re insisting on a veto, why is that reasonable?

Col. Behr: We‘re not saying we won’t provide launch services. We‘re saying we won’t give them a commitment to provide such services without including provision for a negative vote for Intelsat.

Mr. Kissinger: Why should they accept that position? It puts their communication satellites at our mercy since we control Intelsat.

Col. Behr: Alex Johnson proposes to ask them to give us a specific description of their program and we would tell them whether or not we would support it in Intelsat.

Mr. Kissinger: On what criteria?

Col. Behr: On whether or not the European Regional Satellite would harm Intelsat revenues so as to penalize the rest of the consortium—the extent to which it would pull revenues away from Intelsat.

Mr. Kissinger: You mean pull them away from us?

Col. Behr: Not just us—there are 77 nations in Intelsat.

Mr. Kissinger: Contributing what?

Col. Behr: I don’t know the contribution formula. They contribute according to their means.

Mr. Sonnenfeldt: We would have a serious Congressional problem. Congress won’t let us relinquish control of Intelsat.

Mr. Kissinger: Could we get the contribution formula? I don’t think our position is reasonable. Give me a paper on this.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to international cooperation in space.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1272, Saunders Chronology, NSC Operations Staff Meetings. Secret.

256. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 256. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 4, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

The post-Apollo space cooperation talks with Lefevre (11-12 February 71) were not a resounding success. As expected, the contentious issue was that of our qualified assurances regarding launch services. At the final meeting, Lefevre said that unless the US is prepared to be more forth-coming, the prospect for European participation in the space shuttle project is dim.

At Tab B is a sampling of European reactions to the talks. I have extracted these expressions from cables from our posts. The general tone is somber, reflecting a concern that the US is not really interested in cooperation with Europe.

The reactions from Europe have caused discomfiture in Alex Johnson’s office and dyspepsia at NASA. All of this has led to talk of modifying the US position (in the direction of Europe’s demands), which has prompted, in turn, anguished cries from the people institutionally involved in the future of INTELSAT.

There is no need for you to get involved in this hassle at the moment. I feel reasonably confident that the problems can be sorted out. You should, however, have a better understanding of what this is all about in the event that Alex Johnson seeks your judgment. At Tab A is an issues paper—somewhat lengthy—which presents the situation as best I can describe it.

Finally, there is another aspect to this problem which will ultimately have to be resolved by the President. The issue is whether it is in the interest of the US to continue the development of the space shuttle/station and, if so, to what extent do we wish to engage foreign participation? You should discuss this with Ed David at an early opportunity. The first part of the issue is primarily a budget question, but the second part stems from varying interpretations of what the President really wants in the way of space co-operation. The readings differ with the players.

RECOMMENDATIONS: 1. That you read the issues paper at Tab A.

2. That you discuss foreign participation in the Space Transportation System with Ed David.

APPROVE

DISAPPROVE

SEE ME

Tab A

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

ISSUE: Should the United States adopt a less rigid position regarding the provision of launch services for European regional communications satellites in return for substantial European commitment to the US Space Transportation System (STS)?

BACKGROUND:

Program description and status. The Space Transportation System, now in the development stage, consists of a re-usable space booster, an orbiting space station, and possibly a space tug, which would have the capability of transporting payloads from near-earth orbit to high altitude geostationary orbit.

The shuttle is a new concept for putting scientific and technological payloads into space at costs far lower than we presently pay per pound of payload.

Automated spacecraft can be built with more conventional structural design and more off-the-shelf equipment. Also, when an experiment is completed, the shuttle will bring back the spacecraft from its orbit, and a new experiment installed, thus saving the cost of building a new vehicle. The same would be true of communications satellites or weather satellites that go wrong.

The shuttle system is a type of rocket transportation designed to operate for multiple missions. It will do away with the large stable of different boosters the United States now maintains because it will be able to put into space both automated, unmanned vehicles and scientists and engineers, and return them to the ground base when their missions are completed. They will land like airplanes on runways, and just as easily. It is a concept that will revolutionize space transportation, paving the way for increased use and usefulness of space to mankind.

The FY 1972 budget contains $100 million for a) proceeding with detailed design and development of the engine for a space shuttle and b) continuing design (but not development) for the shuttle air frame. While the Administration has thus allowed NASA to continue the shuttle program on an incremental basis in FY 1972, the Administration has not committed itself to developing and procuring an operational space shuttle transportation system. Such a commitment would probably cost in the range of $8-12 billion over the next 8-10 years. NASA’s very preliminary cost projection through FY 1976 is as follows (millions of dollars):

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976

Budget authority 100 400 900 1,400 1,850

The basis for foreign participation in the STS. In 1969 a Task Group led by Vice President Agnew submitted recommendations on space programs for the next ten to fifteen years, placing special emphasis on the space program’s international implications. The Task Group identified a number of areas in which international cooperation would be desirable, such as manned flight, applications of space technology, and scientific research.

In March 1970, the President established the future goals of our space program as exploration, scientific knowledge, and practical application. He made greater international cooperation a specific objective. The President expressed the particular hope that existing international cooperation on scientific payloads could be extended to cooperation on larger satellites and in astronaut crews. The Administrator of NASA echoed the call for cooperation during visits to the capitals of Western Europe, Canada, Japan, and Australia, where he sought to interest other governments in participating in our post-Apollo program—particularly in the development and use of a new space transportation system and a manned space station. Western European countries responded with considerable interest, and a series of meetings concerning the political and technical aspects of their participation began in mid-1970.

Most recently, in his Annual Foreign Policy Report for 1971, the President said: “Space is already a matter of broad international cooperation. We have some 250 agreements with 74 countries covering space cooperation.

“And space has already been put to the service of man in the new global communications systems and in weather monitoring systems. But this is only a beginning. Space is the only area of which it can literally be said that the potential for cooperation is infinite.

“We have opened virtually all of our NASA. space projects to international participation. I have asked NASA to explore in the most positive way the possibilities for substantial participation by Western Europe, Japan, Canada, and Australia in our post-Apollo programs. The result is uncertain, for there are very real difficulties to be solved. We will continue our efforts to meet these problems, for a successful international program of space exploration could set a precedent of profound importance. ”

Negotiations with the Europeans. In addition to numerous informal discussions with European space officials, we have had two meetings in Washington with ministerial-level representation from the European Space Conference (ESC). At both of these meetings—one in September of last year and the other on the 11th and 12th of February, 1971—the delegations were headed by Minister Theo Lefevre, President of the ESC, and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson.

These discussions ranged over such subjects as policies relating to technology transfer, the definition of “substantial European participation” (10% of the program costs), management responsibilities, and US guarantees to Europe for provision of launching services for regional telecommunications satellites both before and after the advent of an operational space shuttle. It is this last topic that has generated considerable smoke and some heat.

The US position has been that we will assure launch services for those European projects that are “… for any peaceful purposes consistent with relevant international agreements”. The INTELSAT arrangements to be taken up for approval of the membership at the final Plenipotentiary meeting opening on 14 April 1971 are germane to the US formulation. If a European communications satellite is technically compatible with INTELSAT and if two-thirds of the INTELSAT Assembly vote in favor of the proposal, there would then be no basis for opposition by the consortium. In that event we would be prepared to provide launch services. If a two-thirds vote were not achieved, then the US would evaluate the case on its merits and launch, or not launch, depending upon our evaluation of the probable economic impact on INTELSAT.

The Europeans have expressed great dissatisfaction with the US position. They point out that a negative finding by the Assembly would be merely “advisory” and that, were the US to deny launch services on the basis of such an opinion, it would put the US in the position of being the sole judge of what is best for the Europeans. This measure of control is particularly repugnant to the French and to Lefevre, who appears to be philosophically aligned with his neighbors. The Europeans are completely agreeable to our two broad conditions for launch—that is, for peaceful purposes and consistency with international agreement. They insist, however, in having the right to interpret international agreement in accordance with their own lights.

In the face of a negative INTELSAT finding, but after the joint construction of the STS, the US has agreed to sell an STS for launch by the Europeans at their own facility. NASA has estimated for the Europeans that the cost to construct an independent STS launch facility would run several hundred million dollars. Therefore, the Europeans feel this last offer is not a realistic alternative.

Another problem that has not been explicitly discussed is what the U.S. would do if part way through the development it canceled the STS, leaving Europe with its own partially completed element of the STS and no guaranteed launch for its telecommunications satellites.

There is room for further negotiation, but without some relaxation of our stated position, strong pressures will arise in Europe to proceed with development of their own launcher—Europa III. Under these circumstances, any European commitment to the STS program would probably be done on a nation-by-nation basis, outside the framework of the European Space Conference, and at a considerably reduced financial scale.

Projection of Booster Requirements for European Payloads

European Space Missions. The Europeans forecast the following satellite missions over the next decade, as part of either the collective program (ESRO, ESC) or of national or multi-lateral programs.

Type of Mission Number of Flights Booster Class

Telecommunications 8-11 Thor-Delta

3-4 Atlas-Centaur

Scientific payloads 20-30 Thor-Delta

1-2 Atlas-Centaur

Aeronautical services 2-3 Thor-Delta

Meteorology 1-5 Thor-Delta

Space applications (technology, earth resources, geodesy satellites) 3-4 Unspecified, but presumably Thor-Delta

These missions total 40 to 60 launches, of which all but 10% will use Thor-Delta class boosters. Since the Europeans have already built a similar class booster (Europa II) and its launch facility, it can be assumed that they are capable of launching these missions without US cognizance. The current problem therefore revolves around the availability of Atlas-Centaur class boosters to launch the 4-6 European missions requiring greater thrust. Although these missions are only 10% of the entire mission complement, they represent the predominant European interest in space, viz, telecommunications satellites.

European Telecommunications Satellites. The main plans center around a satellite system in geosynchronous, equatorial orbit to connect 20 European and near European cities by telephone and television, and to extend TV coverage to some other areas in the general region. The telephonic traffic estimate runs from 3000 circuits in 1980 to 20, 000 circuits in 1990, plus two TV channels and several audio channels. The program is estimated to cost $450M by 1980.

The satellites necessary to perform these functions will weigh 1500-2000 lbs., and will require an Atlas-Centaur or Titan IIIB-Centaur class booster to put them in geosynchronous orbit. The Europeans are tentatively undertaking the development of such a booster, designated Europa III.

Europa III. Europa III as now planned will be a two stage, 355,000 lb. rocket capable of putting about 2000 lbs. into synchronous orbit. The launch will be from a pad to be added to the existing launch facility in French Guiana. Consensus is that there are no technical difficulties that would preclude the construction of this system by the European nations. The cost of the project is estimated to be $500M, but it is conceded that the cost could easily be 50% more. So far only study money has been spent (the order of $10M), but a decision to go into the hardware stage will have to be made within the year if the operational data of 1978 is to be met. France, Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands are currently funding the program, but with-out UK participation it is unlikely that Europa III will be built. All of the Europeans favor a regional telecommunications space system. Thus, it is believed that when convinced there is no less expensive alternative, UK and Italy will support Europa III in order to have the system. But first they want to explore fully the possibility of buying the appropriate US booster.

European Participation in the US Space Transportation System (STS).

An attractive alternative to building Europa III is to buy US boosters during the 1970’s and the STS after that. To gain access to US boosters and also to share in the new technology inherent in the development of the STS, the Europeans are considering our invitation to participate financially and technically in the construction of the STS. The cost (about $1B) would be comparable to that of Europa III and the Europeans would end up as partners with us in a larger, more flexible system built with the technology of the 1970’s, rather than duplicating a more limited booster that will be almost 20 years old at the time it goes operational.

Information on INTELSAT

INTELSAT was organized on an interim basis in 1964 largely on our initiative, with our technology, and with the US signatory, COMSAT, putting up over 50 percent of the investment. It has been extraordinarily successful. Eleven countries participated initially. In six years the number of partner-members has grown to 77 countries. Yugoslavia is thus far the only Communist nation in the system. A half dozen more countries are on the point of joining.

INTELSAT is the first cooperative peaceful use of outer space for everyday commercial purposes.

An object over the equator at a distance of 22,300 miles moves synchronously with the earth’s rotation and thus hovers “stationary” over one-third of the globe. INTELSAT has geostationary communication satellites at 22,300 miles above the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Ocean basins, from where they can “see” and link up member countries that have ground stations. Some 50 ground stations are presently in operation in 30 countries. By late 1972 there will be 70 ground stations in operation in 50 countries.

The satellites are capable of transmitting any kind of electronic message: telephone, telegraph, computer data, facsimile. They carried, live, the television pictures of the moon landing to the largest audience in human history, over half a billion people. The system has particular significance for developing nations, providing them with low-cost, international public telecommunications. For example, you can now put a call through to Santiago, Chile, in three minutes which formerly required three days. Since INTELSAT’s first communications satellite, “Early Bird”, went into orbit in 1965, charges for international telephone calls have been reduced by between 25% and 50%.

By provision of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, the Communications Satellite Corporation (COMSAT) is the chosen instrument to develop commercial satellite communications. COMSAT is the United States’ signatory to the INTELSAT Interim Arrangements and also serves as Manager of the system. With our large vote and COMSAT as Manager, the United States has dominated the system.

INTELSAT is a business operation. It is, actually, an international public utility, jointly owned by the 77 partner-members. The amount of a member’s investment is related to his use of the system. In the years 1964-1970, the cumulative gross capital expenditures on the satellite system by the 77 members was $271 million. The US share (and voting power) is currently about 52% or $142 million. Ninety-two percent of the total expenditures went to US contractors. There is no US Government money in INTELSAT. America’s share is contributed entirely by COMSAT, a private corporation.

The INTELSAT expenditures do not include the cost of some 50 ground stations which have been paid for by each of the 30 countries in which they are located. Averaging $5 million per station, the total investment in ground stations is $250 million. (US manufacturers have produced over 50% of the hardware in these stations).

The INTELSAT system has brought modern and direct communication to many areas of the world which previously had none. Formerly, for example, communications between the US and Spain were limited to two indirect voice-circuits across the Pyrenees. Today, via satellite, there are in excess of 50 direct circuits between Spain and the US. The cost of a three-minute telephone call between New York and Spain in 1964 was $12. Today the cost is $6.75. Similar examples could be cited for almost every developing country with access to a ground station.

The negotiations for “definitive arrangements” have proved long and difficult. Eight sessions of the Conference have been held since February 1969 with a final Plenipotentiary meeting now scheduled for April/May. Not one but two agreements are involved: an inter-governmental agreement, to be signed by representatives of the member governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by the telecommunications entities (the postal, telephone, and telegraph departments of other governments, COMSAT for the US).

On December 18, 1970, the Working Group, consisting of delegations from 40 countries, completed its work on drafts of the two agreements. The texts contain relatively few bracketed alternatives. (The major issues have been resolved; a few troublesome lesser issues remain.) Thus the prospects appear favorable that the final Plenipotentiary meeting, scheduled to open on April 14, 1971, for 4 1/2 weeks, will succeed in reaching agreement.

When the permanent agreement is reached, much of the world will be linked together for instantaneous telephone, telegraph, TV, radio, facsimile, computer data transmission, and other modes of electronic communication.

DISCUSSION:

Arguments relating to a concerted US effort to bring Europe into a meaningful partnership in the Space Transportation System:

For: 1. Engaging the Europeans in a US program the size of the STS is certainly preferable to forcing them to develop a large space program of their own. Not only do the Europeans have both the technological and financial resources to make a joint venture mutually attractive, but such a program would bolster our political objectives of a closely-knit European community working in a cooperative relationship with the United States.

2. If we force the Europeans into the development of Europa III, they will have a launcher capability totally independent of the kind of US influence that could be brought to bear through partnership arrangement. They will then be able to fly regional telecommunications satellites that may cause economic harm to INTELSAT.

3. The pattern of cooperation set by a joint STS development can serve as a model for similar endeavors in other fields of science.

4. Since the US will undoubtedly base a decision to proceed with STS development on essentially national considerations—whether there is a European input or not—the contribution by Europe of 10% ($1 billion) of the program costs would be a financial bonus to the US taxpayer and could make the program more attractive to the Congress.

5. There has in recent years been a shift in attitudes of US private firms toward technology sharing. Although commerical co-operations often tend to believe that technology should be restricted to keep others from competing with them, many large US firms have discovered that their international business depends upon the existence of foreign capabilities and skills to which they can relate. In other words, if the technological gap between nations is too great in all areas, there can be no effective flow in either direction. The technological gap between Europe and the United States in the space field is large. It is in this sense that an Atlantic partnership in the development of an STS becomes particularly meaningful. If, together (even on a 90/10 basis), we execute an STS development with the Europeans, we can create a framework that may lead to partnership in all of those fields to which space will eventually relate.

6. Significant European participation could increase the cost-effectiveness of the STS through the increased use resulting from European mission requirements and payloads.

7. There are, in addition, benefits to scientific space research. If the shuttle development is successful, and the Europeans thereby possess their own launch capability, we will have created a stronger partner in Europe for scientific investigation of space. This aspect has been subordinated in all the discussions with the Europeans to matters of industrial know-how transfer, launch availability for COMSATs and other applications, etc.. but it is nonetheless true and should not be ignored.

Against: 1. Some argue that we are giving the Europeans too much technology for too little return, to the detriment of already ailing US aerospace firms. Also, it is clear that, to the extent that European dollars are spent on European contractors’ efforts in support of this program, these are dollars (and jobs) that will not be made available to their US counterparts. It is possible to speculate that future US business opportunities in other parts of the world may be undercut or underbid by European firms marketing their newly-developed technical competence elsewhere or by bidding in competition with US firms on satellite fabrication jobs for other non-space countries, knowing that a US launch is assured.

2. There is a probability that in return for a 10% share of program costs, the Europeans would demand a disproportionately large share of program management responsibilities.

3. It should be recognized that management problems in conducting this program across the Atlantic, with several European nations involved, and with each seeking to achieve the maximum degree of domestic return from its investment, will be more complicated and almost certainly less efficient than if the entire project were done in the United States by US firms. This lack of efficiency will entail somewhat greater costs; hence one cannot speak of a full US saving of the billion dollars in developing the STS. Just what these inefficiencies will amount to in dollars is difficult to estimate.

Arguments relating to adherence by the US to our announced position of qualified assurances to the Europeans for launch services:

For: 1. From the time the Communications Satellite Act became law through the entire period of the Interim Arrangements it has been uniform US government policy, spearheaded and most strongly advocated by the Department of State, to foster a single global satellite communications system and to oppose regional satellite systems separate from INTELSAT, A relaxation of the US position in order to accommodate European aspirations for a regional satellite system would be counter to our policy.

2. In view of the expressed opposition to regional systems on the part of most of the “developing countries”, any action by the US which could be read as a “softening” of our support for INTELSAT could put road blocks in the way of the forthcoming Plenipotentiary conference. It could be taken as a sign of bad faith on the part of the US and as a further example of how the “big boys” are ready to make deals at the expense of the far more numerous developing countries. While it would be too much to say that this act by itself would disrupt the conference or cause it to fail, it is clearly no exaggeration to postulate that it would make agreement much more difficult and leave the US open to serious charges of bad faith.

3. The Europeans should be motivated toward post-Apollo participation by a wide variety of technological and social benefits. We should not have to “buy” their participation by yielding to European demands which have as a basis narrow economic motives.

4. We have gone as far as we can go toward meeting Europe’s desires within the framework of what we recognize as our responsibilities to INTELSAT. To go beyond this framework would not only create problems internationally, but would cause severe domestic reaction from Congress and those government agencies having an institutional interest in a strong INTELSAT consortium.

5. The USG is not yet committed to the SST program, whereas our international telecommunications policy and programs are established and have great economic potential. To risk jeopardizing a multi-billion dollar business for program yet to be defined is illogical.

6. Even if we were to now conclude an arrangement for launch of a European telecommunications satellite that is acceptable to the interim governing body of INTELSAT, it is virtually certain that when the definitive arrangements come into effect, the case could be re-opened before the INTELSAT Assembly.

Against: 1. It would be presumptuous of the US to function as Europe’s conscience. The Europeans are entitled to make their own interpretation of the international accords to which they are parties.

2. INTELSAT is a going concern, paramount in its field, and not in need of special protection against regional systems that would be at best, only marginally competitive.

3. After the concerted efforts to engage the Europeans in the post-Apollo planning, to now adopt a rigid position which would foreclose their opportunities for participation would lose credibility for NASA in its overall international program. Moreover, the credibility of the Government’s entire program of international scientific and technological cooperation would be questioned.

5. If the US holds to its position on launch services, the Europeans will probably respond by proceeding with the development of Europa III. This could lead to a regional telecommunications satellite that would operate to the detriment of INTELSAT.

5. Since Japan has been assured conventional US launch possibilities from its territory without a US override in the case of negative advisories by INTELSAT, it would seem that we must accord Europe the same accommodation.

POSSIBLE COMPROMISE SOLUTIONS

1. A. The European space conference should be encouraged to complete the studies it is undertaking and, according to the present timetable, submit a detailed communications satellite proposal informally to this government when it is ready—probably late this year or early next year.

B. This government would undertake to give a prompt review—60 to 90 days—and if it conforms to the informal example given by Lefevre, commit itself to support the proposal in INTELSAT.

B. The Europeans could then be encouraged to submit the proposal to Interim Communications Satellite Committee (CSC) for review and study. (By that time—the middle of 1972—the Definitive Arrangements should have been negotiated and many nations should have adhered to the new arrangements. The timetable for getting the necessary adherences would probably run between 1 and 2 years—more realistically around 18 months.) With our support and the European support on the ICSC, the chances are very favorable for a strong majority vote for a favorable recommendation.

D. With this support and with representations to other countries made by us, as well as the European group, the stage would be set for prompt consideration, and hopefully approval, by the Assembly at its first meeting sometime in 1973.

E. This would be very considerably in advance of any presently scheduled launch date for a European satellite.

2. A. We would undertake the following commitments with respect to the launching of European payloads from non-US territory in vehicles purchased from the US or built abroad on license from the US: We would agree to the sale of appropriate US vehicles for launching abroad and/or the licensing of their construction in Europe under the conditions that they be used for peaceful purposes, that use by or technical disclosure to non-participants in the program be subject to mutual agreement, and that European obligations under international agreements be met. In such cases, the decision to launch in the face of failure to obtain a two-thirds endorsement by INTELSAT would rest entirely with Europe. The types of launch vehicles we have in mind are Thor-Delta configurations, Atlas-Centaur, and the Space Shuttle.

B. These policies would not make it necessary for Europe, unless it wished to do so, to invest in developing its own launch facilities for US vehicles. So long as US-launched vehicles were available to meet European requirements, Europe would not have to undertake such costs. These assurances with respect to launchings abroad could stand as a contingency in the event that Europe considered US-launched services in-adequate. The purchase of vehicles and the development of the necessary launch sites could be encompassed within the development time required for a new satellite system.

EUROPEAN REACTIONS TO LEFEVRE MISSION

Paris:

“… For France the only real point at issue is launcher availability and US interpretation of INTELSAT Article 14.”

“… US position on launcher availability… although disappointing, did not come as a surprise.”

Brussels:

“ … US Cannot have advantages of European cooperation without disadvantages. If US wishes to have European confidence, it must also trust and respect European partners. Europe cannot accept US ‘trusteeship’ unilateral decision on whether European projects accord with INTELSAT agreement…. It is too early to talk about failure since there is still some hope for success in negotiations.”

“ … US is treating its allies in high-handed manner, and is jealously guarding its privileges.”

Bonn:

“German officials were surprised and shocked by what they universally described as the ‘hard line’ taken by the US during discussions with the second Lefevre delegation. They expressed fear that it will be impossible for Europe to participate in the post-Apollo program and dismay that Europe will find it necessary to develop an independent launcher capacity which would be wasteful and also a divisive element in US-European cooperation.”

Bern:

“ … Interpretation of application Article 14 might be subject for reconvened INTELSAT Plenipotentiary in April. ”

London:

“… Something seems to have happened which casts doubt on US desire for European participation.”

Rome:

“… Italians sadly expect following consequences of Washington meeting: A. Considerable difficulties at April INTELSAT plenum.

B. Europa III will be built as European project. ”

“… Believe that France, and apparently Germany, deliberately misinterpreting US position on launcher availability, thus putting onusifor possible failure on post-Apollo discussions on US and justifying the building of Europa III. ”

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject File, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. An extensive report of the meeting with the Europeans is in telegram 30947 to Bern et. al., February 24. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US)

257. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 257. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 16, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

Minister Lefevre has sent Alex Johnson a letter (Tab A) requesting USG views on a number of areas relating to post-Apollo space cooperation. These areas include (1) technical opportunities open to European space industry, (2) management and financial arrangements, (3) access to technical data, and (4) the availability of US launch services for European payloads.

Once the US views are made known, the governments of the member countries of the European Space Conference will, according to Lefevre, take a decision on the question of collective European participation in the post-Apollo program. This should occur “during the next few weeks”.

We have gotten ourselves into a peculiar position where we are negotiating formally (and stiffly) at a political level over a specific program (the Space Transportation System) which has within our own government neither been fully defined nor fully approved. Not only is the venue awkward but the pace seems to have been set by the “Red Queen”—faster and faster with scant hope for true progress. We are, in fact, facing the danger that in our negotiations what now may be noted as misunderstandings could soon turn into deep seated and destructive bitterness.

We should shift gears and look at the whole program more reflectively.

To do this there is a first requirement to somehow accommodate the legitimate short-term objective of Europeans with regard to a regional telecommunications satellite. If we are satisfied that the system they propose will not function to the detriment of INTELSAT, we should develop a formulation which will assure them that the satellite will be launched without their having to go to the expense of developing a European launch vehicle. We could then address the longer term aspects of post-Apollo cooperation at a pace that is not driven by immediate tactical needs.

State is prepared to take this approach. Before answering Lefevre Secretary Irwin will send over for consideration a paper originating with the Ad Hoc Group formed by the Under Secretaries Committee in response to NSSM 72 (Space Cooperation). The regular membership of the Group will be expanded to include those agencies such as OTP and FCC whose views must be obtained to insure balance. The paper will not seek to lock us in to program decisions, but instead to suggest an approach whereby a program of beneficial cooperation with the Europeans can evolve.

I expect you will want to issue an NSDM in response to the recommendations of the Under Secretaries Committee. In anticipation of that action, I believe you should consider an approach to post-Apollo cooperation that is somewhat skewed from what has been our course to date.

A strong argument can be made that we ought to broaden our perspective and to think in terms that encompass more than the space shuttle. Accepting the premise that cooperation with the Europeans should be, to the extent possible, mutually beneficial, several points need to be mentioned regarding a program that is oriented along a single vector—the space shuttle.

-- European cooperation should not ride or fall on their decision with respect to the shuttle. The program currently lacks the definition necessary to provide a sound basis for decision, and other programs could have considerable promise for both partners.

-- Europe may not be prepared to operate effectively as an integrated team member in the shuttle development. As a consequence there could be program delays and unanticipated US costs.

-- The shuttle is really nothing more than a truck. The payoffs in technological advancement and scientific knowledge lie in the space station and its experiment modules. These modules could be developed incrementally in accordance with an agreed European priority, or individually as each nation evaluates its own requirements.

In summary, while not discouraging the Europeans from participating in the shuttle development, we could conceivably evolve a more satisfactory pattern of cooperation by suggesting that they focus more on payload and less on the launch vehicle.

A. way to test the water would be to explore the concept with FRG Science Minister Leussink when he comes here in April. He is very interested in the post-Apollo program. You may wish to discuss this idea with Ed David when you meet on 18 March.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you discuss with Dr. David the possibility of broadening European interests in post-Apollo cooperation by suggesting other attractive avenues as alternatives to the space shuttle.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Limited Official Use. Sent for action. Kissinger wrote the following note on the first page: “OK-Put on agenda with David. Should see him soon.” The note was dated March 18. Attached at Tab A but not published was a copy of telegram 774 from Brussels, March 6.

258. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 258. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 17, 1971.

I would like to offer the following thoughts in preparation for our discussion about Post-Apollo cooperation with the European Space Organization.

I see the following negative factors: 1) There is likely to be substantial high technology transfer to the Europeans in return for a small (10%) European contribution.

2) The management of the shuttle project will be complicated by the necessity to satisfy partners before decisions are made.

3) The proposed arrangements will lock us into the shuttle program, depriving us of the flexibility to tailor the program to our evolving needs.

4) The European financial contribution is of dubious value since the cost of doing business with them as partners will be greater and because we will probably have to undertake back-up programs for those elements or systems being developed abroad.

5) The proposed arrangement develops competition for our own commercial exploitation of our satellite technology.

These were the factors which led me and Peter Flanigan to conclude that a joint effort with the Europeans is not in our best interests. In my conversation with the President on February 22nd I got the impression that this was in line with his general thinking. I am looking forward to having your advice and views so that we can determine how to proceed.

Edward E. David, Jr.
Science Adviser

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Sensitive; Eyes Only. A copy was sent to Flanigan.

259. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 259. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, March 23, 1971.

Subject:

European Participationin Post-Apollo Space Program

As you know, since late 1969 Dr. Paine and subsequently Dr. Low, on the staff of NASA, have been exploring with Western Europe, Canada, Japan and Australia the possibility of their substantial participation in the post-Apollo Space Transportation System Program. The Western European countries have expressed considerable interest. Consequently, there have been two political-level meetings with the European Space Conference represented by Theo Lefevre (former Belgian Prime Minister) and the delegation headed by Alex Johnson on our side. The last meeting was held on February 11 and 12 here in Washington, and we are now in the process of preparing a written statement of our views for transmittal within the next ten days or so to the European Space Conference

The most difficult political issue that has emerged from these discussions is the European insistence that if they give up their own launcher program to participate in our post-Apollo program they require an assurance that we will launch regional telecommunication satellites of interest to them. On our side the problem is how to do so without derogating our responsibility to our other partners and to ourselves for the success of the single global INTELSAT system,

Much hard bargaining will be required before a basis for the resolution of this issue is reached and we do not underestimate the difficulties. We have felt that prospects for success are reasonable and plan to continue our efforts to engage European participation in the program. However, before entering the next phase of the negotiations, I have felt it prudent to check with you to ensure our efforts continue to be in accord with your views.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. No drafting information appears on the letter. A typed notation on the memorandum reads: “Guidance provided in memo from Mr. Kissinger to Secretary dated August 18, 1971.” In a March 18 memorandum to Pollack, Rein objected to a draft of this memorandum on the grounds that it did not adequately frame the issues for the President. “The real question,” Rein stated, “is the extent to which the President is willing to permit our negotiating position in any Qseries negotiations’ on launch guarantees to threaten conflict with out Intelsat obligations or endanger the economic viability of the Intelsat system.” (Ibid.)

260. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 260. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 24, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

This memorandum supplements your talking points for your scheduled meeting with Dr. David this evening.

Two developments have arisen which you should be aware of in conjunction with Item 5 on your agenda—Post-Apollo Space Cooperation.

Secretary Rogers has sent a memorandum (Tab A) to the President advising him of the status of the post-Apollo negotiations and seeking assurance that the State/NASA efforts are on the right track. The purpose of the memorandum is to obtain clarification of the President’s wishes with respect to post-Apollo cooperation.

My initial reaction is to suggest to you that we are not in a position at this time to ask the President either to commit to a specific program or to make any sort of decision which weighs one program against the other—that is, INTELSAT versus post-Apollo. If such decisions are needed farther down the road, they have to be based on analytical work that hasn’t even begun.

(FYI: The main reason for Secretary Rogers’ concern is that he has been told that Ed David and Peter Flanigan are convinced that the President is not a strong supporter of the post-Apollo program, despite his public record to the contrary.)

A meeting of European ministers responsible for telecommunications matters that took place on Monday (22 March). According to State, the ministers reached a consensus on a modification to the INTELSAT “definitive arrangements” which, if it can be sold to the INTELSAT conference beginning in April, will go a long way toward removing the stumbling block regarding launch services.

In brief, the formulation is this: major questions such as whether a regional telecommunications satellite will cause economic harm to the consortium will be decided by the INTELSAT Board of Governors

(where weighted voting applies—i.e., the US will have roughly 40% based on a usage/contribution formula). This vote can be overruled only by a 2/3 negative vote in the INTELSAT Assembly (one nation, one vote).

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is Document 259.

261. Memorandum for the Record 261. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, March 26, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Meeting between Dr. Kissinger and Dr. David, March 24, 1971

Dr. Kissinger met in his office with Dr. David, OST, at 1830 on 24 March 1971 to discuss matters of mutual interest. Colonel Robert M. Behr, NSC Staff, was also present.

The notes below reflect the substance of the matters discussed. They are grouped subjectively in accordance with a previously agreed agenda.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to cooperation in space.]

Post-Apollo Cooperation with Western Europe

Dr. Kissinger cautioned that one should not attempt to deduce Presidential decisions from casual conversation. The President makes program decisions only after careful consideration of memoranda addressed to specific issues. In the case of space cooperation, Dr. Kissinger said that he did not recall the President making any firm commitments to any particular program, other than a broadly conceptual observation to Dr. Paine at the time of the Apollo XI recovery that “international cooperation” would be a good thing.

Colonel Behr provided a brief compendium of the President’s and Dr. Kissinger’s public statements on post-Apollo cooperation.

Dr. David expressed concern about the vector of the current post-Apollo negotiations. His main reservation was that the Europeans could acquire high value-low cost (relatively speaking) technology and then, through US beneficence, achieve a competitive position that could damage U.S. industry. Peter Flanigan and John Ehrlichman were said to agree with this view.

Dr. Kissinger said that we should not lose sight of the foreign policy benefits to be derived from international cooperation in space, but he agreed that we shouldn’t advocate a program we really don’t want.

His view was that we would be better off to give the Europeans beneficial access to our launchers rather than tying them into a program where they pay for technology transfer. We should not be dependent upon them for financial support of our programs.

What is needed is an intelligent program that we both want—one in which we can cooperate in the extension of knowledge.

Both agreed that we should not break off negotiations with the Europeans but instead to slow the pace and to devise a program which can be defended on a cost/benefit basis. We should not, however, soften our present negotiations position. Further study is required and no program decision should be made at this time.

Dr. Kissinger asked for a NSSM to be prepared calling for a technical cost/benefit analysis of the various alternative ways of cooperating in space with Europe. The study should be done by a Working Group chaired by Dr. David for ultimate consideration by the Senior Review Group, who would then apply political judgments to the technical analysis. The study should be done within the Executive Office of the President and circulated to the bureaucracy before consideration by the SRG.

Dr. David agreed. The details are to be worked out by the NSC and OST Staffs.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to cooperation in space.]

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 270, Agency Files, OST, Vol. III. Secret. No drafting information appears on the memorandum.

262. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 262. Memorandum From Robert M. Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, April 2, 1971.

SUBJECT:

European Participation in Post-Apollo Space Program

Secretary Rogers has sent a memorandum (Tab B) to the President seeking guidance before proceeding further in negotiations with the European Space Conference regarding cooperation in the US Post-Apollo space program.

Following a short review of the negotiating history, the Secretary identifies the major political issue as that of the European insistence on guaranteed launch services should they give up their own launcher program in anticipation of participation in the US space shuttle development (if and when approved). He notes that, while the negotiations will be difficult, the prospects for success are such that he intends to proceed, given the President’s “go ahead”.

The reason for Mr. Roger’s apparent nervousness is not his uncertainty about the nature of Presidential guidance on space cooperation. Both State and NASA consider that the record (Tab C) of the President’s and your statements on the subject are clearly supportive of the course of action they have undertaken. Instead, Mr. Rogers’ concern stems from alleged reports that the President, Peter Flanigan and Dr. David are opposed to a program of cooperation with the Europeans that would involve joint funding and management.

The issue, therefore, is not a question of defining bargaining counters to he used in “horse-trading” with the Europeans, but whether we should, as a matter of principle, continue our efforts to involve the Europeans in large-scale, technically complex space programs.

In considering how to respond to Secretary Rogers the following factors are pertinent: --The development of a space shuttle is not yet an approved program within the USG.

--The modalities of European participation have not been determined.

--European interests tend more toward the commercial applications of space (telecommunications) than, pure scientific research.

--There is reason to doubt that the Europeans can reconcile national differences and structure a supranational organization capable of cooperating soon on a counterpart basis with NASA.

--The European demands, to date, reflect a dual, unreality. They want more than we would prudently offer in a cooperative venture and they ascribe our motive for cooperation to be more commercial than brotherly.

Notwithstanding the somewhat negative cost of the foregoing factors, I believe that we should continue our dialogue with the Europeans, but in a manner more systematic, unemotional and deliberate than in the past.

Essentially, the primary value of a program of cooperation with the Europeans lies in its political potential. We would approach the negotiations with our objectives oriented less toward specific hardware systems and more toward bolstering our allies technology base. In doing so we may suffer some short-term losses but insure long-term gains.

At Tab I is a memorandum for the President which conveys Secretary Rogers’ request for guidance, explains the issue, and recommends a reply (Tab A) to Mr. Rogers. The reply confirms the President’s support for international cooperation in space and establishes the following guidelines for further negotiations with the Europeans: -- We should make no interim agreements that would prejudice an independent decision by the US on the desirability of shuttle development.

-- Further technical discussions on the possibilities of shuttle cooperation should be pursued to define (1) specific tasks, (2) management arrangements, (3) the degree of technology transfer, and (4) the rights of each side with respect to shuttle use.

--- Areas for cooperation other than a space shuttle should also be examined.

-- We should not tender either formal or informal assurances which could be construed as binding agreements until a mutually satisfactory definition of the basis for cooperation has been achieved.

Dr. David does not concur in the memorandum for Mr. Rogers at Tab A. He believes that we should at this point in time make a reversal of our past approach to the Europeans and permit the discussions to proceed only on the basis that joint management and funding options are excluded. His recommended reply to Secretary Rogers is at Tab A (1).

I do not agree with Dr. David for the following reasons: -- His view ignores the foreign policy implications of a strong technological partnership with our NATO allies.

--His views on technology transfer and joint management are largely intuitive. We should not abandon a course of action pursued over two years without good analysis to prove that it’s been a mistake.

--If avenues of cooperation other than the shuttle have promise, we should not foreclose them by a premature affront to European sensibilities.

RECOMMENDATIONS: 1. That you sign the memorandum to the President at Tab I.

2. That, if approved by the President, you sign the memorandum to Secretary Rogers at Tab A.

Tab I
Draft Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, undated

Secretary Rogers has sent you a memorandum (Tab B) seeking your approval and guidance before proceeding further in negotiations with the Europeans on cooperation with us in the Post-Apollo space program.

The negotiations thus far have centered around the possibilities for joint development (90% US resources; 10% European) of a space shuttle, which would be a re-usable space booster having a wide variety of mission applications. Although the program has yet to be approved within the USG, the Europeans are asking for answers to specific questions regarding US “terms” for cooperation. These questions and their answers may be premature in the face of our own lack of commitment to the shuttle and the absence of a clear understanding either here or abroad of how the Europeans would interface with our program, should it progress to an approved project status.

My view is that the discussions with the Europeans have become too specifically “single system” oriented; they have been elevated to a political level before a sound technical and institutional basis for cooperation has been designed; and, finally, they stand to fall because emotion and commercialism have introduced discordant notes into what should be calm and deliberate talks seeking to define a program of lasting, mutual benefit.

There are, moreover, reasons to doubt that the Europeans can soon organize among themselves to create an effective technical agency which would serve as NASA’s counterpart. Additionally, Dr. David. believes the costs to us that might be associated with joint management and limited technology transfer could outweigh the benefits of a cooperative program. While these reservations may have substance, it is only through frank and detailed technical discussions that their validity can be ascertained.

Notwithstanding these reservations and possible deficiencies, I believe we should continue to pursue our dialogue with the Europeans because of the overriding need to strengthen our NATO ties and to help our allies achieve a technology base that can contribute to the fulfillment of our collective responsibilities. We should, however, proceed along a slightly different tack—one on which careful program definition is the absolute precursor to any formal partnership arrangements.

At Tab A is a draft response to Secretary Rogers which I will forward subject to your approval. The memorandum confirms your support for continued pursuit of opportunities for international cooperation in space and establishes the following guidelines for further negotiations with the Europeans: --We should make no interim agreements that would prejudice an independent decision by the US on the desirability of shuttle development.

-- Further technical discussions on the possibilities of shuttle cooperation should be pursued to define (1) specific tasks, (2) management arrangements, (3) the degree of technology transfer, and (4) the rights of each side with respect to shuttle use.

-- Areas for cooperation other than a space shuttle should also be examined.

--We should not tender either formal or informal, assurances which could be construed, as binding agreements until a mutually satisfactory definition of the basis for cooperation has been achieved.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the memorandum to Secretary Rogers at Tab A which affirms your support for continued efforts to engage the Europeans in a program of space cooperation, but in a manner that does not obligate the United States until a satisfactory basis for cooperation has been reached.

APPROVE

DISAPPROVE

SEE ME

Tab A
Draft Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, undated

In response to your memorandum of March 23, the President has asked me to confirm his support for continued pursuit of opportunities for international cooperation in space. Since previous discussions have not provided a basis for a final decision on European participation in space shuttle development, the following factors should guide your future efforts in continuing negotiations with the Europeans on Post-Apollo space cooperation.

1. There is no commitment on the part of this nation to development of a space shuttle system. Until such a commitment is made, there should he no agreements or assurances, stated or implied, that would prejudice an independent decision by the United States on the desirability of shuttle development.

2. Major unresolved questions about the character and degree of European participation are critical to a final decision by the United States regarding possible cooperation on a shuttle. In particular, there is a need for further technical definition including (1) specific tasks to be accomplished by each side, (2) management arrangements, (3) the degree of technology transfer, and (4) the rights of each side with respect to shuttle use. Evaluation of these technical factors would provide a basis for decision by both sides on whether to proceed with this specific cooperative program.

3. We should not tender either formal or informal assurances which can be construed as binding agreements until a mutually satisfactory definition of the basis for cooperation has been achieved.

4. Whatever the outcome regarding U.S. shuttle development, the President wishes to reaffirm his desire for increasing space cooperation with the Europeans. Accordingly, in future technical discussions, areas for cooperation other than a space shuttle should also be examined.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnefeldt. Tab B is Document 259. Tab C was attached but not published. For the guidance as sent to Rogers, see Document 270. There is no indication that Kissinger saw the memorandum. A notation on the front page of the memorandum reads: “OBE”

263. Summary of Discussions 263. Summary of Discussions1

Washington, April 23, 1971, 6 p.m.

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation

On 23 April 1971 Dr. Kissinger chaired a discussion on post-Apollo space cooperation. The meeting was held in the White House situation room and was attended by the following individuals:

White House Staff Mr. Peter Flanigan

Dr. Clay T. Whitehead

NASA Dr. James Fletcher

Dr. George Low

OST Dr. Edward David

Dr. Norman Neureiter

NSC Colonel Robert M. Behr

After opening the meeting Dr. Kissinger asked for a review of the past negotiations with the Europeans on post-Apollo cooperation. Dr. Low outlined the substance of the US position taken in the two meetings which have been held with Minister Lefevre and his colleagues in the European Space Conference.

Dr. Kissinger stated that the main issue is whether a program of cooperation with the Europeans is desirable. If the President wishes to have a cooperative program of some substance, the US will have to provide launch services to the Europeans. If he decides against a program of co-operation, we will hold to a hard line on the provision of such services.

Dr. David noted, and the group generally agreed, that the primary motivation of the Europeans is to acquire US aerospace technology.

Mr. Flanigan said that the benefits to the Europeans will be totally disproportionate to their contribution. Moreover, the program described by Low was nothing like what the President wants. All that we need do to fulfill the President’s wishes is to arrange a symbolic gesture like flying a European astronaut in space.

Dr. Kissinger replied that the President has not given a great deal of thought to the various likely avenues of cooperation, but he does want something done with the Europeans that goes well beyond a cosmetic gesture.

Mr. Flanigan repeated his arguments about the penalties associated with the massive transfer of technology.

Dr. Whitehead supported Flanigan’s line of reasoning by stating that the President wants cooperative ventures to result in a net foreign policy benefit to the US. Our experience with INTELSAT should have taught us a lesson. A grandiose program (joint development of a space shuttle) like the group had been discussing would probably end up in a net loss in terms of international relations.

Dr. Kissinger asked Drs. David and Fletcher what is meant by “high technology transfer”. Neither was able to provide a good answer although both admitted an answer is very much needed.

Dr. Low asked the group to recognize that NASA’s actions to date represent what they thought the President wanted. Dr. Kissinger said he understood that to be the case.

Dr. Fletcher said that NASA is not in a position to dictate programs—only to suggest program options.

Dr. Kissinger then asked Dr. Fletcher to detail the various options open to us in addition to joint development of the shuttle.

Dr. Fletcher stated his opposition to an “integrated” program wherein the Europeans would. do sub-systems of the shuttle, but favored instead a separable program where the Europeans could do a complete task such as the space tug or a space station module.

Dr. David called attention to the question of launch services. Couldn’t we give the Europeans these services and try to interest them in programs other than the shuttle?

The consensus of the group was that the US should be forthcoming with regard to launch assurances, but that this view should not interfere with or cloud the on-going INTELSAT negotiations.

Dr. Kissinger asked NASA, in cooperation with OST, to prepare a paper (1) defining technology transfer and analyzing its implications and (2) describe the various possibilities for space cooperation with the Europeans in addition to the shuttle. The group would meet in two weeks to go over the NASA paper. Under Secretary Johnson would be invited to attend.

Colonel Behr asked Dr. Kissinger what he wanted to do about Secretary Rogers’ memorandum to the President. Dr. Kissinger said that an answer would have to wait until the NASA paper had been prepared, evaluated, and a program direction had been selected by the President.

The meeting then adjourned.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.Behr prepared talking points for Kissinger for this meeting. (Ibid.)

264. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 264. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, May 5, 1971.

SUBJECT:

House Discussions on Post-Apollo Cooperation with Europe—BRIEFING MEMORANDUM

Attached is a memorandum of talking points on the foreign policy considerations bearing on post-Apollo cooperation with Europe. These were prepared by. SCI and EUR for your use in the White House discussions which will take place, presumably next week, on this subject.

I hope it will be possible for Marty Hillenbrand and me to review this subject with you briefly at a 10:00 AM meeting on Monday, May 10.

Attachment

Talking Points for Ambassador Johnson on Post-Apollo Cooperation

1. Foreign Policy Considerations May be Decisive --The State Department believes cooperation with Europe in the development of the space transportation system would be of considerable value to relations with our European allies. In the absence of other decisive factors, foreign policy benefits may be determining in the decision on whether we should proceed with the proposed program of cooperation.

2. The Cooperative Program would Strengthen Ties with Europe --Our ties with Europe continue to be the cornerstone of our efforts to build a peaceful world.

--Europe’s industrial, economic and technological strength is critical to the existing balance of power, and Europe is making substantial progress toward unity, particularly in the economic sphere. As Europe gains in unity and economic strength it becomes all the more important that we aggressively seek closer ties in areas of advanced industry and technology, where cooperative efforts can continue to provide the Atlantic Alliance with a solid foundation of common economic interests. Space programs and space industries on both sides of the Atlantic are still flexible enough to accomodate themselves to meaningful cooperation. Achievements in space, particularly in the Post-Apollo program, offer highly visible and dramatic symbols of the fruits of partnership.

--Our negotiating position is strengthened by the fact that the post-Apollo program appeals to Europe’s strongly felt desire to stand in the front rank of technological development. A successful joint effort of this magnitude and importance would serve as a landmark in the new and more mature partnership we must achieve with the Europeans during the years ahead.

--Europe will have a space program of significant magnitude in the coming decade. Without post-Apollo cooperation, Europe’s program will be organized around France. We would have little input and little influence on such a program. Post-Apollo cooperation, on the other hand, would permit us to develop a common orientation and common goals. At the same time the Europeans could realize their national and regional goals while participating in an historic effort of world importance; our interest lies in this direction.

3. Set a Precedent for Cooperation in Other Areas --In other areas of advanced technology, such as the development of “breeder” reactors and uranium enrichment facilities, Western Europe is on the brink of deciding whether to advance in unison, perhaps in partnership with the United States, or whether to drift apart and pursue diverse goals. These decisions will have a profound, long term effect on Europe and on its relations with the USA. Successful multi-national cooperation in post-Apollo will improve our ability to influence Europe’s decisions in these other fields.

4. Urgency of Continuing Discussions --Resumption of post-Apollo discussions with the Europeans is a matter of some urgency. Our silence during the three months since the February meeting with Lefevre has caused much of the previous momentum to be lost. Friendly contacts in London and Bonn report that this silence reinforces the French contention that cooperation with the USA on acceptable terms is not a real possibility, and thereby strengthens the French campaign for the development of a completely independent European launch capability. If we are unable to resume negotiations fairly soon, the opportunity for engaging substantial European participation in the post-Apollo program may evaporate completely.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollack and cleared with James D. Phillips (EUR/RPE). Attached but not published was a compilation of Presidential public views on European cooperation.

265. Airgram A-420 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 265. Airgram A-420 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, May 20, 1971.

SUBJECT :

Soviet Space Effort

REF:

Department’s A-32, 3/12/72 (Collection requirement no. C-SI-1-55794)

After looking back carefully at the history of US-USSR relations in the outerspace field—seen against the backdrop of known Soviet policies—we are forced to the following conclusions about the future of this relationship.

The Soviets will continue to dangle before the United States the possibility of broad space cooperation in order to gain access to the special US technology which they need for their programs. Exchanges will be maintained at a level just high enough to obtain the desired information and with just enough external publicity to prevent disillusionment of the US public and government agencies. Contacts will not be permitted to develop to a point which might allow learning any details of the military aspects of the Soviet space program or which would risk tarnishing the image of Soviet space superiority over the US in the eyes of the Soviet people and foreign Communists.

I.

As previously, statements and actions will be carefully orchestrated to produce the desired effects in the US. Occasional unspecific intimations eventual “brotherhood in space” will be released when needed for a politically relaxant effect on the US public and Congress as well as to stimulate continued deliveries of technology.

The pattern of public relations prior to the recent launchings of “Salyut” and “Soyuz-10”, with variations as circumstances require, will doubtless be continued. Deliberately neglecting the well-used channel of official correspondence, an “open letter” signed by nineteen cosmonauts urging greater space cooperation with the US was published in Pravda on April 11 for easy pickup by US journalists. At the same time the impression was given to Soviet readers that this call was prompted by the recalcitrance of the United States. The traditional pre-launch secrecy indicated, however, that no basic change in policy with regard to broad cooperation—which would require a considerable relaxation. of such secrecy—was impending.

The launching was preceded by an article by the secret police journalist Victor LOUIS in a London newspaper saying that the USSR would offer the United States the right to use the new orbiting station for some experiments. This “unofficial” statement may have been designed to provoke such a request by the United States—which could be used by Soviet propagandists to give credibility to Soviet claims of superiority in space technology. The apparent failure of the mission seems to have aborted its propaganda exploitation as well. A. certain amount of published information and “indiscretions” by cosmonauts and others are issued in order to mislead foreigners or. to provoke technical or other reactions of interest to Soviet agencies (desinformatsiya [disinformation] in Soviet officialese). A recent example was the “leak” by a Komsomolskaya Pravda “correspondent” in New York that the USSR would launch a manned lunar mission before the end of the 24th Party Congress, which ended on April 10.

The image of superiority in the field of space exploration—conspicuous to the masses—is necessary to the support of the Soviet claim that Marxism-Leninism is a super-science embracing and pointing the way to all other sciences. This assertion expressed in statements such as that Lenin anticipated the discoveries of modern physics. The link between space and ideology in official dogma precludes broad cooperation with the class enemy, the bourgeoisie, exemplified by the US.

II.

Lenin endorsed the appropriation of “all that is useful” from capitalism, thus providing a scriptural basis for the acquisition of foreign technology by any means. A long duration manned orbiting station, which obviously must precede an American station, may not be possible without the aid of the Americans. The political price of supping with the devil is deemed to be tolerable if the devil can be persuaded to part with his knowledge. The regime feels confident that it can restrict awareness of its partial dependence on American technology to those with a need to know. (Case in point: Pravda recently devoted half a page to the Fiat-built Togliatti automobile plant without mentioning Fiat.) Brief references to US space successes and cooperation in the speeches of the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences are made partly for the effect on the US and partly to give the impression that nothing is being concealed. In the article by Sevastyanov and Faddeev for elite readers in Kommunist, No. 3, 1971, however, there are no such references. Sovetskaya Rossiya, one of the papers of the Central Committee, in a space article on April 20, 1971, referred to cooperation with France, but the only mention of the US was a charge that the US had contaminated space with radioactivity in the Starfish experiment. The Soviet media will probably even give the impression, in future exchanges, that the US is partly dependent upon Soviet expertise.

III.

All that can be said of the mass of published information over the-past year is that a semi-permanent manned orbiting station has been mentioned more insistently than any other goal. Difficulties have been reported, suspected, or admitted in two aspects necessary to the construction and operation of such a station, called “DOS” (for dolgovremennaya orbital’naya stantsiya) in Russian, i.e., in approach and docking, and in adaptation of man to prolonged weightlessness and readaptation to terrestrial conditions. The fact that these are the subjects chosen for some contacts with the US is further confirmation of the priority of the DOS in Soviet plans. Keldysh, in his speech of April 12 implied a gradual achievement of this goal and spoke of much further work to be done.

IV.

Most of the economic tasks assigned to an orbiting station in Soviet articles are being done at present, one assumes inadequately, by unmanned spacecraft, although the latter are undergoing rapid improvement. An article signed by the popular Major-General Georgiy BEREGOVOY in Moskovskaya Pravda on March 21 tries hard to sell the DOS on its economic merits—perhaps to still complaints from consumer-oriented delegates to the XXIVth Party Congress then opening. The Embassy cannot judge the cost-effectiveness of the other economic tasks, which could be performed only on board a manned station, which are mentioned in the article by Sevastyanov and Faddeev, but is convinced that purposes unrelated to economics are the prime factor.

V.

There has been a deafening silence on Soviet military applications (though not on charges of US military uses of space) for several years. On January 16, 1968, Marshal Krylov mentioned the feasibility of orbital rocket launches in Red Star, and P. T. ASTASHENKOV in Soviet Rocket Troops, 1964 (p. 56) mentions ”…a rocket from on board the mother rocket could deliver a load not to the moon or Mars, but to Earth.” An article by Academician Zuyev in Pravda on October 20, 1970, mentions the advantage—obviously military—of locating targets on the earth from a manned orbiting station “with an accuracy of a few tens of centimeters”.

VI.

To sum up, the probable next phase of the Soviet space program will be a long-duration manned orbiting station, designed to provide dividends in the military and political spheres and perhaps also in the economic sphere. Highly selective cooperation with the US has reluctantly been sought by the Soviets in hopes of acquiring sophisticated technology with which to accelerate their programs, not excluding one designed to secure a long-range technical advantage in the missile race.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by William N. Harben, scientific officer at the Embassy on May 20, cleared by DCM Boris H. Klossen, and approved by Lewis W. Bowden of the Economic section.

266. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 266. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, June 4, 1971.

NASA Presentation on Post-Apollo

Attached is a statement prepared at NASA for Dr. Kissinger on technology transfer in the Post-Apollo program (Tab B).

I think all you need to read at this time is the section on Conclusions on page 7 of Tab B.

In essence this report confirms Jim Fletcher’s prediction to you that NASA study would conclude there is no significant transfer of technology inherent in Post-Apollo cooperation with Europe.

NASA was also supposed to provide proposals on alternatives to post-Apollo participation. A second paper in the attachment is so entitled (Tab C). However, it is essentially a contentious paper reciting the dire consequences that would follow from backing out of the post-Apollo proposals. It denies that there are any suitable alternatives.

We shall supply you with some recommendations for the meeting which Dr. Kissinger will hold on the attached paper at 3:00 p.m. on Monday, June 7.

Tab B

Washington, June 1, 1971

V. Conclusions

As a result of this study, the following primary conclusions were reached: 1. European development of the shuttle vertical tail would result in technological benefits to both Europe and the United States and a relatively small transfer of advanced technology to Europe in terms of the economic value of the tail project.

2. European development of the space tug could result in some greater transfer to Europe of discrete technology and considerable systems engineering assistance in terms of the total cost of the tug project. The technology transfer can be limited and controlled through U.S. performance of certain tasks.

In the course of this study, the following ancillary, but important, conclusions were also reached: 1. Knowledgeable Europeans are particularly interested in gaining program management and systems engineering experience from association in the Post Apollo Program, rather than in specific discrete technologies.

2. Knowledge of European technological capability requires additional refinement. A critical validation of European technology capability for specific tasks would be necessary before commitment to specific cooperative efforts. Such a requirement has already been made very clear to European officials and industry.

3. U.S. industry, experienced in this field, does not consider European participation a threat or unmanageable. Rather, they believe participation desirable to stabilize the program.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Tab A, “Introduction to NSA Presentation” and Tab C, “Alternatives to Post-Apollo Participation” were attached but not published. Pollack suggested that Johnson read the “Conclusions” printed on page 7 of Tab B. Page 7 of the attached Tab B is published. According to a handwritten notation on a subsequent June 5 briefing memorandum Pollack sent to Johnson (Document 267), the meeting scheduled for June 7 was postponed until August 9.

267. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 267. Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, June 5, 1971.

Meeting with Dr. Kissinger Tuesday, June 8, 5:00pm on Post-Apollo Cooperation

Where We Are

On February 11-12 Minister Lefevre led an ESC delegation to its second meeting in Washington with the U.S. delegation which you chaired. By letter of March 3 he confirmed the European views expressed during that meeting and restated the matters on which the ESC wanted confirmation of the U.S. position.

Unbeknownst to us, in a meeting on February 22 with the President in which David, Flanigan and Ehrlichman participated the general conclusion was reached that Post-Apollo cooperation with Europe would entail significant transfer of technology, possibly unwarranted and undesirable, as well as managerial headaches of serious dimension. Whether warranted or not this meeting acquired the de facto status of a Presidential decision not to proceed with the Post-Apollo program, and efforts within the Department to prepare ‘a constructive response to Lefevre’s letter to you of March 3 were paralyzed.

To break this paralysis the Secretary on March 23 sent a memorandum (Tab A) to the President informing him 7 that we planned to continue our efforts to engage European participation in the program, but stating that he felt it-prudent to check “to ensure our efforts continue to be in accord with your views”.

A month later Dr. Kissinger held a meeting at which David, Flanigan, Fletcher, et al., were present where it was agreed that NASA would prepare within two. weeks an assessment of the extent to which cooperation with the Europeans would entail the transfer of technology, together with a statement of possible alternatives to Post-Apollo cooperation with the Europeans. The NASA report (now in your office)* was finally prepared on June 2 and is to be the subject of a meeting called by Dr. Kissinger for 5:00 p.m., Tuesday, June 8.

In the meantime you sent a message on April 6 to Lefevre (Tab B) regretting you had not yet answered his letter and assuring him that you would be in touch with him “as soon as possible”. Inquiries from Brussels as to when the letter might be dispatched were made on April 9 and again on May 7. On May 14 we replied that an answer was unlikely “before the end of May”.

Also, in the meantime, on May 21 the INTELSAT Conference came to a successful conclusion.

The NASA Assessment of Technological Transfer

Basically the NASA study of June 2 concludes that the transfer of technology inherent in Post-Apollo cooperation with Europe need not involve unacceptable risks to the U.S. and would be more than compensated for by the economic and engineering benefits from European participation. There would be more technological transfer involved in the European development of the space tug than would be the case in European development of the shuttle’s vertical tail. However, NASA has concluded that even in the case of the space tug the transfer can be limited and controlled through U.S. performance of certain tasks.

This is to say that the NASA study does not substantiate those who in the February 22 meeting with the President argued against the Post-Apollo. cooperation program on the grounds of unwarranted or uncompensated technological transfer.

Where Are We?

It seems to me that, except for the passage of an awkward and inordinate period of time in which we have been unable to resume our discussions with the Europeans, basically, the events recited above have not contributed to the development of this subject. No telling argument has been advanced which would suggest a change in either the affirmative or the negative with respect to whether we proceed with the negotiations with the Europeans.

As Jim Fletcher put it to you at the May 3 luncheon the decision as to whether to engage the Europeans in the Post-Apollo program rests essentially on foreign policy considerations. I believe that the foreign policy considerations (Tab C) set forth for you on May 5 by SCI and EUR remain valid and compelling.

In Europe the interest and enthusiasm for participation in the Post-Apollo program seems to have lessened since its high point last February. Nonetheless, the Europeans have continued to press for a statement of the U.S. position, and face the need to reach basic decisions as to their own space program which will be affected fundamentally by their choice whether to participate in the Post-Apollo program.

What Next?

Launch Assurances. Regardless of the outcome of pending deliberations on cooperation with. the Europeans in the Post-Apollo program there should emerge from the process a decision in principle to provide the Europeans now with a clear and forthcoming statement of the U.S. position with respect to the availability of launchers.

Our preference would be to have such a position incorporated in your response to Lefevre which would continue to make it contingent upon substantial European participation in the Post-Apollo program. However, in fact we believe that our interests are such that the U.S. position is not so contingent. In the event we do not move forward with the Post-Apollo negotiations we believe that a new launch availability position should be announced as an independent and self-sufficient matter.

The absence of such a policy has been a thorn in the side of our space relations with Europe for the better part of a decade. Our present position was motivated largely by a desire to bring into being a single global communication system under the definitive arrangements of INTELSAT. The recent successful conclusion of the INTELSAT negotiations makes possible a renovation of our policy in a

In the event the discussion of technical considerations, including technological transfer, is indecisive, I urge you make a major presentation of the foreign policy considerations and of the President’s public record (Tab D) which argue in favor of engaging if possible the European participation in the program. On the assumption that there will continue to be qualms on the part of at least some of the key participants you might make a major point of the tentative nature of the ongoing discussions and of the opportunity for continuing review and final free decision this fall.

In such circumstances it may prove best not to make a special point of our detailed views on launch availability for this is not necessarily the proper audience or the prime occasion on which to float that proposal. It is one preferably best handled by careful interdepartmental staff effort first.

In the event the general tenor of the meeting continues to be negative with respect to cooperation with the Europeans in the Post-Apollo program I suggest you disassociate yourself from the sense of the meeting and urge that the White House participants provide the President promptly with a proposed response to Secretary Rogers’ memorandum of March 23.

However, in the event the sense of the meeting seems to be emerging with a negative White. House recommendation to the President you may wish to seek an agreement in principle to the necessity for an independent and self-sufficient statement on launch availability being made to the Europeans in fairly prompt fashion. An agreement in principle to the desirability of such a statement would be helpful to the subsequent development of interdepartmental consensus on the content of the statement.

In the event of a trend toward a negative conclusion the question of alternatives will become relevant. You might take the position that cutting off the discussions with. the Europeans will indeed have serious adverse repercussions which can best be ameliorated by a forthcoming and positive position with respect to other outstanding space issues, e.g., launch availability and the aeronautical satellite.

In the event the consensus of the Kissinger meeting is in the negative with respect to Post-Apollo cooperation we shall send you our views as to how to inform the Europeans and manage the subsequent relationships with them.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Tab A is Document 259. Tab B is attached but not published. Tab C is Document 264. Tab D was attached but not published. The NASA report of June 2, dated June 1, Tab E, is summarized and extracted in Document 266.

268. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan) 268. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger), and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)1

Washington July 23, 1971.

Subject:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation with the Europeans

Background

It was agree at our meeting with Jim Fletcher on April 23, 1971, that NASA should prepare an evaluation of (1) the degree of technology transfer to the Europeans, which would take place if the proposed U.S. European cooperation on development of a space transportation system (STS) were to materialize; and (2) alternative subjects for U.S.-European cooperation. I have now reviewed NASA ’s informal paper (summary attached) and discussed the subject with Jim Fletcher, who concurs with the course of action recommended in this memorandum.

Pending further consideration of the details of the NASA analysis, and additional discussions at the technical level between the U.S. and European space groups, I am not prepared to have the U.S. commit itself to this cooperative program of STS development. Although the NASA study (concurred in by Jim Fletcher) suggests that the technology transfer question as well as management complications are not of significant proportions, my personal concerns on these points have not yet been answered to my full satisfaction, nor can they be answered until there is a better understanding of the potential European contribution. Furthermore, U.S. shuttle planning is not sufficiently definitive at present to permit any agreement on the shuttle with the Europeans in the near future. Nonetheless, I do believe that a resumption of technical-level discussions with the Europeans would be in order at this time for the purpose of more clearly defining, without any precommitment, the potential interests and contributions of both sides.

It is also apparent from recent telegrams from Europe that a reply to Minister Theo Lefevre’s letter to Alex Johnson of March 3, requesting a statement of the U.S. position on post-Apollo space cooperation, cannot be delayed much longer. Europe’s space officials must move ahead with their own planning for the future. I believe this matter can be resolved by separating the issue into two components and addressing each separately.

The urgent question before the Europeans is whether U.S. launchers will be available at a fair price and on a non-discriminatory basis for launching European satellites. If the answer is no, the Europeans will likely proceed to develop their own EUROPA-III launch vehicle, with little or no funds left for cooperation with the U.S. in any area; if yes, they will most probably abandon their launcher development plans, freeing funds for increased cooperation with the U.S. and/or for other space developments of their own.

The first alternative would require European expenditures of almost a billion dollars to build a launch capability which has already existed in the United States for several years. In the process, it will doubtless engender some bitterness on the part of those countries who oppose this choice on practical grounds, but would feel constrained to support it on political grounds. However, this approach will by 1976-78 provide the Europeans with a capability to launch their own geosynchronous satellites independently of U.S. views or influence.

The second alternative would perpetuate European dependence on the U.S. for launch services, would generate sales for U.S. booster manufacturing firms, and would preserve the chance for a major European input to a cooperative program with the U.S. This alternative would seem more attractive than the first for longer-range U.S. interests.

Although the availability of U.S. launchers might also enable the Europeans to compete with U.S. firms for satellite construction contracts from other countries, both the U.S. aerospace industry and I believe that this would not be a significant commercial threat, in view of our vastly superiority satellite technology.

Recommendation

Accordingly, I propose that we separate the two elements of launch assurances and space cooperation and that State be advised to proceed along the lines of the attached draft letter to Bill Rogers. If you are in agreement, I believe this course of action provides a satisfactory exit from the present impasse.

Edward E. David, Jr.
Science Adviser

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. No classification marking. The summary of the NSA paper was attached but not published.

269. Memorandum From Michael Guhin of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 269. Memorandum From Michael Guhin of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, August 6, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation Meeting

You are scheduled to meet with Drs. David, Whitehead (for Mr. Flanigan), Low (for Fletcher) and Under Secretary Johnson on Monday, August 9, at 11:30, on the subject of post-Apollo space cooperation with the Europeans. Ambassador Johnson will be accompanied by Mr. Pollack (Director, Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs); Dr. David by Dr. Neureiter.

Primary Goal of the Meeting. Your main goal at this meeting should be to to reach agreement on the following as guidelines for further discussions with the Europeans on post-Apollo space cooperation (Secretary Rogers sought Presidential guidance on March 23 before proceeding in negotiations): -- Continue discussions with the Europeans on post-Apollo cooperation but at a technical level and with a clear understanding that the discussions involve no precommitment;

-- Separate the launch assurance question to the degree possible and at least not condition US launch assurances on European post-Apollo participation;

-- Be responsive and forthcoming to the Europeans’ concerns regarding launch assurances;

-- Be prepared to discuss other space cooperation alternatives at an appropriate time; and

-- Reaffirm our interest in international space cooperation in general terms.

Agency Positions. After reviewing NASA’s June 2 paper on technology transfer and alternatives for cooperation, which was requested at your April 23 meeting on this subject, Dr. David wrote you and Mr. Flanigan proposing a course along the above lines and noting Dr. Fletcher’s concurrence. Dr. David is not prepared to have us committed to a cooperative space transportation system (STS) development program pending further review of NASA’s details, more technical level discussions with the Europeans, and sufficiently definitive US shuttle planning. Ambassador Johnson will probably agree with the above guidelines.

Dr. Whitehead will also agree on the launch assurances aspects, but may still object to the resumption of US-European discussions even at a technical level on the grounds that (1) cooperation in STS development is not in US interests from the standpoint of technology transfer and program management, (2) even technical talks imply commitment to cooperation in STS development, and (3) we should be very forthcoming on giving the Europeans launch assurances and leave the matter at that.

Comment on Dr. Whitehead’s Possible Objections. Technical talks often take on a life of their own and a close rein and clear understanding on both sides would be required in this case. While NASA’s list of advantages in STS cooperation still lack sufficient analysis, Dr. Whitehead’s disadvantages are to date based on even less detailed analysis. We should not affront European sensibilities by abandoning a course pursued over two years without good analysis to prove it has been a mistake. Technical discussions should provide a basis for such analysis and a decision whether or not to proceed. If Dr. Whitehead objects to resuming technical discussions, his objections should be requested for incorporation in a memorandum for the President.

The Question of a Launch Assurances Formula. This issue involves what form our guarantee for launching other countries’ satellites should take. The agencies agree on all aspects of a policy here except for the elnegHon on how we should handle a request for launch assistance for a telecommunications satellite in the absence of a “favorable” recommendation by INTELSAT. (State’s analysis of the issue is in your book.)

Agency Positions. In the absence of a “favorable” INTELSAT recommendation—“favorable” by our definition of obligations which is not universally shared—State believes we should say only that (1) we would still consider providing launch assistance depending on the situation, and (2) we would expect to provide such assistance for those systems which we had supported in INTELSAT and which had been supported by a majority of its members. (Our last position with the Europeans demanded approval by two-thirds of INTELSAT members.)

Dr. David, Dr. Whitehead and perhaps Dr. Fletcher believe we should be more forthcoming by agreeing that, in such cases, we would still be willing to sell appropriate launch vehicles for launching from foreign sites and thereby put launch vehicles on a commercial basis. (State’s position would probably still apply to requests for launching from US sites.)

Dr. Whitehead will probably also suggest (as he has already suggested to Mr. Flanigan and Dr. David) that we adopt this forthcoming position and present it as a Presidential initiative applicable to all after it is worked out with the Europeans.

Comment on Agency Positions. The more forthcoming position would most surely meet European concerns that we not retain a unilateral veto and allow them to interpret their international obligations (e. g., France maintains that a two-thirds negative vote by INTELSAT is required to veto a proposed system, whereas State maintains a two-thirds positive vote is needed to approve a system). The INTELSAT arrangements are deliberately vague on this point

I have no problems with the more forthcoming approach and believe that State’s position could be considered as “too little, too late” by the Europeans But State’s position can be considered a reasonable negotiating “opener” as long as it is recognized that a more forthcoming position may soon be in order to reach agreement with the Europeans.

To avoid getting bogged down in the question of formulas, you may wish only to hear both sides out and then suggest referring this question to the Ad Hoc Interagency Committee to define, in very short order, the options with their pros and cons for the President’s decision. (Even if Ambassador Johnson were to agree to the more forthcoming position, which is not expected, we would still need more definition before pursuing such a course.)

Lastly, I believe the Ad Hoc Committee should be asked to consider the idea of our sending a delegation to Europe since a reply to Minister Lefevre’s letter has been delayed several months and a delegation with the aim of resolving the launch assurance question would be a forthcoming move in itself.

Talking points for the meeting are at the first tab. They reflect the fore-going recommendations and divide the meeting into two parts: (1) basic guidelines for replying to the Europeans and pursuing cooperation; and (2) the question of a launch assurances formula. All the materials referred to in this memorandum are at identified tabs in your book. Immediately following the meeting, I will prepare the necessary implementing memoranda.

Background Note. While the NASA. paper generally concludes that there are no serious technology transfer problems in cooperative STS development, the paper lacks sufficient analysis in support of this conclusion. (If you wish more information, my summary of the paper is tabbed.) Dr. David attaches a summary of the NASA paper to his memorandum along with a draft reply to Secretary Rogers’ March 23 memorandum for the President.

RECOMMENDATION

That you note the talking points for your meeting on the subject of post-Apollo space cooperation with the Europeans.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1971. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Sonnenfeldt. An informal account, prepared by Low, of the meeting that took place at 11:30 a.m. on August 9 is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-21. Also attached but not published were talking points for Kissinger.

270. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers 270. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, August 18, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation with the Europeans and Launch Assurances

In response to your memorandum of March 23, regarding European participation in the United States post-Apollo space program, the President has asked me to confirm his support for continued pursuit of opportunities for international space cooperation in general and specifically with the Europeans.

Unresolved questions about the character and degree of European participation are critical to a final decision by the U.S. and the Europeans regarding possible cooperation in development of a space transportation system (STS). There is not sufficient basis for a final decision on European participation in such development. More-over, there is as yet no final U.S. commitment to development of a space transportation system.

In order to permit further progress in defining a suitable framework for cooperation, the first priority of the U.S. should be the prompt resolution of European concerns about launch assurances. Discussions with the Europeans about possible post-Apollo space cooperation should be reestablished at the technical level with the clear understanding that these talks involve no commitment to a particular cooperative project.

The Department of State should prepare, in coordination with other interested agencies, a reply to Minister Lefevre and the European Space Conference with these objectives and in accord with the following guidelines: -- U.S. launch assurances for European payloads will not be contingent upon substantial European participation in a joint STS program, but will be treated separately to the degree possible.

-- In the course of the technical discussions with the Europeans, there should be no statement or implication which would prejudice an independent decision by the U.S. on the desirability or schedule of STS development.

-- The purpose of these technical discussions will include the definition of possible cooperative relationships between Europe and the U.S. in a program of STS development, but should be broadened to include an exchange of views with the Europeans regarding the content of space activities in the post-Apollo era and, at an appropriate time, other potential areas for cooperation in space exploration, operations and launches. (A report on these technical discussions, including European views and interests in post-Apollo space activities, should be forwarded for the President’s information no later than January 15, 1972.)

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential.

271. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) 271. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre)1

Washington, September 1, 1971.

Dear Minister Lefevre:

This letter is in response to yours of March 3, 1971 concerning possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs It sets out our current views on the matters of consequence which were involved in our discussions this past February and in September, 1970. It overtakes my letter to you of October 2, 1970.

I regret that it has not been possible to respond to you earlier. We felt that our mutual interests would be served best if we took sufficient time to review our position carefully in the light of your letter and of events since our discussions in February. As I stated during those discussions, our ultimate views on most of these matters remain contingent on choices yet to be made in Europe as to the measure and character of European participation and on further development of our own plans for post-Apollo programs.

Since we have understood that the matter of greatest concern to the European Space Conference is the availability of launchers for European satellite projects, we have reviewed our position so as to meet the concerns expressed in your letter and during our earlier discussions. Our new position in this regard, described in the numbered paragraphs below, is not conditioned on European participation in post-Apollo programs. I believe it should provide a basis for confidence in Europe in the availability of US launch assistance. Specifically: (1) We recognize the concern of the European Space Conference with regard to the availability of launch assistance for European payloads. In this respect, US launch assistance will be avail-able for those satellite projects which are for peaceful purposes and are consistent with obligations under relevant international agreements and arrangements, subject only to the following: (a) With respect to satellites intended to provide international public telecommunications services, when the definitive arrangements for INTELSAT come into force the US will provide appropriate launch assistance for those satellite systems on which INTELSAT makes a favorable recommendation in accordance with Article XIV of‘its definitive arrangements. If launch assistance is requested in the absence of a favorable recommendation by INTELSAT, we expect that we would provide launch assistance for those systems which we had supported within INTELSAT so long as the country or international entity requesting the assistance considers in good faith that it has met its relevant obligations under Article XIV of the definitive arrangements. In those cases where requests for launch assistance are maintained in the absence of a favorable INTELSAT recommendation and the US had not supported the proposed system, the United States would reach a decision on such a request after taking into account the degree to which the proposed system would be modified in the light of the factors which were the basis for the lack of support within INTELSAT.

(b) With respect to future operational satellite applications which do not have broad international acceptance, we would hope to be able to work with you in seeking such acceptance, and would favorably consider requests for launch assistance when broad international acceptance has been obtained.

(2) Such launch assistance would be available, consistent with US laws, either from US launch sites (through the acquisition of US launch services on a ‘cooperative or reimbursable basis) or from foreign launch sites (by purchase of an appropriate US launch vehicle). It would not be conditioned on participation in post-Apollo programs. In the case of launchings from foreign sites the US would require assurance that the launch vehicles would not be made available to third parties without prior agreement of the US.

(3) With respect to European proposals for satellites intended to provide international public telecommunications services, we are prepared to consult with the European Space Conference in advance so as to advise the Conference whether we would support such proposals within INTELSAT. In this connection we have undertaken a preliminary analysis of the acceptability of European space segment facilities for international public telecommunication services separate from those of INTELSAT, in terms of the conditions established by Article XIV, and find that the “Example of a Possible Operational System of European Communication Satellites”, which was presented during our discussions in February, would appear to cause measurable, but not significant, economic harm to INTELSAT. Thus, if this specific proposal were submitted for our consideration, we would expect to support it in INTELSAT.

(4) With respect to the financial conditions for reimbursable launch services from US launch sites, European users would be charged on the same basis as comparable non-US Government domestic users.

(5) With respect to the priority and scheduling for launching European payloads at US launch sites, we would deal with these launchings on the same basis as our own. Each launching would be treated in terms of its own requirements and as an individual case. When we know when a payload will become available and what its launch window requirements will be, we would schedule it for that time. We expect that conflicts would rarely arise, if at all. If there should be a conflict, we would consult with all interested parties in order to arrive at an equitable solution. On the basis of our experience in scheduling launchings, we would not expect any loss of time because of such a conflict to be significant.

The United States is considering the timing and manner of public release of this position. Accordingly, it is requested that there be no public disclosure of this position without prior agreement with us.

With regard to post-Apollo cooperation, as you know, the United States has not yet taken final decisions with respect to its post-Apollo space programs, nor can we predict with assurance when such decisions will be taken.

With respect to the more detailed questions on post-Apollo collaboration posed, in your letter of March 3, 1971 and in our earlier discussions in September 1970 and February 1971, our views remain broadly as we put them to you in my letter of October 2, 1970 and in our meetings of last September and February. We would much prefer to continue the consideration of such questions in the context of specific possibilities for collaboration rather than in the abstract.

The relationship we are seeking with Europe with respect to post-Apollo space programs would, we believe, be well served if we can jointly consider the possibilities for collaboration in the context of a broader examination of the content and purposes of the space programs of the late 1970s and 1980s

Accordingly, we suggest broadening your earlier suggestion for a joint expert group to conduct technical discussions. The purpose of these discussions will include the definition of possible cooperative relationships between Europe and the U.S. in a program of development of the Space Transportation System, but would be broadened to include an exchange of views regarding the con-tent of space activities in which Europe might wish to participate in the post-Apollo era. The technical questions relevant to such participation, including the remaining questions raised in your letter of March 3 would be examined as well. The joint group would carry on its activities with no commitment on either side. The US representation would be led by Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA.

This group could most usefully commence its work after the end of September when the results of NASA’s current technical studies of space transportation systems become available.

I trust, Mr. Minister, that this summary of our present views is a helpful response to the matters raised in your letter of March 3. I am pleased to confirm our continuing interest in cooperating with interested European nations in the further exploration and use of space.

Sincerely,

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Packard and cleared by Pollack and Edward L. Peck, Johnson’s Special Assistant. Johnson’s letter is Document 271.

272. Memorandum of Conversation 272. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 6, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation and US Assurance of Launch Assistance

PARTICIPANTS:

Under Secretary U. Alexis Johnson, State

Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., OST

Dr. Norman P. Neureiter, OST

Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA

Mr. Donald Morris, NASA

Mr. John Walsh, NSC Staff

Mr. George Mansur, OTP

Mr. Herman Pollack, SCI, State

Mr. Robert F. Packard, SCl/SAM, State

This meeting was held in Under Secretary Johnson’s office at noon on October 6 to consider three questions: 1. On the basis of Europe’s reactions thus far to his. September 1 letter to Lefevre does it appear that modification (further liberalization) of our stated position on launch assistance would increase the possibilities that Europe would divert resources from the development of its own launch capability to participation in the development of the space transportation system? Would it be feasible to liberalize our policy?

2. How should we respond to adverse European press coverage of our position? Should we make public disclosure of the content of your proposal?

3. What terms of reference should apply to Charles Mathews’ meeting with the Europeans in late October?

Concerning modification of our position on launch assistance it was the consensus of the group that: 1. On the basis of reactions reported thus far from Europe to Under Secretary Johnson’s letter to Minister Lefevre of September 1 there is no basis to believe that further liberalization of our position would significantly affect Europe’s choices as to participation in the post-Apollo program and the further development of its own launch capability (Europa-III), nor does it appear likely that this situation will change over the next few months. Our position is not considered adequate by the French, but appears to seem adequate to the other countries insofar as their own interests are concerned. Although this position is no longer tied to substantial European participation in the development of the space transportation system, the adequacy of our assurances is clearly not the sole, nor the principal, consideration for either France or Germany in deciding whether to proceed with Europa-III.

2. Nonetheless, we should not consider our present position as irrevocable, but rather as open to modification in the future, if these circumstances should change. Under Secretary Johnson observed that the position is probably as liberal as we can make it. Further modification, which could apply only to launch assistance for communication satellite systems separate from the Intelsat system, would be extremely difficult to arrange.

3. It is not our objective to keep the Europeans from developing Europa-III, but to engage their interest and participation in ongoing projects of mutual value such as the development of the space transportation system. In fact, it has been US policy to be willing to assist the Europeans to develop an independent, multilateral European launch vehicle capability, if they should seek our assistance. It was noted that one effect of our position on launch assistance appears to be that the Europeans now seem inclined toward a stretched-out development program for Europa-Ill which would preserve their option whether to complete the task and would reduce their annual expenditure to a level which would enable them, if they so chose, to participate to some measure in the development of the space transportation system as well. Dr. Fletcher noted that NASA had initially proposed foreign consideration of participation in the post-Apollo program on this basis and at the explicit instruction of the President. Under Secretary Johnson noted that this objective was confirmed in Dr. Kissinger’s memorandum to the Secretary of State on August 18. Dr., Fletcher pointed out that this will require that we provide the Europeans a clear and attractive opportunity. In view of our own uncertainty thus far as to when the US will develop a space transportation system and the specific parameters of the system we would propose to develop, we have not yet provided the Europeans a sufficient basis to decide how they wish to participate, if at all. He would hope to be in a position to do so within another month or two.

Concerning public disclosure of Under Secretary Johnson’s letter to Minister Lefevre of September 1 it was the consensus of the group that: 1. In the event of further inaccurate or adverse public comment about the letter we should make it public. This would not have the effect of precluding further modification of our position on launch assistance.

2. It would be preferable to do this on a low-key basis (a routine statement and release by the State Department press officer rather than a presidential announcement or a White House press statement), but in such a manner as not to preempt the President’s option to make a subsequent statement. Mr. Walsh will confirm this choice with Dr. Kissinger and will work directly with the State Department in framing an appropriate press statement.

3. If time permits Under Secretary Johnson should inform Minister Lefevre of our intention to make the letter public and should solicit Lefevre’s views as to this course of action without affording him a veto.

4. Our new position on launch assistance, although developed specifically in response to inquiries from the members of the European Space Conference, would also apply to interested non-western-European countries to the extent possible (i.e.: with respect to communist countries to the extent possible under US export legislation and foreign policy considerations at the time such assistance is requested; to other countries such as Japan and India to the extent consistent with our relationships with those countries at the time such assistance is requested). In response to inquiries as to whether the position applies beyond western Europe we should acknowledge that it could apply generally to other countries, but reserve comment as to its specific application pending an expression of interest by others and consideration of any legal or policy restraints which might apply at that time.

Concerning Minister Lefevre’s request that Charles Mathews of NASA meet with the European Space Conference Committee of Alternates and senior officials in late October it was noted that we are now charged by the President to include in our technical discussions with the Europeans, not only the definition of possible cooperative relation-ships in a program for the development of the space transportation system, but also an exchange of views regarding the content of space activities in the post-Apollo era including, at an appropriate time, other potential areas for cooperation. The meeting in late October should there-fore anticipate this dual dialogue.

Dr. Fletcher urged that the ensuing technical discussions should concentrate initially on defining tasks and working relationships for the space transportation system project, since time is catching up with us. NASA expects to define the concepts and configurations for the system within the next two or three months and to select a prime contractor for the task by next Spring. It will be imperative to know the extent of possible European participation by that time.

Dr. David emphasized that, nonetheless, the discussions should concern objectives and missions for a broad range of space activities in which the Europeans might be interested, not solely the specific technical aspects of cooperation in hardware development. Under Secretary Johnson observed that this dichotomy suggests the possibility that we should establish a new mechanism for dealing with the long-range, conceptual discussion as a matter separate from the technical discussions of the joint expert group. He proposed that Dr. Fletcher and Dr. David consider organizing a small group of American officials concerned with long-range possibilities and purposes for the exploration and use of space who could meet with a similar group designated by the European Space Conference for an initial exchange of views at a two or three day seminar here in the United States later this Fall.

In the light of these considerations it was the consensus of the group that: 1. Even though a meeting of the sort proposed Minister. Lefevre for late October would not be consistent with our preferences to resume discussions on a technical basis, we should nonetheless accede to his request.

2. Mr. Mathews participation should be focused on an exchange of current program plans and technical information, i.e.: presentations by him on the current status of NASA’s overall Program plans for the 197Os-1980s and on the latest developments emerging from NASA’s studies of alternative concepts and configurations for the space transportation system. He could solicit and receive any suggestions which the Europeans have as to the agenda for ensuing meetings of the joint expert group. NASA should consult with the other interested agencies in establishing the parameters for Mathews’ presentations.

The question of how best to proceed after the late October meeting was left open for further consideration.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Packard and cleared by Pollack and Edward L. Peck, Johnson’s Special Assistant. Johnson’s letter is Document 271.

273. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 273. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 20, 1971.

Subject:

Joint Space Docking Mission and the President’s Visit to the USSR

We have received a copy of a letter dated November 3 sent to you by the Administrator of NASA concerning possible agreement with the Soviet Union on a joint space docking mission.

We would not want to attempt to make a judgment as to either (a) the values and costs of additional manned flights from the viewpoint of their merits within the U.S. space program after the present schedule of Apollo lunar landings and Skylab missions has been completed or (b) the incremental cost and effect on our program of designing such flights to enable a joint U.S.-Soviet docking mission. We believe, however, that such a mission could yield substantial benefits from the viewpoint of foreign policy objectives. There would be a number of advantages in concluding a preliminary agreement to work together toward such a mission at the time of the President’s visit next spring.

A joint rendezvous and docking mission would be a highly visible demonstration of U.S.-Soviet ability to cooperate in peaceful projects for which the two countries have unique capabilities. At the same time, U.S.-Soviet space cooperation is likely to appeal to the imagination of other countries without arousing unduly their concerns about superpower collusion.

The Soviet leadership would probably welcome an agreement to conduct a joint mission. We understand that the NASA delegation at the recent technical talks in Moscow on docking requirements returned with the impression that Soviet space authorities would be receptive to a proposal along the lines contemplated by NASA. Apart from the value of having in readiness an agreement which is attractive to the Soviet Government, we believe a joint space mission could contribute to our own objectives by tapping the reservoir of good will which the Russian people still feel as a result of the cooperation between the two countries during World War II.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by Curtis W. Kamman (EUR/SOV). James Carson signed for Eliot. A copy was sent to Fletcher. A report of the NASA Delegation to Moscow, November 5, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-45.

274. Transcript of a Conversation between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher) 274. Transcript of a Conversation between the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher)1

Washington, December 1, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Program

The Department, in consultation with the Executive Secretary of the Space Council, the NSC Staff, OST and NASA, has prepared the enclosed brief report on the relevance of the manner in which FY-72 budget decisions are made concerning the post-Apollo space program to the European approach to their participation in that program. I subscribe to the eonclusion in that Report that, if we are to sustain the impetus in Europe to participate substantially in the post-Apollo program, the content and character of our FY-72 budgetary and program decisions for the space transportation system should provide a clear indication that the US stands committed to continuity and forward movement in its major space efforts.

I have no doubt that the values of foreign participation in the post-Apollo program have already been addressed in the budget proposals now before the President. Although these values are clearly not the primary consideration in our budget and program decisions, I should like to reiterate that they are, nonetheless, quite important.

From a technical point of view we would obtain the benefit of European know-how in areas where they have special technical competence. Under the terms presently contemplated, European participation would reduce United States budget requirements by approximately $1 billion. From a national security viewpoint, there are obvious advantages to having the Europeans as partners in the United States program, as compared to their developing a separate and independent space launching capability which would be wasteful and overwhichwe would have little or no influence. Politically, we have long encouraged the Western Europeans to collaborate on multinational endeavors and this would be a very large one indeed. Success in this venture would help put life into other pending proposals for intra-European cooperation and could be a useful precedent for major scientific and technical projects in the future. Participation in this program would also strengthen the technological capacity of countries who are our NATO allies and thereby enhance the strength of the Alliance.

U. Alexis Johnson

Enclosure

November 30, 1970

PROSPECTS FOR EUROPEAN PARTICIPATION IN THE POST-APOLLO SPACE PROGRAM

In consultation with the Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council and representatives of the NSC Staff, the Office of Science and Technology and NASA we have .assessed the current prospects for substantial European participation in our post-Apollo space program. We find that a key question affecting European decisions as to participation is the extent of then U.S. commitment to the development of a reusable space transportation system and other major elements of the post-Apollo program.

The Europeans are convinced that they cannot afford to pursue a fully independent program to meet their own objectives for the use of space and, at the same time, participate substantially in post-Apollo developments. They have a number of options as to the timing and content of their program, but within a few months should make the fundamental choice whether to arrange their space program so as to permit participation or to pursue an independent course, particularly in the development of their own launch vehicle capability. They cannot be expected to forego independence unless our program offers an assured alternative. Thus, the manner in which we handle our program and budget decisions for fiscal year 1972 will have a major effect on prospects for engaging their participation.

This is obviously not to suggest that the question of European participation should be a pivotal consideration in our budget and program decisions. Rather it is to note that these decisions and the manner in which they are expressed will have an obvious impact on the European approach to participation in the post-Apollo program. If we are to sustain the impetus in Europe to participate substantially in the the post-Apollo program, content and character of our FY-72 budgetary and program decisions for the space transportation system should provide a clear indication that the U.S. stands committed to continuity and forward movement in its major space efforts.

Thus, it is important that, insofar as these decisions reflect U.S. intentions as to the post-Apollo program, our intentions emerge as clearly as possible. Should these decisions becloud our intentions, serious doubt will be raised in Europe whether our professed commitment to ongoing space activities, and to sharing their benefits and burdens, will in fact offer opportunities of rea1 interest to Europe.

Herman Pollack
Director
Bureau of International Scientific
and Technological Affairs

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. Fletcher and Low met with the President and the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs Ehrlichman at the Western White House in San Clemente, California on January 5, from 10:01 to 10:35 a.m. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files, President’s Daily Diary) On November 29 Nixon sent Flanigan a memorandum asking: “Is there still no feasible way to get multi-national participation in some of our future space flights?” Nixon stated he knew there were technical problems, but it was “a pet idea of mine and I would like to press it.” The full text of the conversation is in Document I-23, Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations.

275. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 275. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, January 19, 1972.

Subject:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation with the Europeans and Launch Assurances

I am pleased to report that substantial progress has been made in carrying out your directives as set forth in Dr. Kissinger’s memorandum of August 18, 1971 [71127] with regard to space cooperation with the nations of Western Europe.

In a letter of September 1, 1971 from Under Secretary Johnson to Minister Lefevre, Chairman of the European Space Conference, (Attachment 1) we sought to reassure Europeans on launch assistance by offering on a reimbursable basis to launch all European satellites for peaceful purposes which are consistent with our international obligations. After extensive consultations among ESC members Lefevre replied on December 23, 1971 (Attachment 2) transmitting detailed descriptions of a regional European communications satellite system and inquiring whether the United States would be prepared to support this program when it is officially submitted to INTELSAT. We are now studying the proposed system carefully to determine whether we can regard it as being compatible with INTELSAT.

The technical discussions which you directed NASA to continue with the Europeans for exploration of possible areas of post-Apollo space cooperation were resumed with a meeting of NASA and European space experts in Washington from November 30 to December 3, 1971. On a no commitment basis a number of possible cooperative work tasks were defined and discussed. Both Minister Lefevre and NASA expressed satisfaction with progress made in identifying areas in which Europeans might wish to participate, and the Europeans have already appropriated more than $2 million for conceptual studies in these areas. Attachment 3 is NASA’s report on the meeting and its assessment of the prospects for future cooperation.

Progress during the next meeting of technical experts, planned for early February 1972 should be even greater as result of the January 5 announcement of your decision to proceed with development of the Shuttle. The prospects for substantial European contributions to the post-Apollo program are clouded, however, by residual European doubts about whether our offer of launch assistance is sufficiently adequate to permit Europe to forgo development of its own large and expensive rockets. Europe also regards the delays in reaching agreement on the joint aeronautical satellite project as an ominous sign concerning our future intentions on space cooperation.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 EUR. No classification marking. Drafted by Robert T. Webber (SCI/SAM), and Frank J. Haendler (EUR/RPE); concurred in by Abraham Katz (EUR/RPE) and Frutkin. Also printed as Document I-26 in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations. Johnson’s September 1, 1971, letter to Lefevre is Document 269. Attached but not published were Lefevre’s December 23, 1971, letter to Johnson and the January 11, 1972, NASA Report on Technical Discussions with the European Space Conference.

276. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers 276. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, February 17, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Space Cooperation with the Europeans

The President has reviewed your memorandum of January 19, 1972 transmitting the report of the technical experts on post-Apollo space cooperation, and is pleased to learn that the discussions are proceeding well.

Inasmuch as a firm decision has now been taken to proceed with development of the space shuttle, some of the tentative guidelines hitherto given the technical experts for joint discussions need elaboration: -- In the interests of the foreign policy benefits which we seek through European participation in the development of the Space Transportation System, such participation should be confined to those areas where the risk of management arrangements leading to contention can be minimized. To this end we should limit this participation to clearly separable segments of the total post-Apollo program (e.g., research application module, space tug).

--Because participation in shuttle orbiter development has already been extensively discussed with Europe, its participation in such development cannot be flatly rejected, but it should be discouraged. If Europe is insistent on pressing for such participation, tasks considered for it may only involve simple, well established technology, simple inter-faces, clearly workable management, and realistic financing.

-- Participation in shuttle booster development should continue to be precluded.

-- Great care should be taken not only not to mislead Europe as to the potential usage of the space tug, but to point out the various assumptions and their credibility which drive the utilization analysis.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 249, Agency Files, NASA, Vol. II. Limited Official Use.

277. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers 277. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, March 17, 1972.

Post-Apollo Cooperation in Jeopardy

This memorandum is in the nature of an “alert” to a problem that is rapidly emerging with respect to post-Apollo cooperation with Europe.

I met earlier today with an inter-agency group to develop the last round of proposals for the negotiation of an agreement on this program with the Europeans. Kissinger, Flanigan and David each had representatives on this group, and they were unanimous in reflecting the prevailing spirit in their home offices as one of deep skepticism as to the desirability of European participation in the development of the hardware for the space shuttle or other elements of the post-Apollo space transportation system.

The underlying reasons for this attitude center on protecting the technological position of the U.S., maximizing balance of payments and employment benefits for the U.S., and avoiding managerial difficulties that may be encountered in international cooperation in technological activities. It was their belief that the only argument which would. be. persuasive in the decision to go ahead with European cooperation is that we may have gone so long and so far in our discussions with the Europeans as to be “stuck” with their participation. In that event we may contemplate an effort to ensure that the nature and extent of the cooperation is tailored by the U.S. to meet the concerns enumerated above.

As you know, the cooperation in the space shuttle that we and the Europeans are now contemplating is modest (about $150 million European investment over a 7 year period) compared to the “substantial” participation ($1 billion) which we suggested in our initial discussions with the Europeans about two years ago.

Pursuant to our conversation earlier this week, I informed the inter-agency group of the Department’s view that for the U.S. now to pull back from the discussions on post-Apollo hardware cooperation would give rise to a serious international problem, and that you were interested in this problem and expected to participate personally in any decision. Our target for the development of a position for the consideration of our respective superiors is April 15.

I am hopeful that it will be possible to persuade my inter-agency group that the foreign policy considerations in this instance cannot be entirely discounted and, indeed, that the issues of concern to the White House staffs were much more relevant to earlier proposals for substantial European participation than to the more modest proposals that are still on the table.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by Pollack. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson, Samuels, and Hillenbrand. In a separate March 17 memorandum to Flanigan, March 17, the Executive Secretary of NASA, outlined in detail the NASA position on European participation. Printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, as Document I-25.

278. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 278. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 28, 1972.

Subject:

Proposed Negotiation Staff Work on U.S.-Soviet Docking Mission

NASA-Soviet Academy discussions have been approved, probably beginning April 4 in Moscow, to assure that the Soviet side understands and accepts the principles of organization, management, scheduling, and operation which are required if the President is to have a viable option for a joint announcement in May on a space docking mission.

To make certain that there is in fact an understanding on such principles, NASA believes the April 4th meeting should end with the two sides initialing a statement of the principles which would apply if the project is eventually given a go-ahead. The statement would refer to and attach several entirely technical and managerial draft documents as exemplifying the kind and level of detail which the parties agree must be developed jointly by them. (The attached draft indicates the sort of statement which would be initialed.)

An agreement on principles would not constitute an agreement to conduct a mission nor would it commit the President in any way. There is adequate precedent for such an initialed agreement inasmuch as there are now three sets of agreed documents on the rendezvous and docking subject since October 1970. (A joint working group is meeting in Houston this week on technical questions of docking mechanisms; it will sign a fourth set of technical recommendations which will not be made public until after confirmation around June 1 by NASA and Soviet Academy principals.)

Approval has previously been requested for the NASA delegation to Moscow to be headed by the Deputy Administrator Dr. George Low. It is recommended that the delegation be authorized to initial a statement of principles such as is described above.

Theodore A. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1, US-USSR. Secret. Drafted by O. E. Anderson (NASA); concurred in by Jack Matlock, Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs and Richard T. Davies; and cleared in draft by Webber (SCI/SAM). Parker Borg signed for Eliot. A typewritten notation on the memorandum reads: “Memo from Gen. Haig to Mr. Eliot received 4/3/72.” A report of the NASA delegation to Moscow, April 4-6, is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-46. Attached but not published were the draft principles. On April 3 Haig sent a memorandum to Eliot, approving Low’s statement in Moscow of draft principles for a possible U.S.-Soviet space docking mission, but with the understanding that it would not commit the United States to such a mission. (Ibid.)

279. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 279. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, April 29, 1972.

Subject:

Post-Apollo Relationships with the Europeans

I wish to bring to your attention my increasing concern about developing U.S. attitudes toward European participation in the development of the post-Apollo Space Transportation System and the need for prompt U.S. decisions in this matter, if we are to control the play of events.

Your name has been closely identified with U.S. efforts over the past several years to encourage European participation in the development of that System—the Shuttle, the Tug and associated research applications modules (RAMs) Tom Paine, alluding repeatedly to what he described as your views, visited each major European capital to invite such participation. In October of 1970 and again in February 1971 Alex Johnson and a sub-cabinet team met with the European space and science Ministers. These and other activities of responsible U.S. officials, including our Ambassadors, have provided the Europeans every reason to believe that the U.S. was seriously interested in having them participate in the development of certain parts of the Shuttle, in one or more, of the RAMs, and especially in the Tug. As an indication of their interest the European governments have already spent or committed a total of $11.5 million on preliminary technical studies.

The European space and science Ministers are scheduled to meet in three weeks (May 19th) to formulate their views with respect to participation, and again in early July to take a final position. We can expect a visit of a high-level European delegation shortly after the May meeting.

Within the last several months U.S. views that we should minimize European participation have begun to harden. These views hold that we should not permit European participation in development of the Shuttle because of domestic economic considerations and the difficulties of sharing such a task with foreign governments and subcontractors. With respect to the Tug they hold that the development task will be too difficult technically to rely on European performance. European participation would thus be limited to development of one or more of the RAMs.

Were the European share of Shuttle development to be truly substantial, these economic and management considerations might well be overriding. However, the extent of their possible participation is now limited to a few specific projects totaling about $100 million out of the total Shuttle program costing $5.15 billion. The advantages of denying their participation at this level do not justify the loss of U.S. integrity abroad.

There is no need to reverse our position now on European development of the Tug, since it is a very advanced project which will require several more years of design study. The Europeans areas yet not convinced that they should undertake it.

My basic worry is that we will buy more trouble with the Europeans than can be justified by the ephemeral domestic advantages that we may gain by denying their participation. To limit them now to development of only a RAM would be judged by them as a clear reversal of our previous policy. Your reputation as a consistent advocate of international cooperation in space and specifically with Europe on the post-Apollo program would inevitably suffer. Furthermore, we ought not to ignore altogether the very real political values that would result from European participation with us in the development as well as the use of the Space Transportation System.

Balancing all these considerations, I suggest: 1. That we accept, but not encourage, European participation in the tasks in the development of the Shuttle already identified by NASA conditioned on a prior commitment by the European Space Conference (ESC) that it will undertake the subsequent development of one or more RAMs.

2. That we bring the Europeans to agree that consideration of their undertaking the development of the Tug will be deferred pending further mutual study.

3. That we conduct negotiations on these matters so as to avoid indicating a major change in our policy toward European participation (i.e. in the proposals which we have already made to the ESC.)

I urge that you approve this course of action in principle and instruct me to reach agreement with the Europeans along these lines.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollard and Packard.

280. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan) 280. Memorandum From the President’s Science Adviser (David) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the President’s Assistant (Flanigan)1

Washington, May 18, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Relationships with the Europeans

I have reviewed the memorandum from Secretary Rogers to the President on this subject, dated April 29th, (copy attached) and have several comments to offer.

The cumulative effect of several U.S. actions in the past year in the field of space cooperation has been to cause considerable cooling in U.S.-European relationships in this area. European leaders, however, appear to understand the background for the changing attitude of the U. S. toward the flow of technology and management difficulties and they are pragmatic enough to seek acceptable solutions to this problem without abandoning cooperation. I have recent information that the French are going to propose that their European partners give priority to development of Sortie or RAM modules that would eventually be carried as a payload in the shuttle and that they abandon plans for a potential role as developer of the tug and contributor of subsystems to the shuttle vehicle itself. If this proposal is accepted by the European Space Conference, it will pre-empt somewhat action on the memo to the President from Secretary Rogers.

It is anticipated that a delegation from the European Space Conference will request a meeting with the U.S. following their meeting later this week. We should be prepared to respond to the Europeans at that time with a clearly defined U.S. position. I believe the proposal outlined below will provide a basis for that position.

In my view, the U.S. can accept European participation in the shuttle program, if limited to RAM and Sortie payload modules. The State Department proposal (point 2 of the attached) that the U.S. leave open the question of European development of the tug would only raise false hopes that the U.S. might agree to such development. I am opposed to European development of the tug and I believe this view is shared by most of the interested agencies. The State Department has also proposed that we continue to negotiate with the Europeans on specific shuttle vehicle tasks that had been identified by NASA as appropriate to European participation. I believe we can terminate such negotiations and discussion of the tug and should point out in so doing that our further review of these tasks reveal that they would lead to excessive additional costs and management complications that the U.S. is unwilling to accept.

I will be pleased to discuss this in further detail with you, if you wish.

Edward E. David, Jr.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1972. No classification marking. Rogers’ memorandum is Document 279.

281. Telegram 4915 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 281. Telegram 4915 From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, May 24, 1972, 0630Z.

Subject:

Test of Draft Agreement on Space

Ref:

Moscow 4913

Text follows of draft agreement on space accepted by the two sides for scheduled signature on May 24:

Agreement Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes.

The United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,

Considering the role which the USA and the USSR play in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

Striving for a further expansion of cooperation between the USA and the USSR in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,

Noting the positive cooperation which the parties have already experienced in this area,

Desiring to make the results of scientific research gained from the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes available for the benefit of the peoples of the two countries and of all peoples of the world,

Taking into consideration the provisions of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, as well as the agreement on the rescue of astronauts, the return of astronauts, and the return of objects launched into outer space,

In accordance with the agreement between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics of exchanges and cooperation in scientific, technical, educational, cultural, and other fields, signed April 11, 1972 in order to develop further the principles of mutually beneficial cooperation between the two countries:

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

The parties will develop cooperation in the fields of space meteorology: study of the natural environment: the exploration of near earth space, the moon and the planets: and space biology and medicine: and, in particular, will cooperate to take all appropriate measures to encourage and achieve the fulfillment of the “summary of results of discussion on space cooperation between the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.” of January 21, 1971.

Article 2

The parties will carry out such cooperation by means of mutual exchanges of scientific information and delegations, through meetings of scientists and specialists of both countries, and also in such other ways as may be mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation.

Article 3

The parties have agreed to carry out projects for designing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flight in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of a U.S. Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of astronauts in each other’s spacecrafts. The implementation of these projects will be carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the summary of results of the meeting between representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on the question of developing compatible systems for rendezvous and docking of manned spacecraft and space stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., dated April 6, 1972.

Article 4

The parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer-space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field.

Article 5

The parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes.

Article 6

This agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the parties.

Done at Moscow this twenty-fourth day of May 1972, in two copies, each in English and Russian languages, with both texts equally authentic.

For the United States of America

For the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 1-1 US-USSR. Confidential; Immediate, Exdis. The May 17 memorandum from Kissinger to Nixon, recommending that the President sign such a statement during the Moscow summit is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-47. The agreement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 26, 1972, pp. 924-925.

282. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher) 282. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Fletcher)1

Washington, June 1, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Post-Apollo Relationships with the Europeans

The President has carefully studied the rationale and recommendations of your memoranda of April 29, 1972 and May 5, 1972 respectively, and has decided: 1. That we actively encourage European development of research application modules, as well as participation in payload development and shuttle utilization, both manned and unmanned.

2. That we discourage but not preclude European participation in the tasks in the development of the Shuttle already identified by NASA, conditioned on a prior commitment by the European Space Conference (ESC) that it will undertake the subsequent development of one or more research application modules. In informing the Europeans of this position, the U.S. delegation should do so with the understanding that these tasks will be conducted without exchange of funds, and any cost growth, whether due to overruns or changes of scope, will be assumed by the ESC, in order to avoid acrimonious disputes over cost allocations.

3. That the Tug should be U.S.-built.

4. That future joint programs should stress joint payload and utilization activities and that joint development and production in the non-payload area not be undertaken.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential; Noforn. The text of Fletcher’s May 5 memorandum is printed in Logsdon (ed.), Exploring the Universe, Vol. II, External Relations, Document I-27. Rogers’ memorandum is Document 279. In transmitting these two memoranda to Kissinger, John B. Walsh of the NSC staff disagreed with David’s recommendation that discussions concerning European participation in Shuttle tasks should be terminated on the basis of cost and management complications. Walsh thought the tasks were simple and represented minimal fulfillment of implied U.S. commitments. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 393, Subject Files, Space Programs, 1972)

283. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin 283. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin1

Washington, July 12, 1972.

Post-Apollo Relationships with the Europeans

By memorandum of June 1, 1972 Dr. Kissinger forwarded to the Secretary and Dr. Fletcher, the Administrator of NASA, the President’s decisions as to the acceptable measure and character of European participation in the development and use of the space shuttle system (Tab A). This action was in response to the Secretary’s memorandum to the President on April 29 seeking prompt decisions on these matters and urging that we neither deny European participation in the development of this system nor take a course of action which would indicate a major change in our policy toward relationships with Europe in our post-Apollo space program (Tab B).

Although the President did not accept our suggestions fully, his response met our essential request in that it instructed us to encourage European development of one or more research application modules and it provided us with decisions in time for us to hold political-level discussions in mid-June with a delegation from the European Space Conference (ESC).

The President’s instructions also directed that the Europeans be discouraged, but not precluded from participation in the development of the shuttle (i.e., the booster) and that the space tug to be used with the shuttle be U.S. built. Our recommendation concerning the shuttle had been “do not encourage,” and concerning the tug “defer pending further mutual study.”

The net effect of two years discussion of this subject is to move from a premise that European cooperation in the development of hardware as well as use of hardware was politically desirable to a posture that cooperation in hardware development is to be tolerated only if it meets stringent fit criteria. Future joint programs, the President said, “should stress joint payload (i.e., satellite) and utilization activities.”

The European purpose during the discussion with the ESC delegation on June 14-16 was to ascertain our current position as to the extent of, and arrangements for, European participation, since the ESC ministers were to meet in mid-July to reach a decision on these matters. The discussions were informal. Dr. Fletcher participated throughout.

At the outset of the discussions we made the President’s policy perfectly clear. We also emphasized that our interest in European participation is essentially a political act reflecting the enduring nature of the ties that bind the US and Europe; that it is not based on commercial or technical considerations. We stipulated that we seek multinational participation and arrangements. In view of NASA’s tight schedule for the development of the space shuttle system we also stipulated the necessity (1) for an early decision in principle by the Europeans whether they intend to participate, (2) for specific European proposals as to the tasks which they will commit to undertake and (3) for the ensuing development of intergovernmental and interagency agreements governing their participation. All these steps should be completed by the end of October. The next step is up to the Europeans.

The Europeans were clearly grateful for the clear and authoritative statement of our position even though it was a disappointment to some of them. They are apprehensive as to their ability to develop an agreed European proposal within the tight schedule which we required. The interests and preferences of the European countries differ substantially and much work remains to be done in Europe, if they are to reconcile these differences and present us a comprehensive proposal.

Last minute developments indicate that the ESC ministers will probably delay their meeting to late September. They understand that we could, in fact, wait until then for their decision in principle.

In sum, we have now brought two and a half years of discussion with the Europeans to a point of decision. We have made a reasonable, albeit somewhat limited, proposal for their participation—one which offers them clear choices and a worthwhile challenge. At this point it is not clear how they will respond.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Confidential. Drafted by Pollack and Packard and concurred in by Katz. Tab A is Document 282 and Tab B is Document 279.

284. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Stoessel) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin 284. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Stoessel) to Acting Secretary of State Irwin1

Washington, October 5, 1972.

Post-Apollo Cooperation with the Europeans

Background

The idea of encouraging European participation in the post-Apollo Space program dates back to 1969, when Tom Paine, then Administrator of NASA, visited the major European capitals to invite such participation. In 1970 and 1971 US officials led by Under Secretary Johnson met with European ministers to discuss the matter in detail. During this period we encouraged the Europeans’ interest in participation in the development of parts of the Shuttle, in one or more Research Application Modules (labs to be carried into orbit by the Shuttle), and especially in the Tug (a vehicle to be carried aloft in the Shuttle and used for operations at greater distances from the earth than can be reached with the Shuttle).

By the time of the Presidential decision of February 1972 to proceed with the Shuttle program, various factors caused the US to become less interested in substantial European participation in the Shuttle and Tug. This position was reflected in a White House decision of June 1972 to foreclose European development of the Tug, discourage their construction of Shuttle parts and welcome their development of a RAM. The decision was conveyed to a delegation at the deputy minister level from the European Space Conference (ESC), which visited Washington later that month.

Since then the Europeans have not been able to resolve their differences and have postponed holding an ESC ministerial meeting several times. Von Dohnanyi, the German Minister of Science and Education, has thus far been unsuccessful in his attempts to persuade his French and British colleagues, Charbonnel and Heseltine, to agree to participation in the post-Apollo program. He visited Washington in September to request a high level reaffirmation of our launch assurance policy as a means of enhancing support for post-Apollo cooperation.

Due to the scheduling requirements of the Shuttle program, we have requested the Europeans to reach a decision in principle by November on whether they will undertake development of the RAM (Sortie lab) but have told them that if further studies indicate that their part of the program will exceed estimated costs ($250 million), they may still back out by August 1973.

Issues

The Europeans have been unable to reach a decision because of their varying interests in a space program and their apparent conclusion that post-Apollo cooperation and development of their own launcher are mutually exclusive. Of the major states in the ESC, the FRG has been most interested in our offer. The Germans have decided that they would gain more technologically from modest participation in the most advanced space project under development than they would from cooperating in the development of a European launcher, Europa III, which would be inferior to US launchers developed in the mid-1960’s. The French are motivated more by political objectives—in particular a desire for independence from the US enabling them to launch any satellites they might wish. The French may also hope that work on a space launcher will assist the development of their next generation of military missiles. The British hold views similar to those of the Germans on Europa III, but have recently become less enthusiastic about post-Apollo cooperation. As the prospective European task became smaller and involved less sophisticated technology, the British interest in the program for its technological spin-offs has waned.

As a result of this trade-off between Europa III and post-Apollo, the Germans have told us that more forthcoming attitudes on launch assurances and other cooperative space ventures might convince other European countries that they could rely on the US and need not develop their own launcher. The US Government has taken steps to move the Aeronautical Satellite program along and in response to German urging has just issued a high level reaffirmation of our launch assurance policy.

In the event that no agreement can be reached within the ESC, the Germans have indicated that they would be interested in the possibility of bilateral cooperation with the US. They have asked us for a signal that we would be receptive to such an approach. Thus far we have maintained our position that because our objectives in the cooperative aspect of this program have a high political content, we would prefer to cooperate with a broadly based European group, including France, Germany and the UK. The question of our further response to the German proposal is now under consideration in the Department and we expect to submit a recommendation on this point soon.

The President will be making a statement on post-Apollo launch assistance on Monday, October 9. A copy of the Department’s cable containing the text of the statement is attached.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alexander T. Liebowitz (EUR/RPE), cleared with Webber and in EUR. The statement is published in the Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, Vol. 8, p. 1508. Attached but not published is telegram 182573.

285. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers 285. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Scientific and Technological Affairs (Pollack) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, November 13, 1972.

Breakthrough on Post-Apollo Cooperation with Europe

As you know, for over two years we have been seeking European participation in the Post-Apollo program. Since June of this year we have concentrated on European study and development (Phases B and C) of the Sortie Module an important $250 million component of the Post-Apollo system.

Last week the European Space Conference (ESC Ministers) voted unanimously to permit interested European governments to proceed on Phase B (project definition) studies of the Sortie Module. Although no commitment has yet been made with respect to the actual hardware development of the Sortie Module (Phase C), the actions taken last week implicitly assumed that at an appropriate time such a commitment will also be made.

Last week actions by the ESC Ministers seems to mark the end of an impasse between the Germans, advocates of cooperation with the U.S. on the Sortie Module; the French, advocates of Europe proceeding with the development of an independent launcher; and the British who have been arguing for the development of a comprehensive European space policy and the establishment of a single European Space Agency.

While it will take another eight to ten months to learn whether Europe will undertake the full task of developing the Sortie Module, last week’s action by the European Space Conference was a long first step toward realization of what could become one of the most significant space cooperation projects of the decade.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Pollack. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Stoessel.

286. Translation of a Letter From the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) to Secretary of State Rogers 286. Translation of a Letter From the Chairman of the European Space Conference (Lefevre) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Brussels, December 27, 1972.

Mr. Secretary:

I have the honor to refer to the discussions which have taken place between United States representatives and the European Space Conference concerning Europe’s participation in the post-Apollo program, and in particular to the correspondence exchanged between Mr. U. ALexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State, and myself.

The Ministerial Meeting of the European Space Conference, which took place in Brussels on December 20, 1972, adopted an important decision in this regard. Indeed, taking into account and within the framework of the proposal of the United States Government, it agreed that the “Sortie-Module” program should be undertaken, carried out, and administered within a common European framework.

The participation of member countries and the mode of financing will be settled in the near future.

This means that at the outset this program will be carried out as a special project on the European Space Research Organization.

Since the Ministers of the European Space Conference also decided to form a new European space organization from ESRO and ELDO, to be established if possible by January 1, 1974, this new organization, upon its creation, will take over the continuation of this program.

All appropriate measures will be taken to ensure the continuity of obligations undertaken by member countries as well as of management and of contracts already awarded.

During its meeting on January 18, 1973, the ESRO Council will take all appropriate measures, and the Council President will inform the American authorities of the steps taken and will make suggestions for the continuation of negotiations.

I am very pleased to be able to inform you of the adoption of this decision by the Ministers of the European Space Conference.

Without doubt it marks the beginning of an important new period of cooperation in space matters between the United States and Europe. Accept, Mr. Secretary, the assurances of my highest consideration.

[s] Theo Lefevre
Th. Lefevre
Minister of State

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SP 10 US. No classification marking. A notation on the letter indicates that Lefevre signed the original.

Chapter 5. International Environmental PolicyChapter 5. International Environmental Policy

287. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, June 2, 1969.

Kissinger reported on progress at the North Atlantic Council of NATO on establishing a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society to deal with environmental issues.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 256, NATO, Vol. V. Confidential. Sent for information. Nixon proposed the committee in an April 10 speech to the North Atlantic Council. The full text of the address is in Public Papers: Nixon, 1969, pp. 272-276. Attached but not published was Richardson’s May 19 memorandum.

288. Letter From the Acting Secretary of the Interior (Train) to Under Secretary of State (Richardson)

Washington, November 17, 1969.

Train expressed his concern that the Department of State was not enthusiastic about the UN Conference on the Human Environment. The American concern over the conference budget, he predicted, would have a negative effect on world opinion. He suggested that U.S. leadership adopt a “positive attitude” toward the Conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 61-3. No classification marking.

289. Letter From Under Secretary Richardson to Under Secretary of the Interior (Train)

Washington, December 10, 1969.

Richardson assured Train that the Department of State was giving the UN Conference on the Human Environment, slated for Stockholm, Sweden, its fullest support.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 61-3. No classification marking. Drafted by Guy Ferri (IO/OES), cleared by Thomas Kellermann (SCI), and redrafted by Melvin Levitsky on December 8.

290. Telegram 16911 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Washington, February 4, 1970, 0121Z.

The telegram reviewed the progress of the CCMS proposal within NATO.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 3 NATO. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Alan D. Berlind (EUR/RPM) on December 3; cleared with SCI, EUR/RPM, and the White House; and approved by Springsteen.

291. Telegram 27061 From the Department of State to the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Mission to the United Nations European Office, and to UNESCO

Washington, February 24, 1970.

The Department of State outlined a rationale for a new U.S. initiative in East-West cooperation in environmental matters.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 NATO. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals, all Eastern European capitals, Bern, Helsinki, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, Dublin, Belgrade, Strasbourg, Moscow, and USUN. Drafted by Arva C. Floyd and Edward J. Streator (EUR/RPM) on February 9; cleared with EUR, SCI, IO, BMI, EE and the White House; and approved by Richardson.

292. Telegram 37255 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Washington, March 6, 1970.

Under Secretary of State Richardson reassured NATO Ambassador Ellsworth that the Department of State was not detracting from environmental efforts launched through CCMS.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 NATO. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals, OECD Paris, the U.S. Mission to Geneva, and USUN. Drafted by Floyd and Streator; cleared in EUR, SCI, IO, and the White House; and approved by Richardson. In telegram 794 from NATO, March 4, Ellsworth agreed that the concept of more vigorous U.S. leadership in environmental matters through the ECE was sound, but disagreed that the main focus should shift to the OECD. (Ibid.)

293. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, March 9 1970.

Herter briefed Rogers on the first meeting of the Standing Committee within the Cabinet Committee on the Environment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking Sent through Pollack (SCI) and Eliot. Drafted by William C. Salmon (SCI/EN) on March 5. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

294. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, March 17, 1970.

Rogers reported that at the first meeting of the International Standing Committee on the Environment he had set 1972 as a target date for tangible results in international environmental cooperation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret. Richardson signed for Rogers

295. Telegram 48681 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Washington, April 3, 1970.

The Department emphasized the importance of the Economic Commission for Europe’s Prague Conference on the Environment as a forum for East-West cooperation and as a means for orienting the ECE toward tangible action. It believed that this emphasis should not detract from the work of the CCMS.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to the Mission to Geneva. Drafted by Floyd and Smith (IO) on March 28; cleared in EUR, SCI, IO, and the White House; and approved by Springsteen.

296. Research Study REUS-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, April 14, 1970.

Study entitled: “NATO: Support for Committee on Challenges of Modern Society (CCMS) Growing.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem. Drafted by F. Herbert Capps (INR/REU/BINC) and cleared by Martin Packman (INR/REU).

297. Telegram 1370 From the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Department of State

Brussels, April 14, 1970.

The Mission transmitted the text of Counsellor to the President Moynihan’s remarks delivered at the opening of the second meeting of the CCMS.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Unclassified; Priority. Repeated to USIA and all NATO capitals

298. Letter From the Acting Deputy Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Salmon) to the Secretary to the Council on Environmental Quality (Gibbons)

Washington, July 14, 1970.

The letter transmitted a document entitled, “Significant Activities of the Department of State in the Environmental Field.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking.

299. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon

Washington, August 24, 1970.

Johnson asked the President to provide guidance for U.S. policy toward the major international organizations dealing with the environment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Unclassified. Drafted by Herter. A notation on the first page indicated that the President approved the statement

300. Research Study SAS-1, Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, October 8, 1970.

The study, entitled: “Major International Conference on the Environment, 1971-1972,” was prepared as a supporting paper for a report on “U.S. Priority Interest in the Environmental Activities of International Organizations.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Howard M. Wiedemann, (IND/DFR).

301. Telegram 171300 From the Department of State to All Embassies in Europe, the Mission to the United Nations, the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Mission to Economic Commission for Europe, and the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Washington, October 16, 1970.

The telegram was also sent to the Mission to the United Nations, the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Mission to Economic Commission for Europe, and the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The Department provided guidelines for President Nixon’s decisions on U.S. policy toward the major international organizations dealing with the environment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 UN. Unclassified. Drafted by Herter on October 14; cleared by Pollack, Herz, Hillenbrand, Treize, and in substance with Train and Moynihan; and approved by Acting Secretary of State Irwin.

302. Letter From the Representative to the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (Greenwald) to the Deputy Director, Office of Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs (Phillips)

Washington, October 29, 1970.

Greenwald discussed the Department of State’s broad strategy in directing the OECD’s environmental work.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 OECD. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. A notation on the letter indicates Greenwald signed the original

303. Report by Task Force III of the Committee on International Environmental Affairs

Washington, December 1970.

The report is entitled: “U.S. Priority Interests in the Environmental Activities of International Organizations.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking.

304. Telegram 4070 From the Mission to the Economic Commission for Europe to the Department of State

Geneva, December 4, 1970, 1745Z.

The Mission reported that at the meeting of the ECE senior environmental advisers, Soviet senior advisers tried to play down the importance of international environmental action.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 ECE. Confidential. Repeated to OECD, USUN, USNATO, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, and Stockholm.

305. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President (Whitaker) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, January 14, 1971.

Rogers was authorized to continue the International Standing Committee on the Environment even though its parent Cabinet Committee had been abolished.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Train.

306. Letter From the Scientific Attache (Hudson) at the Embassy in Brazil to the Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Herter)

Washington, February 12, 1971.

Hudson informed Herter that underdeveloped countries may feel that concern about the environment is a “rich man’s game” and that this may inhibit the work of the Stockholm conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 BRAZ. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. Copies were sent to the ambassador, deputy chief of mission, and public affairs officer at the U.S. Embassy.

307. Research Study From the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, May 20, 1971.

”ECE/GDR: The Prague Environmental Symposium A Shortlived Compromise.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73. SCI 41 ECE. Confidential.

308. Report of the US Group of Experts on the Economic Commission for Europe’s Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment

Washington, July 9, 1971.

The report summarized the results of the symposium held in Prague, Czechoslovakia. The symposium was downgraded from “conference” status because of the problem of East German representation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 ECE. No classification marking. Drafted by Patrick Mulloy on July 12.

309. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, August 5, 1971.

Under a covering memorandum, Eliot transmitted scenarios in which the U.S. would support an invitation to the People’s Republic of China to attend the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret. Drafted by Barbara J. Schrage (IO/UNP) on August 1 and cleared in IO, EA, EUR, L, C, and SCI.

310. Intelligence Note RSGN-16 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, August 12, 1971.

Research study entitled: “UN: Soviets Pushing GDR Participation in Stockholm Environment Conference.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret. Drafted by John J. Donovan and cleared by Frank H. Perez (both of INR/RSG.)

311. Memorandum From Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 4, 1972.

Train discussed the possibility of environmental cooperation with the People’s Republic of China.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Ehrlichman.

312. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, January 12, 1972.

Rogers recommended that the President propose the establishment of a United Nations Fund on the Environment, asserting that it, and substantial financial support, would serve as the keystone of U.S. participation in the Stockholm Conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 UN. A notation on the memorandum reads: “Message sent to Congress 2/8/72.” The message is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1972, pp. 173-189. Annexes 1-6 were attached but not published.

313. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)

Washington, January 14, 1972.

Kissinger thanked Train for his suggestions on possible environmental cooperation with China and promised to “keep them in mind,” but agreed that there was little evidence that the Chinese were interested in environmental cooperation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Haig signed for Kissinger.

314. Research Study RSGS-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, January 14, 1972.

The study was entitled, “UN: Soviets Increase Pressure for GDR Participation in Stockholm Conference.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan and cleared by Perez.

315. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon

Washington, February 5, 1972.

Kissinger and Train recommended that the President agree to Secretary of State Rogers’ recommendation to create a voluntary UN Fund on the Environment in part because it would give the Stockholm Conference the chance to produce a substantive international program.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CQE I. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The initials “RN” are next to the option of recommendation 2 that the “US should offer $40 million on a 40/60 matching basis.” There is no indication that the President approved the other recommendations.

316. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Eliot) to the President’s’ Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 1, 1972.

Eliot described the Department’s position on an anti-nuclear clause submitted by the Japanese and inserted into the draft declaration on the environment prepared for the Stockholm Conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by John Trevithick (IO/SCT) on February 28, and cleared by IO, SCI, ACDA, and PM. Carson signed for Eliot. The IWG Report, DOD Memorandum, and State Memorandum were attached but not published.

317. Intelligence Note RARN-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, March 2, 1972.

Intelligence Note entitled: “Brazil: If Development Brings Pollution, So Be It.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth M. Schimel and cleared by Godfrey H. Summ (both of INR/RAR).

318. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 3, 1972.

CEQ Chairman Train and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin discussed the feasibility of U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working projects and the possibility that U.S. and Soviet leaders could sign a bilateral environmental agreement during the Moscow summit.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ II. Secret. The meeting took place at the Council on Environmental Quality. Copies were sent to the U.S. participants, the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, and Sonnenfeldt.

319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)

Washington, April 6, 1972.

Train recommended that Secretary of State Rogers not be designated as the head of the U.S. Delegation to the Stockholm Conference.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ II. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Kissinger and Whitaker. Printed from a copy that indicates that Train signed the original.

320. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, April 27, 1972.

Stevenson reported that the World Heritage Convention, announced by President Nixon as an environmental objective, had been prepared by the representatives of 60 nations and would be submitted to the UNESCO General Conference in October 1972 for approval.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Unclassified. Drafted by Salans on April 26.

321. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon

Washington, May 29, 1972.

Irwin submitted a report of the Under Secretaries Committee on the status of international environmental negotiations as requested by the President.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. There is no indication that the President approved or disapproved any of the recommendations.

322. Intelligence Note REC -11 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, May 31, 1972.

The intelligence note assessed the expected African position at the Stockholm UN Conference on the Human Environment.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Jim B. Marshall and cleared by J. Ghiardi, both of INR/REC.

323. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, June 8, 1972.

Kissinger summarized CEQ Chairman Train’s memorandum on U.S. environmental goals for President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Sent for information. A stamped note on the memorandum indicated the President saw it. McDonald signed the attached report for Train.

324. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon

Washington, June 19, 1972.

Train reported on the Stockholm Conference and characterized it as a success.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. The memorandum is unsigned. The draft statement was attached but not published. Copies were sent to Erhlichman and Kissinger.

325. Report on the UN Conference on the Human Environment from the Vice-Chairman of Delegation (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, July 28, 1972.

Herter transmitted the U.S. Delegation’s official report of activity during the Stockholm Conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential.

326. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)

Washington, August 4, 1972.

Kissinger informed Train that President Nixon had approved a recommendation that Train serve as U.S. coordinator to monitor implementation of the U.S.-Soviet Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Ehrlichman and Ziegler. Nixon’s letter to Train is Document 327. On April 28 the White House authorized sending a delegation to Moscow to negotiate an ad referendum environmental cooperation agreement based upon previously exchanged drafts. Dr. Gordon MacDonald headed the delegation. (Memorandum from Hillenbrand to Kissinger, May 1; ibid., Box 719, Country Files, Europe, USSR, Vol. XXII) On May 6 the environmental negotiations were successfully concluded. (Memorandum from Sonnenfeldt to Kissinger, May 6, ibid.) The text of agreement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 26, 1972, pp. 921-923.

327. Letter From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)

Washington, August 4, 1972.

Nixon designated Train as the Chairman of the United States side of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Committee in the Field of Environmental Cooperation and the U.S. Coordinator for the agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking.

328. Intelligence Note RESN-102 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

Washington, August 11, 1972.

An intelligence assessment of “The Soviets in the International Environment: After Stockholm.”

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Robert T. Willner and cleared by Martin Packman, both of INR/REU.

329. Memorandum From A. Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 1, 1972.

Clift suggested guidance for Train prior to his trip to Moscow. He questioned Train’s inclination to present the Soviets with several rare horses.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Administratively Confidential. Sent for action. Tabs A-C were attached but not published. Next to the first sentence of the second paragraph of section 1, Kissinger wrote in the margin: “I favor it.” Kissinger wrote next to the sentence in the second to last paragraph opposing a gift of horses: “I agree, it is crazy.” Kissinger initialed his approval of both recommendations.

330. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 25, 1972.

Sonnenfeldt commented on the success of CEQ Chairman Train’s talks with the Soviet leadership and reported that a memorandum of understanding providing for the implementation of cooperative environmental projects had been signed with the USSR.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Administratively Confidential. Sent for prompt action please. There is a check mark next to the option not to include Dobrynin.

331. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, October 9, 1972.

Kissinger summarized CEQ Chairman Train’s report on the first meeting of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection. Train’s report is attached.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Confidential. Sent for information. Copies of Train’s report were sent to Ehrlichman and Kissinger. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

287. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 287. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, June 2, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Implementation of Your NATO Proposals

The North Atlantic Council (NAC) has now discussed your proposal for establishing a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society (on May 14), and the proposals for periodic meetings at the Deputy Foreign Minister level and creation of a more powerful Special Political Planning Committee (on May 21).

The discussions in Brussels have made clear that the considered Allied reaction has been generally positive though cautious to the idea of a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society, and generally negative on Deputy Foreign Minister meetings and a new planning group.

At Tab A is a memorandum from Elliot Richardson giving details of the status of the proposal for a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society, which has been considered in some detail with the Allies. The Permanent Representatives have agreed ad referendum to (a) visits this summer by NATO Secretary General Brosio to Allied capitals to discuss your proposals; and (b) a special NAC meeting this autumn, reinforced by high-level experts on environmental affairs, to discuss this subject.

My own review of the reporting from Brussels leads me to conclude that there are three basic reasons for the slowness and skepticism of our Allies in responding to your proposals: --first, and most important, the proposals have been advanced through NAC, where the Permanent Representatives tend to see the new structures as challenges to their own prerogatives, and to interpret US advocacy of change as implying that NAC has not been doing its job properly;

--second, your proposals tend to cut across bureaucratic lines and suggest a NATO role for agencies of Allied Governments outside the Foreign Ministries, which causes consternation among professional diplomats in the capitals; and

--third, the Allies traditionally are suspicious of plans to create new NATO mechanisms until it is perfectly clear why they are required and how they will be used.

The State Department is currently undertaking a further series of bilateral approaches to the allies both in allied capitals and by calling in Ambassadors or Deputy Mission chiefs here. An aide memoire giving additional details on how the Committee on Challenges of Modern Society would function is being handed to all allied foreign ministers.

I think this is the right approach since it may cut through some of the inertia. If, after we have obtained responses to these demarches, the pace still seems unsatisfactory we could consider a personal letter from you to NATO heads of government. Elliot Richardson will provide a further progress report in a few days.

Attachment
Memorandum From the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, May 16, 1969

SUBJECT: Implementation, of your NATO Proposals

Attached at Tab A is a progress report on the implementation of the three proposals you made in your speech of April 10 to the NATO Ministers. Our ambassadors are now in the process of laying the groundwork in NATO capitals so that our NATO delegation will be in a position to submit formal proposals—to the North Atlantic Council.

Tab A
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Richardson) to President Nixon

Washington, May 6, 1969

Subject: Implementation of your Proposals to the NATO Ministerial Meeting

In your address at the commemorative session of the North Atlantic Council on April 10, you called for the following three measures to improve Western political consultations: -- Periodic meetings of Deputy Foreign Ministers

-- Creation of a special-political planning group;

-- Establishment of a committee on the challenges of modern society.

Discussions at the Ministerial Meeting and comments thereafter from capitals and NATO Permanent Representatives indicate, considerable interest in implementing these proposals. Predictably there, are areas of resistance from, certain quarters some Allies have expressed concern over an expansion of NATO’s current structure others have taken a conventional view towards expanding NATO’s consultative role to include environmental problems. On the other hand, there have been strong expressions of support for your proposals from a number of the Allies; the Germans and Dutch, for example, have evinced enthusiastic interest in NATO discussions on problems of modern society.

Based on reports we have received thus far, we considered it advisable to instruct Ambassadors in Allied capitals to make bilateral approaches in order to develop support for your proposals at the political level. We also believe it important to try to break this subject out of traditional Foreign Office channels. As a further useful step in this direction, NATO Secretary General Brosio may soon tour Allied capitals in order to obtain high-level views on your proposals.

Specifically, we have taken the following steps on each of your suggestions:

— Periodic Meetings of Deputy Foreign Ministers:

We have urged that the first meeting take place in September, leaving to participating officials the question of the schedule for subsequent meetings. We have suggested that topics for consultation by Deputy Foreign Ministers might include European security issues which lend themselves to negotiation with the countries of Eastern Europe; formal establishment of the Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society, and of guidelines for this committee; and a discussion of the work of the Special Political Planning Group.

– Special Political Planning Group:

We have called for the establishment of a planning group which would consult on long-term issues beyond current Alliance operational concerns. We believe this body should examine trends in an effort to identify at early stages the problems that might arise, or could be prevented from arising through advance action. If possible, we would like to organize the first session of this group in June.

— Committee on Challenges of Modern Society:

Our first objective in this area is to obtain early agreement in principle among the Permanent Representatives for establishing this committee. Once this decision is taken, we believe that, an ad hoc exploratory group should be convened to discuss topics to be brought before the committee, as well as organizational arrangements for carrying this work forward. We have proposed that Allied representatives to-this ad hoc group should be of the caliber of Pat Moynihan Arthur Burns or James Allen. This ad hoc committee would report its findings to Deputy Foreign Ministers at their September meeting; they in turn would endorse or amend decisions of the ad hoc group. The Committee on Challenges of Modern Society would then be formed to meet in October or November.

The Council at Permanent Representatives level will meet to consider these proposals again on May 14. We will complete our bilateral discussions in capitals before then. In the light of these discussions we will prepare additional instructions to our NATO Ambassador to use at that meeting. That session should result in further clarification of Allied views and be the first step towards an action program.

Elliot L. Richardson

DEPARTMENT OF STATE

WASHINGTON

May 19, 1969

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT

Subject: Implementation of Your Proposal for Establishing a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society

In my memorandum of May 6, I outlined steps in NATO to implement the proposals you made in your April 10 address for improving NATO’s consultative machinery. On May 14, the North Atlantic Council, exchanged views on the establishment of a Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society.

Prior to the May 14 Council meeting, we had instructed our Ambassadors in NATO capitals to make approaches at high levels of government to gain support for your proposals Nonetheless, Allied views expressed in the Council May 14 showed that further effort is needed to achieve consensus on establishing the new Committee on Challenges of Modern Society.

However, the Permanent Representatives agreed ad referendum to a), visits this summer by NATO Secretary General Brosio to Allied capitals to discuss your proposals; and b) a special meeting this autumn of the Council, reinforced by high-level experts on environmental affairs, to discuss this subject.

Although we fully support the Brosio tour, we would also like to see an early meeting of officials who have direct responsibilities in this field to prepare recommendations for consideration by the Council on the procedure and substance of future Allied consultations on the problems of modern society. We thus plan to instruct our Ambassadors to make another round of approaches in NATO capitals on your proposals and have suggested that the North Atlantic Council have another full discussion on this subject in June. Our hope is to have an exploratory group of high-level experts in the environmental field meet in early September, prior to the reinforced Council meeting and the proposed meeting of Deputy Foreign Ministers.

The Department will also be in touch with NATO Embassies in Washington to emphasize our interest in this project.

On May 21, the Council will discuss your other two proposals for improving NATO’s consultative machinery periodic meetings of Deputy Foreign Ministers and the establishment of a special political planning group.

Acting Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 256, NATO, Vol. V. Confidential. Sent for information. Nixon proposed the committee in an April 10 speech to the North Atlantic Council. The full text of the address is in Public Papers: Nixon, 1969, pp. 272-276. Attached but not published was Richardson’s May 19 memorandum.

288. Letter From the Acting Secretary of the Interior (Train) to Under Secretary of State (Richardson) 288. Letter From the Acting Secretary of the Interior (Train) to Under Secretary of State (Richardson)1

Washington, November 17, 1969.

Dear Elliot:

I am concerned about our Government’s attitude and response toward the 1972 UN Conference on the Human Environment.

Signals have come to me from several sources that the United States is not particularly enthusiastic about the Conference, particularly as reflected in our attitude toward the Conference budget.

I know that a conference of the projected size and complexity of the 1972 meeting involves many considerations, not the least of which is financing. However, I think it would be most unfortunate if our concern over the budget should result in the United States being caste in an essentially negative role in a field where we should be exercising positive international leadership. Quality of the environment is attracting world-wide interest and attention. The opportunity is ripe for U.S. initiatives.

At the very least, the United States should develop a positive attitude toward the 1972 Conference and do everything possible to contribute to its eventual success.

Sincerely yours

Russell Train
Acting Secretary of the Interior

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 61-3. No classification marking.

289. Letter From Under Secretary Richardson to Under Secretary of the Interior (Train) 289. Letter From Under Secretary Richardson to Under Secretary of the Interior (Train)1

Washington, December 10, 1969.

Dear Russ:

Thank you for your letter of November 17. I would like to reassure you that we are giving the fullest support to the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment scheduled to be held in Stockholm in 1972. The attitude of our Government was reflected in President Nixon’s address to the 24th UN General Assembly on September 18, 1969. The President then pledged our “strongest support” for the Conference. We have instructed our delegation to give the most vigorous support to this UN initiative, and a favorable resolution was recently approved unanimously by the Second UNGA Committee considering this matter.

As concerns the Conference budget, I understand that at the 47th Session of the ECOSOC held in Geneva last summer some 26 representatives agreed that the estimated budget for the Conference should be cut back. Both the ECOSOC resolution and the resolution approved by the Second UNGA Committee request the Secretary General of the UN “to make all efforts to reduce the costs of the Conference.”

I can assure you that we will continue to support the UN Conference on the Human Environment. We intend to participate vigorously in the Preparatory Committee which is now being formed.

With warm regard,

Sincerely,

Elliot L. Richardson

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 61-3. No classification marking. Drafted by Guy Ferri (IO/OES), cleared by Thomas Kellermann (SCI), and redrafted by Melvin Levitsky on December 8.

290. Telegram 16911 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 290. Telegram 16911 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

Washington, February 4, 1970, 0121Z.

Subject:

CCMS Guidance for Science Committee Meeting February 5-6

Ref:

State 14863

1. When Science Committee (SC) last met in October of 1969, CCMS was still in formative stages and had rot yet won official approval from NAC. Some NATO member governments still had doubts about their participation or even the desirability of establishing CCMS at all. It is not surprising, then, that similar element of doubt in evidence at SC meeting.

2. Since then, and beginning with highly successful first meeting last December, CCMS has made real progress. Plans are underway for meetings within next few weeks on three US pilot projects, with experts from interested member countries attending. Great majority of NATO membership now firmly committed to and actively engaged in work of CCMS. In short, new NATO activity in environmental field shows every sign of fulfilling promise contained in original proposal.

3. At October SC meeting, several delegates remarked on need to clarify division of labor between SC and COMS where both committees involved in same field of study. It should now be clear to all concerned that CCMS, as action-oriented body seeking convince governments to take concrete steps toward solving problems of environment, should in no way interfere or clash with activities of SC. On contrary, we foresee most fruitful cooperation between two committees precisely because of their complementary functions.

4. Also at October SC meeting, German representative (Dr. Pestel) cited need for coordination among interested international bodies on question of sea pollution, with view to avoiding duplication of effort in this area of SC interest. As is known, Belgians have undertaken to pilot study on open water pollution for CCMS, with Portugal and France as co-pilots, and US and others actively involved as participants. This coincidence of interests between SC and CCMS furnishes good opportunity for cooperative effort, with SC consideration of oceanographic platform highly relevant to Belgian pilot study in CCMS. Fortunately, Chairman Randers in convenient position to effect liaison between two committees on this and other possible areas of cooperation.

5. US Rep to SC meeting February 5-6 should draw on above during discussion of CCMS (Item X) and urge full SC support of and cooperation with CCMS.

6. If results of probes undertaken per State 16050 so indicate, and if Ambassador Ellsworth concurs, US step may also raise question of contemplated CCMS conference on open water pollution and possibility of SC involvement.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 3 NATO. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Alan D. Berlind (EUR/RPM) on December 3; cleared with SCI, EUR/RPM, and the White House; and approved by Springsteen.

291. Telegram 27061 From the Department of State to the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Mission to the United Nations European Office, and to UNESCO 291. Telegram 27061 From the Department of State to the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Mission to the United Nations European Office, and to UNESCO1

Washington, February 24, 1970.

Subject:

Enhanced East-West Cooperation on Environmental Problems

For Ambassadors from Under Secretary

1. As a function of US attention to national and international efforts on environmental issues, and to follow-up on para 12 of December 1969 NATO Ministerial Declaration, decision has been taken that US will play in months ahead a more vigorous leadership role in efforts to enhance East-West cooperation in environmental matters through the ECE. This message sketches rationale for new US initiative in this area, together with scenario for pressing our objectives initially in NATO subsequently in OECD and thereafter in ECE, with a view to raising the level of participation in the 1971 ECE environment conference and to ensuring that substantial practical results flow from it.

2. Our basic rationale is simply that all industrially advanced societies, regardless of their social systems, share increasingly urgent environmental problems, many of which cross national boundaries and can only be solved in international context. Moreover, serious and practical joint endeavors of this kind could, in the long run, help to allay the suspicions and reduce the tensions that impede progress on resolution of fundamental East-West political issues. A sense of the urgency of these objectives underlay the NATO Ministers’ call in December 1969 for enhanced cooperation on environmental matters. Finally, this initiative will extend into another international arena the emphasis the President has already given to fostering domestic and international cooperation in improving environmental quality.

3. After consideration of possibility for enhanced East-West environmental consultation, we have concluded that, rather than a special international meeting, it would be preferable to build on ongoing ECE environmental work. ECE has been conducting programs in various environment fields for over a decade. These include permanent groups concerned with water and air pollution and urban environment. The EE’s and Soviets have been active participants in meetings of these groups. Recently, Soviets proposed and had approved an ECE meeting on desulphurization of fuels, scheduled for Fall 1970.

4. Specifically, our target is to begin planning the work necessary to upgrade the ECE Conference on environmental problems already scheduled in Prague in mid-1971, as well as the preparatory meetings prior to the Conference. As a step in this direction, Christian A. Herter, Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary for Environmental Affairs, will head US group at March 2-5 preparatory meeting in Geneva. We would also envisage participation in the conference itself by Ministers, or officials of equivalent rank, in order to help insure, within the various individual government bureaucracies, the kind of interest and impetus that will be required for the success of the conference and the specific cooperative efforts that should flow from it. We would hope to use the momentum of this high-level conference to give ECE programs greater action orientation. For example, ECE programs could call for governmental action along general lines of pilot Projects US is currently sponsoring in CCMS; ECE could also convene working parties on specific problems, leading to negotiations of international agreements of environmental nature, following pattern of ECE’s role in drafting Vienna Road Traffic Convention of 1968. (As a step in this direction, we plan during April ECE plenary to submit resolution calling for establishment of Group of Senior Advisors to ECE Governments on Environmental Problems.)

5. Environmental programs in ECE context should, of course, be compatible with ongoing CCMS effort, which represents major Presidential initiative. We would thus envisage that subjects for East-West environmental cooperation would emphasize those in which Alliance members have already developed experience and capability for dealing with successfully among themselves, especially within CCMS. Moreover, discussions of specific subjects appropriate for East-West cooperation should also take place within CCMS (during next regular meeting in April or in special meetings called for the purpose) and draw upon its experience in development of pilot projects.

6. To begin building broadest Allied and other European support for enhanced ECE conference, addressees should be guided by following scenario:

7. USNATO should brief Brosio fully on our thinking, seeking his advice as appropriate, requesting early discussion in NAC, and indicating that, prior to NAC discussion and in order to alert capitals, USNATO would be prepared to discuss US views informally at PermRep lunch or other session. Prior consultation at NATO Headquarters with the UK and FRG Dels might also be useful in preparing ground. There were indications of considerable UK interest in East-West environmental cooperation before and during the December Ministerial, and any East-West meeting of course raises the problem of GDR participation. (FRG is member of ECE but GDR is not, although individual East Germans sometimes attend ECE meetings as experts; ECE’s Executive Secretary has mandate permitting him to invite non-UN members to ECE meetings, though it is extremely doubtful he would use it without concurrence of all ECE members.)

8. Discussion in NATO of enhancement of ECE conference of course should be held closely by all Allies in order to preclude possibly adverse impact if initiative appeared to be of NATO origin rather than product of effort by individual countries acting in harmony. Indeed, though we propose to consult in the first instance in NATO, we are aware that this effort could fail if it were advanced solely as a NATO initiative, or if the Soviets, East Europeans and neutrals came to believe that it were put forward merely to serve allied political interests.

9. Accordingly, after initial launching, discussion and development of broad consensus in NM, including possible preliminary discussion in special CCMS meeting called for the purpose, and before matter is taken up by ECE, at its April Plenary, we believe main locus for consultation on Western side should be shifted to OECD. We would wish to see other countries playing an active and visible role in carrying this initiative forward.

10. Preparatory to NAC discussion, and following informal USNATO discussions with other PermReps, we believe it might also be useful if International Staff (ASYG Randers) were to draft and circulate scenario for further Allied steps. This would help organize PermRep discussion, permit a measure of consensus to be developed on next steps, and possibly flush out further constructive suggestions from NATO capitals. In any case discussion in NATO should not drag on, and we hope to see tangible action taken by NAC within two-three weeks, followed by OECD discussion on unclassified basis during March. From OECD session should flow first major signal to East Europeans of Western interest in raising level and enlarging scope of 1971 ECE environmental conference.

11. The 25th Plenary, meeting in Geneva April 13-24, would be appropriate occasion for raising this issue formally for first time in ECE context.

12. Manner of raising our proposal for high-level ECE Europeans conference with Soviets and Eastern Europeans will require careful thought. A first step, after OECD discussion, might be presentation by third party or parties to Exec Secretary of ECE Stanovnik for his suggestions on best procedures with EE’s and Soviets.

13. We would expect that approaches in Allied and other capitals will be called for at some stage, paralleling multilateral consultations in NATO and OECD, and we will send all addressees background material on East-West environmental cooperation, underway or proposed, and on ECE activities in this field.

14. We would welcome comments and suggestions from info addressees.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 NATO. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals, all Eastern European capitals, Bern, Helsinki, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, Dublin, Belgrade, Strasbourg, Moscow, and USUN. Drafted by Arva C. Floyd and Edward J. Streator (EUR/RPM) on February 9; cleared with EUR, SCI, IO, BMI, EE and the White House; and approved by Richardson.

292. Telegram 37255 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 292. Telegram 37255 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

Washington, March 6, 1970.

Subj:

Enhanced East-West Cooperation on Environmental Problems

Ref:

USNATO 794

For Ambassador Ellsworth from Under Secretary

1. I am grateful for your constructive comments. We of course agree that continued success of CCMS is a matter of prime concern to the President, and nothing we do to stimulate other international environmental efforts should detract from it. Indeed, the intimacy of our relationships with the NATO Allies, their weight in world affairs, the gravity of environmental problems that we and most of them face, and the extent of the material and human resources that we and they can bring to bear jointly on these problems combine, I believe, to assure the rising success of CCMS.

2. Our proposed ECE initiative—and consultation and coordination on the Western side in support of that initiative—remain, however, matters of considerable assumption moment to us. Our assumption (State 27061) about the OECD follow-up role in coordinating Western efforts in this endeavor was based on three calculations: First, that the Soviets and Eastern Europeans would find it easier, politically, to go along with a proposal of this kind if it seemed to have its principal Western consultative focus in OECD rather than in NATO; second, that the OECD is already involved in some of the environmental subjects proposed for the ECE Conference and the SYG of the OECD and the Exec Sec of the ECE have already been in touch with each other to work out cooperative Secretariat arrangements; and third, that the Western European neutrals will wish to become involved and for this purpose the OECD provides best organizational framework at hand. Whether, as Ambassador Toon has suggested (Prague 232), the appearance of a NATO hand will hinder rather than help attract a forthcoming Eastern response to an ECE initiative remains to be seen. For Geneva: For the record, we would be interested in knowing whether Stanovnik actually referred to CCMS or NATO by name (Geneva 698).

3. CCMS Terms of, Reference (AC/274-D/1) specify that CCMS shall “make recommendations to the Council…on cooperation between member states and non-member states.” Legislative history shows this formulation to be based in large measure upon the premise widely discussed among the Allies and articulated in the December 1969 Declaration that “the benefits of the Alliance’s work in the field of the environment would be enhanced if it were to become the basis of broader cooperation.” Accordingly, as we suggested in para 5 of State 27061, CCMS would discuss in April specific subjects suitable for East-West cooperation, and its recommendations presumably would be approved by the Council, While, of course, the results of all CCMS activity will eventually be available to the public, we can envisage serious problems in opening to non-Allied eyes and ears discussion of procedural details related to this East-West initiative by NAC/CCMS. Basically, we had envisaged NAC/CCMS as the loci for private exchanges designed to assure a solid combined Allied send-off for the ECE initiative.

4. In the light of reftel, however, we are prepared to forego a major OECD role in launching ECE initiative. Nonetheless, we believe we should also be prepared to participate in discussions at OECD if, as is likely, some Allies wish to involve OECD members not in NATO (like the European and neutrals and Japan) in the effort. We do not plan to ask US OECD itself to raise ECE conference in OECD.

5. USNATO should initiate discussions with Brosio and PermRepS on using NATO as the forum for Allied consultation to seek fullest support for moving ahead on raising level of attendance and attention, given to ECE conference. While we agree that you should not rpt not seek to shift locus of Western consultation to OECD, we believe you may be confronted with suggestions that may be advanced by others for concurrent consultations on ECE substantive program within OECD and NATO. Since, as time for ECE conference nears, we can expect subject to be raised in OECD in any case, you should not oppose such suggestions but continue to stress advisability of continued use of NATO forum.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 NATO. Confidential. Repeated to all NATO capitals, OECD Paris, the U.S. Mission to Geneva, and USUN. Drafted by Floyd and Streator; cleared in EUR, SCI, IO, and the White House; and approved by Richardson. In telegram 794 from NATO, March 4, Ellsworth agreed that the concept of more vigorous U.S. leadership in environmental matters through the ECE was sound, but disagreed that the main focus should shift to the OECD. (Ibid.)

293. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers 293. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, March 9 1970.

SUBJECT:

First Meeting of the International Standing Committee of the Cabinet Committee on Environment, March 17, Tuesday, 10:30 a.m., Secretary’s Conference Room - ACTION MEMORANDUM

Background

The President has directed the establishment of a Standing Committee within the Cabinet Committee on the Environment under your chairmanship to serve as a focal point for effective United States participation in international consideration and activities concerned with environmental quality. Memorandum 3 of February 2, 1970, from Dr. Lee DuBridge (at Tab B) sets up the membership of the Standing Committee and outlines its responsibilities.

Discussion

You have tentatively set aside an hour at 10:30 am, on Tuesday, March 17, for the first meeting of the Standing Committee. We anticipate from fifteen to twenty attendees.

Your personal participation in this inaugural meeting will be of great assistance in establishing the leadership role of the Department of State in international aspects of environmental activities. The future work of the Committee would be carried out by a group of alternates composed of policy-level designees of the principals under the chairmanship of Christian A. Herter, Jr., your alternate for the activities of this Committee. The parent Committee of Cabinet members would meet only when you personally called a meeting. For an initial period, the group of alternates will meet regularly, beginning in early April.

The March 17 meeting will be devoted to: (a) Your opening remarks (talking points at Tab C)

(b) Status reports on NATO/CCMS, ECE and UN environmental initiatives by Messrs. Moynihan and Herter;

(c) Brief outline of future Committee activities by Mr. Herter.

Recommendation

That you sign the memoranda to Standing Committee members and invited observers and the letters to Dr. DuBridge and Mr. Moynihan (Tab A) requesting their attendance at the March 17 meeting.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking Sent through Pollack (SCI) and Eliot. Drafted by William C. Salmon (SCI/EN) on March 5. Tabs A-C were attached but not published.

294. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon 294. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, March 17, 1970.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT - Evening Report

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the committee meeting on the environment.]

3. The International Standing Committee on Environment - This morning I chaired the first meeting of the International Standing Committee of the Cabinet Committee on Environment. Secretaries Hardin, Stans, Hickel and Romney, Drs. Seaborg and McElroy and Russell Train attended, along with representatives of a number of other interested agencies. I used the occasion to stress the importance of the international aspects of environmental problems and the relationship with U.S. efforts. I set a target date of 1972 for the production of specific tangible results in the international field. Russ Train reviewed progress in organizing the Council on Environmental Quality; Pat Moynihan reported on NATO/CCMS efforts; and Chris Herter reported on the recent meetings of the Preparatory Committee of the 1972 UN Conference on Human Environment and the Economic Commission for Europe 1971 Conference on the Environment. The work of the Standing Committee will be carried out under the leadership of Chris Herter with policy-level alternates from the member Departments and Agencies.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to the committee meeting on the environment.]

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, President’s Evening Reading: Lot 74 D 164. Secret. Richardson signed for Rogers

295. Telegram 48681 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 295. Telegram 48681 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

Washington, April 3, 1970.

Subject:

Enhanced East-West Cooperation on Environmental Problems

Info:

A. USNATO 1149; B. State 037255; C. State 027061

1. We are concerned by the apparent misunderstanding expressed by some PermReps at the March 25 NAC regarding our view of NATO’s role in enhancing the East-West aspects of the ECE’s environmental activities (Ref. A). We hope that details of specific issue that surfaced this misunderstanding have been clarified by NATO ECONADS meeting on ECE Plenary. To avoid further misunderstandings, we believe that following approach, including details on respective ECE and NATO roles, will helpfully complement efforts of US Reps in ECONADS this week.

2. We believe clarification US view must make three related points: first, great importance we continue to attach to CCMS; second, the necessity of strengthening those aspects of the ECE’s work in the environment that will broaden the base of East-West cooperation in this field; and third, our belief that both NATO and ECE Western Caucus in Geneva have distinct and useful consultative roles to play in support of this effort. Specifically, NATO PermReps may not be fully aware that ECE Western Caucus is in close touch with the ECE Executive Secretary and with Eastern European ECE reps, and has proved an effective means of coordinating Western positions for presentation to capitals.

3. We would propose to instruct Embassies in NATO capitals to convey detailed statement of our views to Foreign Ministries at appropriately high level, and to leave following text as aide memoire. We expect you would also wish to circulate copies of aide memoire to NATO Dels and to Secretary General Brosio. We also envisage asking missions, in their oral presentations, to lay particular stress upon paras 5 and 6 of aide memoire, which emphasize great importance we continue to attach to CCMS. Would appreciate your views on this proposed course of action soonest.

Begin text

1. At the meeting of the North Atlantic Council on March 25 there appeared to be some misunderstanding of the views of the United States as to the role of NATO in the environmental field and the importance of strengthening East-West cooperation in this field.

2. Ministers agreed in paragraph 12 of the North Atlantic Council Declaration issued at the meeting in Brussels on December 4 and 5, 1969, that “The benefit of the Alliance’s work in the field of human environment would be enhanced if it were to become the basis of broader cooperation. This could, and should, be an early objective, being one in which the Warsaw Pact Governments have indicated an interest…More intensive efforts in this field should be pursued either bilaterally, multilaterally, or in the framework of existing international bodies comprising interested countries.”

3. With a view to carrying into effect this expression of Ministerial intent, the United States has suggested to its NATO Allies that it would be advisable to strengthen the continuing work of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) on environmental matters. In particular we emphasized the desirability of enhancing the importance of the Conference on Environmental Problems which the ECE has scheduled in Prague in May of 1971. We suggested participation in the Conference itself by Ministers, or officials of equivalent rank, in order to help insure, within the various participating Governments, the degree of interest and attention that would be required for the success of the Conference and the specific cooperative efforts that should flow from it. We would hope the Allies could use the momentum of this high-level conference to orient further the ECE’s environmental programs toward decisions on tangible actions. We have suggested the ECE as the forum for enhanced East-West environmental cooperation because it seems preferable to build upon the useful environmental work of that Commission, and to work within an established organization with both Western and Eastern members rather than to attempt to convene a special international meeting for the purpose. This proposal was first broached in NATO on March 17, was discussed in the Council on March 25 and will be discussed there again on April 8.

4. Our basic rationale in offering this suggestion is that which is implicit in paragraph 12 of the December NATO Ministerial Declaration. All industrially advanced societies, regardless of their social systems, share increasingly urgent environmental problems, many of which cross national boundaries and can only be solved in an international context. Moreover, serious and practical joint endeavors of this kind could, in the long run, help to allay the suspicions and reduce the tensions that impede progress on resolution of fundamental East-West political issues.

5. At the same time, the continued success of the Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society (CCMS) is a matter of prime concern to the President, as he reiterated most recently in his Foreign Policy Report of February 18. Indeed, we believe the pioneering approach embodied by the pilot projects in CCMS can only enhance and complement work on similar problems in other international organizations. We do not believe that the added effort suggested in the ECE would detract from the work of the CCMS in any way. Moreover, we believe that the intimacy of our relationships with the NATO Allies, their weight in world affairs, the gravity of environmental problems that we and they face, and the extent of the material and human resources that we and they can bring to bear on these problems combine to assure the rising success of the CCMS. We are, encouraged by the progress registered to date within the CCMS and the interest that member nations have demonstrated in its activities. Our commitment to the success of CCMS will be strong and lasting, as is indicated by the extent of our support of its current endeavors.

6. It is our hope, then, that Allied Governments would agree upon the desirability of enhancing the environmental work of the ECE. An important element of this effort is raising the level of its 1971 conference, a goal we believe can and should be reached without interfering in any way with the quickening pace and growing importance of allied environmental cooperation within the CCMS. Environmental programs in the ECE context should be compatible with CCMS efforts, and we would envisage that as a rule the areas chosen for emphasis in East-West environmental cooperation would be those in which Alliance members have already developed the experience and the capacity for dealing with successfully. Moreover, East-West environmental cooperation should be the subject of regular and continuing consultation in NATO.

7. Specifically we believe that NATO should continue to consult on the basic political implications of this cooperation and on its relationship with CCMS and other Western efforts. At the same time, Western consultation with respect to the substantive aspects of international cooperative environmental efforts will also take place within the various multilateral organizations active in this field, including NATO and the ECE. In particular, we believe the procedural, tactical and technical problems that arise in the ECE context should continue to be discussed in the Western Caucus in Geneva, which includes Western nations not repeat not members of NATO and has proved itself to be effective in the past.

8. Prior to the United States’ suggestion outlined in paragraph 3 above, which so far has been discussed only with the NATO Allies, the ECE was seized of a proposal, originating with its Executive Secretary, to establish a Senior Environmental Advisors Group, whose organization and functions would roughly parallel those of its Senior Economic Advisors Group, established in 1957. This proposal was embodied in paragraph 15 of the Executive Secretary’s “Long-Term Programme of Work and the Organization of the Activities of the Commission” dated December 9, 1968, and in Annex 2, paragraph XVII (3) to that document. The April 1969 ECE Plenary session, in which all NATO member governments participated, endorsed the Executive Secretary’s proposals, including the proposal to establish a Senior Environmental Advisors Group.

9. The April 1969 ECE Plenary, however, did not formally establish the Senior Environmental Advisors Group, and the United States therefore tabled in the Western Caucus of the ECE on March 17, 1970, a draft resolution designed to accomplish this.

10. In discussions in the North Atlantic Council it has been suggested that the United States should have consulted in advance in NATO before taking this particular step. The United States’ view was that this proposal represented a useful procedural device but that, since it had already been approved in principle by all NATO Governments in the April 1969 ECE Plenary and did not have substantial political implications, prior consultation within the Western Caucus of the ECE was sufficient. In this connection, it is recalled that the NATO Committee of Economic Advisors meets before each Plenary session of the ECE to discuss its agenda. A meeting of the Economic Advisors was held on March 27, 1969, to discuss the April 1969 Plenary and provided an opportunity for members to register their views on the Executive Secretary’s Long-Term Programme, including the proposed establishment of a Senior Environmental Advisors Group.

11. The proposal for a Senior Advisor’s Group is consistent with but separate from the major United States proposal for enhancing the work of the ECE in the environmental area by raising the level of representation at the 1971 Environmental Conference and attempting to give the Commission’s programs a greater action orientation. This proposal, which flows directly from the NATO December Ministerial Declaration has, in our view, substantial political implications. Accordingly, our first step in advancing it was to consult our NATO Allies and to request their views.

12. We hope that the Government of ________________ will be able to register its support for this proposal during the discussions in the North Atlantic Council April 8 and thereafter. End text

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to the Mission to Geneva. Drafted by Floyd and Smith (IO) on March 28; cleared in EUR, SCI, IO, and the White House; and approved by Springsteen.

296. Research Study REUS-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 296. Research Study REUS-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, April 14, 1970.

NATO: SUPPORT FOR COMMITTEE ON CHALLENGES OF MODERN SOCIETY (CCMS) GROWING

The second meeting of the CCMS opened in Brussels on April 13. This paper examines the evolution of the attitudes of NATO members toward the CCMS and describes the present state of their cooperation with it.

ABSTRACT

The original skepticism of most Western European NATO governments (in contrast to those of Greece and Turkey) over the advisability of NATO’s entering the field of environmental problems has been largely dissipated since the CCMS was formed and CCMS projects have got under way. The cool reception first given the US initiative, made by the President at the April 1969 20th anniversary NATO ministerial session in Washington, did not reflect any lack of feeling among West Europeans that a major international effort is needed to cope with urban and pollution problems. In fact, concern over these problems has grown until it is becoming an important domestic political issue in several countries. The coolness arose primarily from a general belief that NATO is not the appropriate forum for an international effort in the environment field and from fear that formation of the CCMS might actually harm international environmental activities by causing the USSR and the Warsaw Pact nations to tag the CCMS as just another NATO vehicle and therefore to refuse to cooperate with the NATO countries in environmental program.

Almost equally as great a reason for Western European reluctance to support the CCMS was the fact that several international organizations, primarily the Organization for European Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), were already active in the field of environmental problems. There was concern that undesirable rivalry for leadership of this field would arise. The sharp criticism of the CCMS by Austria and the other European neutrals (Finland, Sweden, and Switzerland) in the OECD Committee for Research Cooperation (CRC) in December 1969 has heightened this concern. There is also a general dislike of proliferation of international agencies dealing with environmental problems because of the fact that the Western European governments, particularly in the smaller countries, have few experts in this field and cannot support many international activities.

Nevertheless, the top leaders of most of the NATO governments supported the formation of the CCMS partly because of desire to take quick action against pollution, particularly of the ocean and air. Their support was also due partly to their belief that NATO might benefit from growing public support for action to overcome environmental problems. Another important spur was the emphasis placed on the CCMS by the US. Pro-CCMS NATO leaders have made efforts to convince experts within the governments in the environment field that the CCMS can play an important role in crystallizing international attention on the need for action on environmental problems and that it need not conflict with other agencies at work in the field.

The efforts of NATO leaders before the inaugural meeting of the CCMS on 8 December 1969 and the establishment of the system whereby any interested country, can pilot or co-pilot a study on environmental problems have laid many fears to rest and aroused increasing interest in the CCMS. West Germany has been perhaps the most receptive, and Canada has become more involved. Belgium and Italy, despite their original caution, have also participated in CCMS special projects; the UK has promised to head a project but has been slow to organize it. The change in the French position is the most striking. After making clear that the CCMS would in no way bind French hands from bilateral cooperation with any country, including the Warsaw Pact powers, France has taken part in CCMS planning and agreed to pilot a study on “environment and strategy in regional planning.” Only Norway has gone so far as to refrain from sending any observers to the meetings on the CCMS special projects. Denmark and the Netherlands have been largely passive; Iceland and Luxembourg have also done little, but more because of lack of resources and personnel than because of any reluctance to engage in CCMS activities. Portugal, Greece, and Turkey have been positive toward the CCMS. Turkey has been the most active of the three in CCMS projects, and Portugal is undertaking to co-pilot a study on open waters pollution. Greece expressed a willingness to play a greater role but has refrained from doing so because of opposition from other NATO governments which dislike the Greek regime.

Some resistance to CCMS activities lingers, however. Perhaps the greatest hindrance has been the reluctance of officials traditionally concerned with matters now thought of as belonging to the field of urban problems and environmental pollution control to give their authority to any central committee or agency. These officials are spread throughout the governments and are becoming aware that growing public interest in these problems gives them increasing political leverage. As a result, the Western European governments have been slow to establish significant, central coordinating authorities. West Germany, which has developed significant domestic anti-pollution programs, has done perhaps the most in this regard. Italy and Canada have recently named inter-ministerial coordinating committees, but not much coordination has yet taken place. The UK has set up a special unit and appointed a Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution to make recommendations for coordination and study, but the effect on the UK’s contribution to the CCMS has so far been slight.

[Omitted here is the body of the study.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem. Drafted by F. Herbert Capps (INR/REU/BINC) and cleared by Martin Packman (INR/REU).

297. Telegram 1370 From the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Department of State 297. Telegram 1370 From the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Department of State1

Brussels, April 14, 1970.

Subject:

Remarks by Dr. Daniel P. Moynihan, Counsellor to the President at the Opening of the Second Meeting of the CCMS

One year ago on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the President of the United States, addressing the annual Ministerial meeting of the Alliance, set forth a hypothesis, having to do with relations of modern man to his environment.

The hypothesis contained three propositions:

The first proposition was that there existed within the nations of the North Atlantic Alliance a powerful, if still somewhat latent concern with the deterioration, indeed in many instances the degradation of the natural environment under the impact of technologically based industrialization. Correspondingly, there existed an equally wide spread conviction that the opportunities provided by the same technology to create a significantly more fulfilling and meaningful social environment had only begun to be realized.

The second proposition was that there was already in existence a considerable body of technical knowledge that if applied with sufficient vigor and purpose, would enable industrial societies to halt and to reverse the degradation of the natural environment, and also that the methodologies of contemporary social enquiry offered considerable possibilities for social advances.

The third proposition was that NATO countries, in the course of two decades of military alliance and political consultation, had acquired the governmental skills which would enable them to act in concert with respect to those aspects of the natural and social environment which either required international action, or which might best respond to a multinational effort.

Barely four months ago the Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society, which the President of the United States proposed be established to pursue this hypothesis, met for the first time here in Brussels.

It is not my purpose to review what has happened, but simply to set forth the view, the very strong view, of the Government of the United States that, if anything, a year ago our President underestimated the mounting concern with these subjects in all our nations and the rapidly coalescing political and social will that something should be done to meet the challenge. In the four months since our first meeting, the United States has been intensely pursuing the three topics for which we offered ourselves as pilot country. These are difficult subjects; elusive in the face of analysis; obdurate in the face of effort. There are but limited grounds for optimism about any of them. Yet I should like to report the most extraordinary progress. In four months we feel we have made advances that would, quite literally have consumed four years in the normal pace of international affairs. It is altogether clear to us that a very different pace is now being set by our governments in some measure, but far more significantly by our peoples. We are not ahead; it already clear that we are behind, in many instances dangerously and inexcusably behind our citizenry in these matters.

Yet we have begun, and to our view begun splendidly. My government will be reporting on the specifics of our various projects in the course of this meeting. My purpose in speaking now is general. On behalf of the Government of the United States I should like to express our intensive and determined desire that we should not merely press the present agenda of the CCMS to completion, but that we should expand that agenda, both with respect to the subjects of our activities, and the range of nations with whom we engage in such activities. Secondly, I should like to reaffirm our conviction—a position stated explicitly by the Chairman—that action is the purpose of NATO and the purpose of this Committee.

Ellsworth

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 NATO. Unclassified; Priority. Repeated to USIA and all NATO capitals

298. Letter From the Acting Deputy Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Salmon) to the Secretary to the Council on Environmental Quality (Gibbons) 298. Letter From the Acting Deputy Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Salmon) to the Secretary to the Council on Environmental Quality (Gibbons)1

Washington, July 14, 1970.

Dear Mr. Gibbons:

In response to Mr. Train’s request enclosed is a resume of significant environmental activities of the Department of State in the past year.

Sincerely yours,

William C. Salmon
Acting Deputy Director
Office of Environmental Affairs

Enclosure

Significant Activities of the Department of State in the Environmental Field

Even prior to the present intense concern with environmental matters, the Department of State had been involved with activities concerning the human environment in two ways (1) in relation to U.S. foreign policy objectives and (2) in relation to domestic goals. The first concerns primarily policies, programs and activities, whether initiated by the U.S. or other governments, dealing with environmental problems which can best be solved internationally (e.g., ocean pollution), while the second relates mainly to programs and activities which various U.S. Government agencies undertake in pursuance of domestic goals but in cooperation with foreign governments and/or international organizations. The aim of such cooperation is to take advantage of the benefits that can accrue from joint research and sharing of information. These two aspects of the Department’s involvement in environmental matters are often inter-related, and indeed in both cases the Department carries on its responsibilities in association with other agencies of the Government, the agencies with policy, funding and/or substantive responsibilities in the environmental field.

President Nixon, recognizing the complexity of the environmental problems and the need for international cooperation in solving them, devoted a portion of his major message on U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970’s to the subject. He noted that environmental problems are secondary effects of technological change, stressing that “industrial nations share no challenge more urgent than that of bringing 20th Century man and his environment to terms with one another…Cooperative research, technological exchange, education, institution building and international regulatory agreements are all required to reverse the trend toward pollution of our planet’s environment within this critical decade.”

To better enable the Department to meet the challenge which the increasing preoccupation with environmental problems in the international arena places upon it, the Secretary of State established in January 1970 an Office of Environmental Affairs within the Department’s Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs. The new office is assigned the responsibility for providing leadership within the United States Government on international environmental matters including: (1) formulating policies and initiatives, (2) assuring that the international programs and activities of the other agencies of the Government are consonant with these policies, and (3) providing support, in concert with other areas of the Department, for international meetings and intergovernmental organizational activities.

In addition, Secretary Rogers personally requested all U.S. Ambassadors overseas to take note of the President’s strong desire to cooperate with other countries in maintaining and improving the quality of our environment and that they be alert for possible foreign policy initiatives in this field.

While foreign policy considerations are present to varying degrees in the international cooperative programs or activities undertaken by the U.S. Government in the environmental field in pursuance of domestic goals, they are paramount in programs or activities carried on by multilateral organizations, e.g., NATO, OECD and the United Nations, its specialized agencies and regional commissions. They are also of primary importance in activities, whether undertaken through multilateral organizations or bilaterally, requiring international action for effective results, as for example, the control of pollution resulting from aircraft in international commerce and from shipping on the high seas and on other international waterways. It is in these organizations and areas that most of the Department’s efforts in the environmental field have been concentrated. In dealing with these organizations, the Office of Environmental Affairs works closely with the Bureau of International Organizations and other appropriate bureaus and offices of the Department.

In concert with the Office of Science and Technology of the Executive Office of the President, the Department has played a leading role in initiating and stimulating activities in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in areas concerned with the environment. This organization has had special groups and panels working on air management research, water management research, urban management, and the long-term effects of persistent pesticides and their implications. It is of interest to note in this connection that the Water Management Research Group has in the past year prepared a Confrontation Exercise on integrated water resources management which is to take place at meetings in the United States and Canada, July 15-25, 1970.

The Department has also provided leadership on behalf of the U.S. in the preparatory sessions for the Conference on Environment scheduled for May 1971 in Prague, Czechoslovakia, under the aegis of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE). This Conference will be the first major forum in which industrialized countries of differing social, economic and political systems will consider together the degradation of national and international environment. The United States regards ECE as the principal framework for multilateral East-West cooperation on environmental matters, and hopes that the nations at the Conference will agree on a positive, action-oriented ECE environmental program.

Following the ECE Conference on Environment, which will concentrate on questions particularly relevant to the developed regions of the world (Europe and North America), there will be a United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1972 which will be addressed to environmental questions of concern to the developing as well as developed countries. The Conference will concentrate on three major subjects: (1) environmental problems arising from population growth and distribution, (2) use, development and conservation of natural resources with due attention given to minimizing environmental degradation, and (3) identification of areas where pollution control can best be achieved through international action and promotion of internationally accepted criteria, standards and monitoring. The Department views this Conference as a most important international activity in this field, the forum for presenting global environmental action programs.

As one of many steps in preparing for United States participation in this United Nations Conference, the Department is co-sponsoring with other federal agencies a study under the guidance of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on the “Global Climatic and Ecological Effects of Pollution on the Atmosphere-Ocean System.” The MIT project is a major interdisciplinary attempt by a group of scientists to provide a comprehensive in-depth analysis of key problems which the Conference may have to consider in dealing with the subjects on its agenda. The United States is seeking action-oriented proposals to advance at that Conference.

One of the most effective moves that have been made so far in bringing our growing concern with the environmental problems to world-wide attention was President Nixon’s address to NATO in February 1969 and his proposal in April 1969 for the establishment of a NATO Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society. The Department has played a key role in discussions and negotiations supporting the activities of the new NATO Committee. This Committee is designed to consider specific problems of the human environment with the deliberate objective of stimulating action by member governments. It has already underway eight separate pilot studies, in five of which two or more of the member countries collaborate. The studies are on (1) disaster assistance (U.S. and Italy), (2) air pollution (U.S., Turkey and Germany), (3) road safety (U.S. and Germany) (4) open-water pollution (Belgium, Portugal, Canada and France), (5) inland-water pollution (Canada, France, U.S. and Belgium), (6) scientific knowledge and decision-making (Germany), (7) motivation in a modern industrial society (United Kingdom), and (8) environment in the strategy of regional development (France).

The Department’s role in efforts designed to promote domestic goals through international collaboration is mainly that of coordination and assistance to the U.S. agencies in dealing with foreign governments. In addition, the Department is instrumental in stimulating programs where it believes that such collaboration would also have significant payoff in terms of U.S. foreign policy objectives. The U.S.-Japan Natural Resources Program, the U.S.-German Cooperative Program in Natural Resources, Environmental Pollution Control, and Urban Development, and the Franco-American Scientific and Technical Cooperation Program are cases in point.

The U.S.-Japan Natural Resources Program provides for the exchange of scientific and technological information which will be mutually beneficial to the economies and welfare of both countries. A principal aim of the program, however, is also to increase bonds of understanding between the U.S. and Japan. Several of the subjects included in the program relate to the environment, as, for example, air pollution, water pollution, toxic micro-organisms, wind and seismic damage, and undersea technology, Panels of U.S. and Japanese experts have been formed to concentrate on each of the subject areas. In 1969 a dozen panels covering various aspects of these subjects met to exchange ideas and plan for future sessions and studies. On the U.S. side, the program is steered, at the request of the Department, by the Department of Interior, but the participants include nine agencies of the U.S. Government.

Under the U.S.-German Cooperative Program there are now several individual bilateral panels in operation. Among these are panels on coal dust, water pollution, air pollution control, urban planning and noise abatement. The first three of these panels were particularly active in the past year. In the air pollution field several areas of mutual interest for cooperation between HEW and the West German Ministry of Interior were delineated. The U.S. participants in the panel on coal dust, which is concerned with the treatment and prevention of diseases arising from coal dust, include Interior and HEW. On the water pollution panel, which concentrates on six areas (eutrophication, sludge, instrumentation, waste treatment, data processing, and legislation, administration and enforcement), the U.S. is represented by Interior.

The Franco-American Scientific and Technical Program is to a large extent still in the formative stage. In the past year, a number of French and U.S. officials have met to discuss specific cooperative projects in a variety of fields, including urban development, environmental pollution, marine science, meteorology and others. To provide high-level coordination of the program, the State Department appointed Dr. Allen Astin, former Director of the National Bureau of Standards, to serve as a counterpart of the French officials responsible for coordinating the program within the French Government. In the areas of particular relevance to the environmental problem, considerable progress has been made toward reaching agreement on cooperation in urban planning. The French are planning an experimental pollution-free city in Northwestern France and they have invited the U.S. to participate fully in this undertaking. The areas under consideration for cooperation are: the central planning effort, city planning, air pollution, water pollution, traffic noise, urban sociology, urban transportation, economic planning and waste disposal. The U.S. “lead agency” in this cooperation is the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The other participating agencies include Commerce, Interior, HEW and DOT.

In dealing with many aspects of environment problems, there are genuine advantages in international cooperation, and in the coming years there will be rapid growth in the need for such cooperation. The Department anticipates playing an active role in these efforts.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking.

299. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon 299. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon1

Washington, August 24, 1970.

Subject:

U.S. Policy toward the Major International Organizations Dealing with the Environment

Recommendation:

That the United States (a) exercise affirmative leadership in each of the three major international organizations dealing with the environment—the United Nations, the OECD and NATO—; (b) encourage each organization to develop its special competences to the fullest, having due regard for political and economic realities and the potential performance of each organization.

Approve
Disapprove

Background:

Following your recent conversation with members of the Council on Environmental Quality in which you emphasized the need to consider environmental problems in the global context, Chairman Russell Train, in consultation with Daniel P. Moynihan and the Special Assistant for Environmental Affairs, Christian A. Herter, Jr., recommended that a memorandum be prepared with a description of the major international organizations dealing with the environment and assessing how the United States might wisely allocate its priorities among these organizations. We sought this kind of an appraisal as a guideline to our officials at home and abroad at a time when international activity on the environment is increasing, when planning for important international conferences in 1971 and 1972 is advancing rapidly, and when two of these organizations, the OECD and the UN’s Economic Commission for Europe have reorganized their structure to concentrate more effectively on environmental problems.

The appraisal concludes that the United States benefits by continued substantial participation in the work being done on the environment within the United Nations, the OECD and NATO. Each of these organizations has special and unique attributes, experience and potential for dealing with various aspects of the environmental problems that will face us in the coming years. Each organization provides an important framework to facilitate United States cooperation with other nations. The United States has the opportunity in each organization to provide significant assistance and advice in making technology available to deal with specific environmental problems. Equally, this country has much to learn from other nations in areas where they appear to have greater expertise, e.g. regional planning in land use, population distribution and urban planning.

The appraisal recommends that the United States encourage the fullest and most practical development of the special attributes within each organization, with due regard to political and economic realities and the actual potential of each. It recommends that as areas of strength within each organization develop, the United States give appropriate support to those developments which promise to have a genuine impact in solving environmental issues. At the same time the U.S. should strive to achieve mutual enforcement of their environmental activities according to an overall U.S. plan so as to assure effective utilization of limited fiscal and manpower resources in furtherance of U.S. interests.

A summary description of the three organizations and of the work in which they are or plan to be engaged is enclosed. The description also appraises the special strengths and competence of each organization.

U Alexis Johnson
Acting Secretary

Enclosure

Summary Description and Appraisal of the Major International Organizations Dealing with the Environment

There are three principal international organizations dealing with environmental problems. They are the United Nations proper as well as the regional U.N. Organization for Europe (the ECE) and the U.N. specialized agencies; the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD); and NATO, through the Committee on the Challenges of Modern Society (CCMS).

1. United Nations (a) The 1972 Stockholm Conference. Sweden will host a major U.N. Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June 1972. The decision to hold this Conference reflects the intensified work on environmental problems undertaken in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the U.N. Secretariat, resulting, for example, in research, planning, and development assistance programs on the urban environment and non-renewable natural resources and on the causes and impact of pollution on a worldwide scale. The President’s public endorsement of this Conference has expressed U.S. recognition that this forum is of the greatest importance for mobilizing the nations of the world to deal effectively with certain environmental problems as intrinsically international problems.

It is the only conference of this kind in which the less developed countries will participate, and it is of utmost importance that these countries take part in a substantive way which would reflect their real, although still largely unacknowledged, self-interest in joint action to improve the environment.

The U.N. Conference can lead to one or more conventions treating international environmental problems and may establish an international organization of a new kind to handle these problems.

In short, the Stockholm Conference provides a focus for work on broad issues of environmental policies and administration in the international field. Its success in realistic and lasting terms will be important not only for the reputation of the United Nations itself but also for the work of international cooperation in this field over the next decade.

(b) The U.N. Economic Commission for Europe (ECE). The ECE has planned a conference of industrialized nations from the East and West for May 1971 in Prague. ECE is a principal forum in which East/West relations can be improved. Environmental problems common to East/West industrialized nations can often transcend political differences and ECE provides a setting in which continuous contacts with Eastern Europe and the USSR can be maintained. Further, the U.S. has pushed hard—including through NATO CCMS—to upgrade the participation in the Prague Conference to that of ministerial level, and Chairman Train has been designated to lead the U.S. delegation at Prague.

Although the ECE, because of its politically divergent membership, cannot itself be expected to undertake dramatic operational tasks on the environment, it has a respectable capability for joint studies leading to agreement on regulations and standards. Its reorganized Secretariat Staff should be able to focus more systematically on questions of the environment. Under the leadership of its energetic Yugoslav Secretary-General, Janos Stanovnik, the ECE will unquestionably play a useful and more active role in consequence of Prague; and Stanovnik hopes that this conference can be preparatory to that of the U.N. in Stockholm.

As planning for the Conference proceeds, the U.S. will explore the attitudes of the USSR and the most interested Eastern European states, particularly Romania, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary, and identify possible new areas for realistic East-West environmental cooperation within the ECE framework. Prospects for this are reasonably bright, since both NATO and the Warsaw Pact have acknowledged the value of environmental cooperation. The Warsaw Pact states will doubtless push hard to secure East German participation in the ECE Conference. The U.S. handling of this sensitive issue will hinge in part on the state of inter-German relations and in part on the course of international negotiations affecting Germany in which the U.S. and other Western governments are currently involved.

(c) United Nations and the Specialized Agencies. The specialized agencies of the U.N. have by and large compiled impressive records of achievement, on a sound technical and non-political basis, in such fields as land use and conservation of natural resources (FAO), atmospheric monitoring, disaster prediction services, and weather forecasting information (WMO), international health problems of the broadest range (WHO), certain aspects of oil pollution on the high seas (IMO), noise (ICAO), and monitoring of radioactive pollution (IAEA). Clearly, we should continue to take an active part in the work of these agencies and in addition should consider ways in which their individual fields of specialization can be more effectively related one to the other and placed in the broader context of world environmental quality.

2. The OECD, whose membership includes the nations of Western Europe in addition to Japan, Canada and the United States, brings together all the major non-Communist industrial powers in a forum dedicated to developing international economic cooperation. It has been engaged for a number of years in work on environmental problems, and is developing the particular experience and professional competence needed for analyzing the economic aspects of environmental control.

An Environment Committee has recently been established to study a wide range of economic questions related to environmental problems and to coordinate the work of the relevant sections of the Organization on these issues, in order to offer governments specific policy-oriented conclusions and recommendations for action. The Committee will appraise the possible effects of environmental measures on international trade, develop and improve indicators of economic and social well-being, and analyze how the diversion of resources to combating environmental degradation might affect economic growth and production. Such economic and social problems have international aspects that will require the development of close cooperation among the developed countries for effective solutions, a function for which the OECD is especially suited.

There is no doubt that the U.S., as a major trading nation, has a vital interest in the work of the OECD in general, as well as in specific OECD activities in the environment field such as air pollution, water re-sources management, unintended occurrence of pesticides in the environment, noise, urban development and trans-port policy. OECD Secretary General Emile van Lennep takes a strong personal interest in strengthening this aspect of OECD work, and the U.S. strongly supports the development of this improved OECD capability and the Organization’s emphasis on the economic issues of the environment.

3. NATO/CCMS: Established in 1969 as a direct result of the President’s initiative, the CCMS has effectively tackled specific issues such as air and open water pollution, flood and earthquake disaster relief, water pollution, and road safety.

Despite initial reservations on the part of some NATO members, CCMS has shown that the “pilot country” concept applied to environmental problems, is an effective managerial device to cut through international bureaucracy and achieve specific results in clearly defined areas within a specific time period under the leadership of one or two interested countries. The NATO capacity to gain access to authoritative political levels and its orientation toward action have also given through CCMS a new kind of impetus to work on the environment.

Because of its derivation as a major Presidential initiative, and the importance we have accorded CCMS politically and in the environmental field, the United States should give special attention to pilot projects launched under CCMS aegis to assure their timely success.

CCMS was conceived primarily, not as an operational agency, but rather as a catalyst that would generate action by member countries either individually or in appropriate international organizations. The unique character of CCMS deriving from its links to high policy levels in Allied Governments renders it most suitable as a primary initiator for major innovative programs and policies requiring a high degree of coordination among the technically advanced and industrialized Allied countries. To achieve our political and environmental purposes, it is imperative that projects under CCMS sponsorship be given special support with respect to obtaining the cooperation of our Allies. Thus not only is our full commitment needed, but we must continue our efforts to win full Allied support.

The U.S. believes that the momentum and experience gained in this framework represent valuable assets with useful implications for other international organizations. The CCMS effort warrants our continued strong support. Any sign that the U.S. is slackening in this support would create doubts in the minds of our Allies as to our willingness to follow through on our commitments, in this case a Presidential initiative, which NATO Secretary General Brosio and several Allied political leaders have supported.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Unclassified. Drafted by Herter. A notation on the first page indicated that the President approved the statement

300. Research Study SAS-1, Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 300. Research Study SAS-1, Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, October 8, 1970.

MAJOR INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES ON THE ENVIRONMENT: 1971-1972

The attached research study (SAS-1) was prepared as a supporting paper for a report on US Priority Interests in the Environmental Activities of International Organizations. The latter report is being prepared by Task Force III of the International Standing Committee on the Environment and will contain the attached study as an appendix. Because of its general usefulness beyond this immediate purpose, SAS-1 is being issued separately to give it wider distribution.

MAJOR INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES ON THE ENVIRONMENT: 1971-1972

This report summarizes information on two international conferences on the environment which will be convened under United Nations auspices. It includes a brief discussion of their purpose, subject matter scope, and likely outcome. A list of pertinent UN documents is appended for reference.

ABSTRACT

Two major international conferences on the environment are being planned under the auspices of the United Nations. The Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) Conference on Problems Related to Environment is scheduled to convene in May 1971 in Prague; the UN Conference on the Human Environment will be held in June 1972 in Stockholm. The former will concentrate on the environmental problems of industrialized nations, particularly countries in the European region. The latter will be more comprehensive in scope; it will discuss the global aspects of various forms of pollution, as well as the adverse effects on the environment that might result from future economic development in the less developed countries.

Both conferences aim to formulate recommendations for action that might be undertaken by national governments and international organizations. Institutional arrangements for dealing with environmental problems will be discussed, including guidelines for cooperation among participating countries.

The 1971 ECE Conference: Emphasis on the Urban Way of Life

The basic theme of the ECE Conference is the environment of man in cities and urbanized areas. Discussion of this general topic, as well as the recommendations that emerge, will provide an important contribution to the more comprehensive UN Conference in 1972 since a principal source of environmental pollution is the industrial activity of developed nations.

All ECE members have been invited to prepare country monographs which will include their respective statements of recommended priorities for international cooperation. About half of the ECE countries are currently scheduled to present one or more discussion papers, case studies, or topical reports. Inputs will also be made by various UN specialized agencies and by non-UN international organizations such as OECD, European Communities, and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources.

The upshot of the Prague Conference is likely to be agreement on the need and desirability of greater cooperation in exchanging information, sharing experience on pollution problems, determining criteria and standards, and improving monitoring systems. It is possible, though less likely, that significant progress will be made in such areas as regulatory measures for controlling pollution and joint management of shared natural resources. A work program for the ECE will be defined, but its implementation will depend upon the extent to which participating countries are willing and able to allocate resources for environmental improvement.

The 1972 UN Conference: Globalism and Economic Development

The Stockholm Conference is intended to be a worldwide convocation to stimulate action on environmental problems which affect the interests of all nations. It will provide both a challenge and an opportunity to come to grips with the issues posed by the potentially adverse impact on the environment that might result from rapid economic development in the LDCs.

The main outlines of the Conference program have already been agreed upon. Discussion topics have been organized under three broad headings: (1) Environmental Aspects of Human Settlements, (2) Rational Management of Natural Resources, and (3) Environmental Degradation from Pollution and Nuisances. A wide variety of papers are to be prepared by UN member countries, the UN Secretariat, specialized agencies and other components of the UN system, and non-UN international organizations. More definitive arrangements regarding the agenda and country participation will be made at the January 1971 meeting of the Preparatory Committee and at the XXVI Session of the UN General Assembly next year.

Recommendations for action by national governments and by international bodies will be considered at the Conference. Emphasis will be given to (1) programs designed to help developing countries minimize or forestall the adverse effects on the environment that result from rapid industrialization and unplanned urbanization, and (2) problems that are difficult or impossible to solve by one country alone or whose solution would be greatly facilitated by multilateral agreements, including cooperative arrangements within the UN framework.

A draft Declaration on the Human Environment will be submitted for debate. It will probably be a statement of general principles about the rights and obligations, of men, nations, and international organizations in regard to the environment. Differences in attitudes toward environmental pollution on the part of the developing countries and the industrialized states will be difficult to reconcile. There is a good chance that the substance of any declaration accepted by a majority of the participants will be fairly ambiguous in order to allow for different interpretations consistent with diverse national interests.

One or more proposals to establish a new international agency for environmental affairs will almost certainly be introduced. This issue is virtually unavoidable, but it may remain unresolved for some time. Conceivably, the Conference might produce a recommendation which could be adopted at the XXVII session (1972) of the UN General Assembly.

[Omitted here is the body of the study.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Howard M. Wiedemann, (IND/DFR).

301. Telegram 171300 From the Department of State to All Embassies in Europe, the Mission to the United Nations, the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Mission to Economic Commission for Europe, and the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization 301. Telegram 171300 From the Department of State to All Embassies in Europe, the Mission to the United Nations, the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Mission to Economic Commission for Europe, and the Mission to North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

Washington, October 16, 1970.

Subject:

U.S. Policy Toward the Major International Organizations Dealing with the Environment

From the Secretary

1. The President has approved and I am directing that the following policy be implemented:

The United States will (a) exercise affirmative leadership in each of the three major international organizations dealing with he environment—the United Nations, the OECD, and NATO—; (b) encourage each organization to develop its special competences to the fullest, having due regard for political and economic realities and the potential performance of each organization.

2. I am looking to my Special Assistant for Environmental Affairs (SCI/EN) in conjunction with EUR, IO and E to insure that our actions are consistent with the President’s policy.

3. This policy is based on an assessment of how the US might wisely allocate its priorities among these organizations. The appraisal concludes that the United States benefits by continued substantial participation in the work being done on the environment within the United Nations, the OECD and NATO. Each of these organizations has special and unique attributes, experience and potential for dealing with various aspects of the environmental problems that will face us in the coming years. Each organization provides an important framework to facilitate United Sates cooperation with other nations. The United States has the opportunity in each organization to provide significant assistance and advice in making technology available to deal with specific environmental problems. Equally, this country has much to learn from other nations in areas where they appear to have greater expertise, e.g. regional planning in land use, population distribution and urban planning.

4. The appraisal recommends that the United States encourage the fullest and most practical development of the special attributes within each organization, with due regard to political and economic realities and the actual potential of each. It recommends that the United States give appropriate support to those developments which promise to have a genuine impact in solving environmental issues. At the same time the U.S. should strive to achieve mutual enforcement of their environmental activities according to an overall U.S. plan so as to assure effective utilization of limited fiscal and manpower resources in furtherance of U.S. interests.

5. The summary description and appraisal forming part of the staff study for this policy is being sent to all addresses by airgram.

Irwin

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 UN. Unclassified. Drafted by Herter on October 14; cleared by Pollack, Herz, Hillenbrand, Treize, and in substance with Train and Moynihan; and approved by Acting Secretary of State Irwin.

302. Letter From the Representative to the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (Greenwald) to the Deputy Director, Office of Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs (Phillips) 302. Letter From the Representative to the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (Greenwald) to the Deputy Director, Office of Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs (Phillips)1

Washington, October 29, 1970.

Dear Ruth:

Herewith the promised letter on a work program for fiche Environmental Committee. We are currently engaged in the ExCom discussion of environment activities and are trying to lay the groundwork for a 1971 program along the lines of our previous instructions.

Our understanding of the broad strategy is to move the OECD work in the direction of dealing with the economic and trade aspects of environmental problems. We se this being achieved through a combination of taking existing projects forward into the economic and policy action area and of initiating new projects on high priority economic issues.

Taking the latter category first, I would urge the prompt launching of a Study of the domestic and international economic policy implications of alternative techniques of pollution control or abatement. It would cover the whole range of tools from taxation and subsidies, through performance standards, to modification of production methods. The work would be based on a survey of techniques presently employed by governments (or industry), but should go on to any creative ideas the consultant or staff member might have. In each case, there would be an analysis of the economic policy effects, including NTB’s, international competitiveness and management of the domestic economy.

It may also be desirable to initiate some work on pollution projections, but I think the next most, important task is to select those areas where work has already been done o shift from the scientific and technological orientation to the economic and policy fields. The prime candidate (at least in terms of urgency in the U.S.) seems to be the pesticide, detergent and additive complex. Someone who knows more about this than we do would have to frame the proposal. Other possible subjects (which have a tie-in with the industry work) are pulp and paper, fuel combustion (stationary sources) and urban waste collection and disposal.

Another new possibility is the concept of an “early warning system”, which appeals to Chris Herter. The idea is that, before acting unilaterally in taking various regulatory or preventive measures, such as banning certain pesticides or meat fed with hormones as the Swedes have recently done, the member countries agree to tell their partner countries in the OECD what they are planning to do for reasons of environmental quality, which obviously covers a wide range of subjects, and be prepared to defend the steps they intend to take, including the economic aspects if any within a reasonable period of time (30-90 days).

On the negative side, I would jettison projects like air pollution monitoring, and de-emphasize the urban transportation and management sector.

On a more positive note, I think it’s important to try to get some policy recommendations out of the now completed and very good report on vehicle noise abatement. Work too should go on in motor vehicle air pollution and in water management. Potentially, the examination of water use patterns in the iron and steel industry and economic incentives to reduce pollution also could be important and achieve some early recommendations.

Don’t let the modesty of these proposals put you off. If MacDonald or Beckler have some good ideas which are manageable with the resources we are likely to get (or with the resources governments are likely to want to apply within national administrations), please do not hesitate to come back with a more ambitious program.

Sincerely,

Joseph A. Greenwald

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 OECD. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. A notation on the letter indicates Greenwald signed the original

303. Report by Task Force III of the Committee on International Environmental Affairs 303. Report by Task Force III of the Committee on International Environmental Affairs1

Washington, December 1970.

US PRIORITY INTERESTS IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVITIES OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS,

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT: Synopsis and Conclusions v

Summary Table xxiii

Section 1. The Problem of Determining Priorities

Statement of the Problem 1

Current Policy Guidelines 3

Treatment of Related Issues 6

Section 2. A Preliminary Analysis of Environmental Problems

Man-Made Environmental Problems 8

The Environment and Territoriality ll

Controllable Aspects of the Total Ecological Burden 13

Section 3. An Overview of International Activities

US Objectives in Cooperation on Environmental Affairs 23

Modes of International Cooperation 25

Expenditures on environmental Activities 28

Major International Conferences on the Environment 31

Institutional Factors Affecting Intergovernmental Organizations 38

Section 4. Atmospheric Pollution

The Need for International Cooperation 43

Current and Prospective International Activities 44

Priority Projects for International Cooperation 49

Section 5. Deterioration of the Marine Environment

The Need for International Cooperation 54

Current and Prospective International Activities 57

Priority Projects for International Cooperation 61

Section 6. Water Resources and the Environment

The Need for International Cooperation 66

Current and Prospective International Activities 70

Priority Projects for International Cooperation 73

Section 7. Land Use and Conservation of Natural Resources

The Need for International Cooperation 77

Current and Prospective International Activities 81

Priority Projects for International Cooperation 84

Section 8. Urban Environmental Problems

The Need for International Cooperation 90

Current and Prospective International Activities 93

Priority Projects for International Cooperation 98

Section 9. Selected Classes of Pollutants

Pesticides and Related Pollutants 102

Other Toxic Chemicals 106

Radiation Hazards in the Envivironment 108

The Control of Noise 114

Section 10. Toward a US Strategy for International Cooperation

Overall Priorities in the Field of Environmental Affairs 117

Approaches to a US Strategy 120

Institutional Priorities: Problems and Choices 124

The Long View 135

US PRIORITY INTERESTS IN THE ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVITIES OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

ABSTRACT

Salient Features of Man-Made Environmental Problems

A. The defining characteristic of an environmental problem is the current or prospective existence of some condition, trend, or deficiency in the environment which adversely affects human welfare. Man-made environmental problems arise because of the side effects of normal socio-economic activity in contrast to such natural phenomena as earthquakes and typhoons. In this respect, environmental pollution is an unintended consequence of the modern way of life.

B. Broadly speaking, the extent of pollution in any country or throughout the world is determined by (1) population size, growth, and distribution (especially trends in urbanization); (2) industrialization and the modernization of agriculture, along with concomittant increases in consumption; and (3) the technology on which contemporary society is based. None of these factors is the sole cause and, in any particular country or during any period of time, one may be a more important contributor to environmental deterioration than the others. For the world as a whole, these three basic variables determine the nature and magnitude of the total ecological burden (i.e. the totality of all demands which human activity puts upon the environment). The management of this burden will require a high degree of international cooperation in the years ahead.

Environmental Affairs in the International Arena

C. The basic objective of international cooperation on environmental problems is threefold (1) to prevent further deterioration of the environment, (2) to reduce, and if possible to eliminate, the pollution that already exists, and (3) to improve the quality of life for both present and future generations. Competing and conflicting national interests on environmental issues can create or exacerbate international tension. In political terms,, the underlying purpose of cooperative efforts to resolve these issues is to reduce or forestall this tension; but international cooperation might also have more specific aims such as strengthening an intergovernmental organization that serves US interests, securing mutual advantages in international trade, or improving the US image abroad.

D. Remedial and preventive action on environmental problems can often be undertaken at the local, subnational, or national level. However, effective control of environmental deterioration sometimes requires the cooperation of several, most, or all countries. International co-operation is frequently desirable even though it may not be necessary. At the very least, nations can profit by sharing their experience with domestic pollution problems and by exchanging information on factors affecting the quality of man’s environment.

E. There is a compelling need for international cooperation in preventing and correcting pollution in any part of the natural environment which is shared by several countries and which therefore functions as a commons. This applies particularly to the atmosphere and the oceans, but also applies to rivers and lakes on international boundaries. The rationale for cooperation on such matters as land use, conservation, and development of inland water resources is critically affected by the sovereign rights of national powers. Apart from territoriality, the basic factor affecting the need for international cooperation in these cases is the economic interdependence of nations.

F. Long-range policy planning to cope with global environmental problems must take account of the total ecological burden. This burden tends to increase with population, growth and with the level of economic activity, whereas the capacity of the environment to provide essential inputs to production and to absorb unwanted outputs from consumption is fundamentally limited. The problem of managing total ecological burden will remain even after world population is stabilized. Controlling that burden by systematic reduction in per capita production of goods and services would be politically unacceptable. A concerted effort is needed to orient technology toward making human demands upon the environment less severe.

G. The issues posed by the continual growth of world-wide demands upon the environment are primarily important for long-range planning, but they also require long lead times for resolution. Cooperative efforts to devise and implement technical solutions to global environmental problems may need to be supplemented by two admittedly difficult measures. One is to move toward zero population growth more rapidly; the other is to re-orient human values, especially in regard to national self-interest versus the interests of all mankind.

Environmental Activities of International Organizations

H. In general, international organizations deal with environmental matters as they relate to functions established for other purposes. Most of their effort is focused on the exchange of information, cooperative research and data collection, and the production or promotion of studies of the environment. Some cooperative activities consist of action programs for preventing or reducing pollution, and some internationally financed development projects have the net effect of improving environmental quality even though that is not their primary aim. H.1 The principal intergovernmental organizations currently concerned with environmental affairs are: (i) the United Nations, including its subsidiary organs, various UN specialized agencies, and the IAEA; (ii) the NATO Committee on Challenges of Modern Society (NATO/CCMS); and (iii) the OECD Environment Committee (OECD/ENV).

H.2 The principal non-governmental international organizations that have taken steps toward coping with world-wide and regional pollution problems are (i) the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), (ii) the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN); and (iii) the International Social Science Council (ISSC).

I. Two major intergovernmental conferences on the environment are being planned under UN auspices. The UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) will convene a Conference on Problems Related to Environment in Prague (May, 1971) which will concentrate on pollution in industrialized nations, especially in urban areas. The UN Conference on the Human Environment will be held in Stockholm (June 1972); it will devote special attention to the adverse effects on the environment that might result from increasing industrialization and unplanned urbanization in the less developed countries. The US will participate in both conferences. I.1 The 1971 ECE Conference provides the US with an opportunity to encourage East-West cooperation, but the political significance of any agreement to work together on environmental problems will be greatly influenced by prevailing US and Soviet attitudes toward more critical foreign policy issues. There are no current indications that the Conference itself will become an East-Wept confrontation. It will probably identify environmental programs that could be effectively carried out within the ECE framework and will set the stage for agreements to be negotiated by ECE member states after mid-1971.

I.2 The 1972 UN Conference presents a challenge and an opportunity to come to grips with the underlying problem of reconciling economic development with minimal environmental pollution. The basic differences in outlook on the part of LDCs and industrialized nations may be a stumbling block in achieving meaningful agreement on environmental issues. A draft declaration of general principles defining the rights and obligations or men, nations, and international organizations in regard to the environment will be debated at the Stockholm Conference; it is likely that any declaratory policy adopted will be fairly ambiguous in order to allow for considerable latitude in interpretation. Proposals to establish a global environmental agency, within the UN system or associated with the UN,, will also be discussed. The acceptability of alternative proposals will depend upon the powers which the new agency would be granted.

J. The UN system provides suitable institutional mechanisms for cooperation on environmental problems which are global in scope, directly affect the interests of a large number of countries regardless of the stage of their economic development, or are likely to become more serious for the LDCs. Existing organizations within the UN system are capable of dealing with a wide range of environmental problems, but their piecemeal efforts need to be counterbalanced by an integrated approach that cuts across established areas of responsibility.

K. NATO/CCMS is intended to operate as an action-oriented catalytic agent of the NATO powers. It has developed a technique for encouraging national involvement in cooperative efforts on environmental problems—viz. using one member country as the “pilot” for a specific project and one or more other member countries as “co-pilots”. This technique might prove to be particularly effective in initiating action programs; if so, it could be used more widely. CCMS can become an exceptionally effective instrument whenever its association with the NATO Alliance does not adversely affect the attitude of nations whose views on environmental matters are important to the US and whose cooperation is essential for solving environmental problems.

L. OECD/ENV combines technical expertise and substantial experiemce in economic policy analysis; it is particularly well suited for dealing with the economic implications of environmental problems, especially issues directly affecting the interests of the principal trading nations of the Western world. The OECD has a tradition of approaching problems broadly, yet keeping its efforts focused on courses-of-action designed to advance the economic development of its member states. Since its membership is wider than that of CCMS and it is not associated with a military alliance, OECD/ENV as certain advantages as an institution for advancing cooperation among major non-Communist nations.

M. Both OECD/ENV and NATO/CCMS provide mechanisms for bringing together policy-makers and technical experts on environmental issues of common concern. In this respect, they do not differ from each other as much as they both differ from UN organizations with world-wide member-ship. Cooperative efforts on regional environmental problems probably can be handled most effectively in regional organizations, either within the UN system (viz. ECE, ECLA, ECAFE, ECA) or outside of it (e.g. OECD, NATO, OAS, etc.). For the time being, OECD and NATO are clearly the most important non-UN Organizations for fostering multinational cooperation on environmental affairs; but in the future other non-UN mechanism such as the OAS might play a significant role. Bilateral or multilateral arrangements outside the framework of existing intergovernmental organizations may be preferable for cooperative research on topics of special interest to a few industrialized states.

Promoting US Interests through International Cooperation

N. The interests of both the US and foreign countries are served by cooperative efforts to supplement current knowledge about the environment and about the impact of human activity on environmental quality. Many activities of existing intergovernmental organizations are undertaken primarily for this purpose; they usually consist of encouraging the exchange of information, improving monitoring methods, planning research on a coordinated basis, and collaborating on multidisciplinary studies of environmental problems. These modes of international co-operation are often a necessary preliminary step before effective measures can be developed for dealing with regional or world-wide environmental problems. Additional knowledge may also be needed to help solve national or local pollution problems.

O. In order to bridge the gap between studying environmental deterioration and doing something about it, international agreements are needed on standards and criteria (e.g. air quality standards, permissible levels of DDT residues in foods and feeds, etc.), as well as on regulatory measures and methods of enforcement. Some specific pollution problems (e.g. controllable oil spillage in ocean waters) could be solved in the near term, provided that feasible techniques for preventing environmental damage are widely accepted and put into practice. In other cases, existing agreements and regulations will probably have to be supplemented to keep the cumulative effects on the environment under control (e.g. carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, toxic chemicals in coastal waters, disposal of radioactive wastes, etc.).

P. International action programs for preventing and correcting environmental deterioration will require funding primarily by the U$ and other industrialized nations. Adjustments in the allocation of resources for US national programs will be affected by the need for concerted action on regional and global environmental problems. There is a continuing need for careful examination of the economic and social costs that would be incurred if action were delayed, undertaken unilaterally, or carried out in cooperation with other nations. Joint efforts to weigh these options would be mutually advantageous.

Priority Projects for International Cooperation

Q. Multinational cooperation on specific environmental problems is needed whenever they cannot be solved by one or a few nations. The relative priority of environmental projects can be very crudely determined by taking account of three factors: (1) the inherent seriousness of the problem from the standpoint of human health or, more generally, human welfare; (2) the scope and emphasis of on-going efforts to solve or ameliorate the problem; and (3) the penalties which nations are likely to pay if they fail to deal with the environmental problem in question. These criteria can be applied to cooperative projects within any area of environmental affairs, as well as to projects concerned with very different types of environmental problems. However, a detailed analysis of particular proposals would be necessary in order to establish a rank order among the many cooperative projects that would serve US interests. Such a case-by-case analysis has not been attempted for the projects listed below.

R. An examination of numerous environmental projects of interest to the US resulted in the identification of 46 priority projects which are either already under consideration in various international organizations (with explicit or implied US support) or could be undertaken by existing intergovernmental organizations. Most of these projects can be grouped under five principal areas of environmental affairs; they are listed below along with a brief statement of the rationale for international cooperation that applies in each group.

R.1 Atmospheric Pollution. The basic rationale for international cooperation in this area of environmental affairs is twofold: (1) the atmosphere is a commons shared by all nations, and (2) effective measures for preventing and correcting atmospheric pollution usually cannot be instituted by unilateral action. The following nine projects would help to prevent regional and global air pollution problems from becoming critical, though in some cases the project is essentially a preliminary step toward future action programs which would be carried out by national governments. The first six projects (indicated with an asterisk) have, as a group, somewhat higher priority than the remaining three; but no relative priority is implied by the order in which projects are listed. *Al. Standardization of Data Collection

*A2. Monitoring of Airborne Pollutants of Global Significance

*A3. Adoption of Agreed Air Quality Criteria

*A4. Emission Inventories, by Specific Source

*A5. Standards for Permissible Amounts of Selected Pollutants

*A6. Studies of Air Pollution Effects, especially on Health

A7. Analysis of the Economic Impact of Air Pollution

A8. Monitoring the Upper Atmosphere

A9. Expanding the Existing Solar Monitoring Network

R.2 Deterioration of the Marine Environment. While the high seas, like the atmosphere, is a commons, international cooperation to control the. deterioration of the marine environment must take account of prevailing sovereign rights regarding territorial waters and the adjacent seabed. Most ocean pollution problems affect coastal waters; but the obvious inter-connections with the rest of the ocean, as well as the interactions of the oceans and the atmosphere, make any division of the marine environment somewhat arbitrary. The first six projects listed below are specifically concerned with pollution, whereas the other three reflect a continuing need for cooperative research on the indicated topics. *M1 Preventing Pollution from Ship Operations and from Dumping

*M2. Studies of Oceanic Pollution Effects

*M3. Monitoring Pollutants Affecting Ocean Quality

*M4. Inventory of Ocean Pollution Sources

*M5. Analysis of Economic Impact of Ocean Pollution Standards

*M6. Development of Control Technology

M7. Sustaining Yields of Marine Living Resources

M8. Air-Sea Interactions Affecting Weather Forecasting

M9. Man-made Ecological Upset of the Sea

R.3 Water Pollution and Development of Water Resources.

The need for international cooperation in dealing with pollution in estuaries and coastal waters is subject to the qualifications noted above in regard to the deterioration of the marine environment. In the case of inland wavers, the need for cooperation is fairly clear when the river, watershed, or lake is a common resource shared by two or more countries; when this latter condition is not met, the rationale for cooperation on water pollution and water development projects is more complicated. For the most part, it depends upon the extent to which pollution affects a common resource such as the oceans or upon the impact of the water development project on the interests of other nations. As in other areas of environmental affairs, however, international cooperation is desirable even though it goes no further than the exchange of information and the coordination of national research efforts. There is a continuing need for cooperative research on the economic aspects of water pollution and its control; specific priority projects that would serve US interests are as follows: *W1. Effects of Air Pollution on Water Quality

*W2. Monitoring Methods and Water Quality Standards

*W3. Controlling Eutrophication of Estuaries

W4. Controllinq Eutrophication of Lakes

W5. Studies of Regional Water Availability

R.4 Land Use and Conservation of Natural Resources. Generally speaking, land use and conservation pose issues primarily for domestic policy. Nevertheless, the way land is used in the LDCs affects the interests of industrialized nations on whom the burden of economic aid falls; and, from the standpoint of world population growth, there is a real need for encouraging more rational management of natural resources, including the use of land for agricultural purposes. Priority projects in this area of environmental affairs are as follows: *L1. Surveys of Land Types and Uses

*L2. Analytical Studies of Land Requirements

*L3. Comprehensive Land Use Planning

*L4. Research on Reduction of Waste of Natural Resources

L5. Land Utilization in Regions with Extreme Climate

L6. Baselines for Natural Ecosystems

L7. Coordinated Network of Natural Parks and Preserves

R.5 Urban Environmental Problems. The rationale for international cooperation on problems of the urban environment is partly based on the need for reducing the contribution of urbanized areas to more widespread pollution, and partly depends upon how far the US and other developed nations want to go in helping each other, and in helping the LDCs, with the costly task of urban renewal. It would be clearly desirable to encourage greater exchange of information, to conduct cooperative research, and to promote education and training; it may also be desirable to go beyond these modes of cooperation. A major obstacle is providing sufficient funds to meet the needs of LDCs and to help eliminate the social causes of environmental deterioration in urban areas of other foreign countries. As a first step, cooperative studies might be undertaken on the following topics: *U1. Urban Growth and National Settlement Patterns

*U2. Disposal of Solid Wastes

*U3. Community Water Supply and Sewerage Systems in LDCs

U4. Improvement of Squatter Settlements

U5. Environmental Management for Large Urbanized Areas

U6. Urban Land Reform

U7. Urban Management

S. The use of environmental media as an organizing principle in discussing the need for international cooperation and in identifying priority projects has certain disadvantages. An alternative approach is to focus on particular classes or types of pollutants. While this approaoh also has disadvantages, it draws attention to the need for avoiding compartmentalization by media. Four illustrative classes of pollutants were considered: (1) pesticides, (2) toxic metals, (3) man-made radioactivity, and (4) noise. The projects listed below include examples from each class. *P1. Development of Pest Control Technology

*P2. Control of Pesticide Residues in Foods and Feeds

*P3. Control of Pesticide Residues in the Environment

*P4. Economic Analysis of Pesticide Substitutes

*P5. Studies of Toxic Metals in the Environment

*P6. Radioactive Effluents from Nuclear Power Stations

P7. Disposal of Radioactive Wastes

*P8. Control of Aircraft Noise, especially the Sonic Boom

P9. Noise Standards for Appliances and Equipment

T. A few of these 46 projects are so closely related to the normal activities of single international organizations that the choice of a most suitable mechanism for multinational cooperation is fairly obvious—for example, WMO for Project A2 and ICAO for Project P8. In most cases, however, the project involves using the special competences of several organizations either because the environmental problem has diverse and interrelated aspects or because the objectives of cooperation require the active participation of different groups of countries (e.g. the NATO community, East-West collaboration, the LDCs, etc.). In general, there is no one-to-one correspondence between priority projects and institutional mechanisms. Even when a single international organization provides the most suitable vehicle for advancing US interests in coping with an environmental problem, there are usually other organizations that would have a legitimate interest in the project and they would almost certainly expect to play a significant role in some phase of its execution.

U. The attached Summary Table (p. xxiii) indicates the relationship between selected priority projects and various intergovernmental organizations involved in environmental affairs—notably, specialized agencies, affiliates, and components of the UN system; the NATO/CCMS; and the OECD Environment Committee. For each project, a distinction is made between the principal organization(s) that would be involved and those which would perform an advisory or supporting role. When two or more organizations are shown in the former category, they are either the most suitable mechanisms for handling different aspects of the project or are equally capable of taking the lead on the project as a whole. In some cases, non-governmental organizations such as ICSU or IUCN might provide support for research studies or independent recommendations for action by national governments. U.1 The 23 projects included in the Summary Table are those which require multinational cooperation in the near term, either because cooperative research and data-collection are essential before action programs can be initiated or because further progress in coping with the environmental problem in question is likely to be difficult to achieve by unilateral efforts. They may be regarded as the projects which deserve special emphasis in formulating US strategy for international cooperation in the area of environmental affairs.

U.2 The 23 excluded projects are somewhat less urgent or are concerned with environmental problems which nations can tackle without international agreements that go beyond the exchange of information. Borderline cases are unavoidable since these selection criteria are imprecise. There are also numerous cooperative projects in addition to the 46 mentioned above that would serve US interests and might be proposed for consideration at the UN Conference in 1972.

Institutional Problems

V. The US has opted for a pluralistic approach in the choice of organizational mechanisms for pursuing its objectives in international cooperation on environmental affairs. It will work through the United Nations and its related organizations, through NATO/CCMS, and through the OECD Environment Committee. Two interrelated problems are likely to arise: (1) duplication of effort, and (2) coordination of activities. V.1 In part, duplication arises because international organizations tend to define their roles in rather broad terms. Some duplication of effort is probably unavoidable, since the environment has many interconnected aspects and multidisciplinary studies cut across traditional boundaries. In many cases, duplication is more apparent than real and a certain amount of over-lapping of functions may even be advantageous.

V.2 Outright duplication of effort can be reduced by more effective coordination of the programs and activities of the semi-autonomous agencies within the UN system, as well as between the UN and non-UN organizations. In order to avoid wasting money and scarce manpower, the US needs to improve the coordination of its own activities in dealing with the international aspects of the environment. Better coordination is needed to assure that US delegations are guided by consistent instructions which are binding. Some reduction in the size of US delegations to meetings of international organizations would be desirable.

W. The coordination of environmental activities within the UN system will almost certainly be discussed at the Stockholm Conference in 1972. Attention to this problem is being given in the preparatory work for the conference, but there is a need for improving coordination of the continuing activities of the UN organizations that will be concerned with environmental affairs for many years to come. A strong case can be made for using the UN as the focal point for the formulation of overall policies and for coordination of action programs. For these purposes, a new Council on the Environment might be established as am imtegral part of the UN; the Council’s work in such areas as world-wide data collection, exchange of information, monitoring, and setting standrws could be suitably insulated from political confrontation and nterference.

X. An alternative approach would be to establish a new environmental agency, either within the UN system or separate from it. A new specialized UN agency on environmental affairs might be seriously handicapped by competing with existing specialized agencies that have substantial experience and a legitimate interest in enviroranental matters; it might become bogged down in jurisdictional conflicts. An independent environmental agency would probably have a more limited membership, at least initially, than one within the UN system. The US would probably have a pre-eminent position in the independent organization, but participation by the LDCs might be difficult to secure. In addition, the UN agencies are not likely to surrender their environmental programs to an outside agency or be willing to coordinate their activities under its direction.

The Need for Long-Range Policy Planning

Y. Effective action on many global environmental problems, including the management of total ecological demand, requires not only international cooperation but also long-range planning. New questions about means and ends will undoubtedly emerge in the course of planning for the satisfaction of future needs and wants within the constraints imposed by a finite environment and the uncertainties inherent in the development of new technologies. It may be necessary to devise new forms of multinational decision-making in order to resolve environmental issues affecting the interests of all mankind.

Z. For the nations of the world, the most difficult political issue posed by future environmental prcblems is likely to be the need for genuine commitment to goals that transcend national interests. Another crucial problem is the need for increasing the power of intergovernmental organizations to act. Improvements in existing mechanisms for international cooperation may be insufficient unless they enable multi-national organizations to execute programs which nations do not or can-not carry out alone and to enforce decisions which subordinate sovereign rights to human rights. Perhaps this ultimate goal will be regarded as attainable when nations become accustomed to thinking of the environment as a heritage that can be used more rationally and improved for the welfare of future generations.

[Omitted here is the body of the report.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking.

304. Telegram 4070 From the Mission to the Economic Commission for Europe to the Department of State 304. Telegram 4070 From the Mission to the Economic Commission for Europe to the Department of State1

Geneva, December 4, 1970, 1745Z.

Subject:

ECE: Eastern Europeans’ Positions at the Senior Environmental Advisers Meeting

REF

(A) Geneva 4044

(B) State 195406

(C) Bonn 13582

1. Soviets attempt to play down importance of international action in field of environment in numerous interventions. Soviets tried to limit environmental problem to pollution control and conservation of nature. They excluded any social, urban, or related topics. Emphasized need for national rather than international action in appropriate areas and stressed sectoral rather than overall approach in formulation of guidelines for ECE work program as well as for international actions in general. Soviets also tried very hard to delay any substantive decisions on shape of work program, selection of priorities and on institutional arrangements. Czechs, Soviets isolated even among EE’s and without support from WE’s. In fact, other EE’s, notably Poland stressed importance of increased ECE activity in this field.

2. East German participation in Prague Conference first advanced by Czech Vice-Chairman of seniors who will be Chairman of Prague Conference. He proposed meeting request Executive Secretary to issue formal invitation to GDR to attend Prague Conference. This rejected by majority including Swedes on grounds that Prague Conference being organized as UN/ECE conference and that UN/ECE procedural rules and regulations to be strictly observed, also that political issue outside competence of experts’ meeting. Czech representative then announced his government would invite GDR representatives on its own as guests of host government, a procedure frequently applied at ECE meetings taking place in Eastern Europe and accepted by Secretariat and all Western dels. Status of guests of host governments differs from observer status by fact that presence of guests entirely on responsibility of host, not involving ECE or UN in any way whatever, particularly not involving any kind of official accreditation. Rules stated ref b will then apply.

3. Both Exec Sec and Soviets, in private talks, linked ECE action environment and CES. Stanovnik fears that attempt to delay decisions on action-program in ECE motivated by their wish to promote ces program on environment. Local Soviet Rep explicitly confirmed this to MissOff.

Rimestad

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 ECE. Confidential. Repeated to OECD, USUN, USNATO, Bonn, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, and Stockholm.

305. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President (Whitaker) to Secretary of State Rogers 305. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President (Whitaker) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, January 14, 1971.

Since the abolition of the Cabinet Committee on the Environment by Reorganization Plan No. 2, the status of its standing committees has not been clear. The International Standing Committee, under your Chairmanship, continues. to perform a very useful function. We are hereby transferring to you all responsibilities relating to the International Standing Committee and request that it continue to operate as an interagency Committee on International Environmental Affairs reporting to you.

We would expect you, in carrying this work forward, to rely on the Council on Environmental Quality for substantive guidance on international environmental matters.

John C. Whitaker
Deputy Assistant to the President

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Train.

306. Letter From the Scientific Attache (Hudson) at the Embassy in Brazil to the Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Herter) 306. Letter From the Scientific Attache (Hudson) at the Embassy in Brazil to the Director of the Office of Environmental Affairs (Herter)1

Washington, February 12, 1971.

Dear Chris:

As I have regained a more current assessment of the situation here in Brazil, vis-a-vis environmental matters, following my leave, a thought has occurred to me which I would like to pass along to you. As you know, one of the standard Department procedures, especially where international organizations or activities such as the upcoming Stockholm Conference are concerned, when they run into trouble, is to attempt to mount a démarche by all of the “friendlies” on the poor little fellow who happens to be too “unenlightened” to appreciate fully the merits of our position. Having participated in more of these than I would like to remember, I have invariably been impressed by their ineffectiveness and sometimes even outright counterproductivity.

Since the environment is an important subject to the present administration and to mankind as a whole, I would like to suggest an alternative to last-minute concerted approaches. I think we can anticipate without much difficulty that there is going to be a continuation of the feeling among many of the underdeveloped countries that being concerned about the environment is, in the final analysis, a rich man’s game. This feeling may well, in fact, be present at a low level even with countries which may be pragmatically willing to go along for “what’s in it for them”. While we know this is not just a rich man’s game, we also know that it is sometimes very difficult to persuade otherwise someone whose major goal must be development.

Accordingly, my suggestion would be that you give consideration now to identifying those countries where we are likely to have the most opposition and associate them with ourselves or specific “‘friendlies” of like mind and set into motion now, while we still have time, a well thought-out program of gradually informing and hopefully converting the key policy makers wherever that seems necessary. Certainly, our Canadian colleagues would be willing to join in such an operation and I think many of our other friends who share our concern in the environment would prefer to establish long term persuasive relationships with the policy makers of specific underdeveloped countries where they may have influence by virtue of past association or a special relationship rather than face the last minute crash approach.

Certainly, for my part, I am going to do everything I can to try and reach a few key Brazilian policy makers with objective information on the environmental problem and, in the jargon of today, establish an objective dialog with them. The effort may not work but I personally feel its chances of success are at least as high if not higher than the last minute crash approach. If nothing else is accomplished, when the time comes to make that démarche, I will not have to explain from the beginning what the environment is before explaining what it is we would like them to support. In this connection, I would very much appreciate your identifying and sending me a copy of what you consider to be the best single book-length exposition of the environmental problem as it is being faced today, preferably by a non-governmental author. I would like to try and persuade our USIS people here to include it among the books which they will translate into Portuguese this coming year. (USIS has a program which permits the translation of a few books each year from English into Portuguese and we can always get large numbers of copies of these translations for circulation throughout the country.)

Sincerely yours,
Miller N. Hudson, Jr.
Scientific Attache

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 BRAZ. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. Copies were sent to the ambassador, deputy chief of mission, and public affairs officer at the U.S. Embassy.

307. Research Study From the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 307. Research Study From the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, May 20, 1971.

RSES-21

ECE/GDR: THE PRAGUE ENVIRONMENTAL SYMPOSIUM—A SHORTLIVED COMPROMISE

The May 3-10 Symposium in Prague of environmental experts from member countries of the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), as the April 19-30 ECE Plenary Session beforehand, again produced sharp East-West divergences over the issue of East German (GDR) representation in international organizations. This paoer reviews the nature of recent clashes on this subject and the prospects for their repetition in the near future.

ABSTRACT

The Soviets may now be more willing to obstruct any environmental or other multilateral conferences which they feel cannot be exploited to enhance the international status of East Germany or further their concept of a Conference on European Security (CES). Soviet/East European tactics at the 26th plenary session of the ECE in Geneva last month suggested that Prague, the host government, would cancel a scheduled environmental conference if the demands on GDR attendance were not met. In the end, a last-minute compromise downgraded the ministerial-level conference to that of a symposium of experts, allowing East German participation in the role of observers—a formula utilized previously in various ECE symposia held in Eastern Europe. Although the Soviets again failed to achieve a breakthrough for the GDR at the ECE plenum in Geneva and at the Prague symposium, the GDR representation issue will remain a focal point in East-West confrontations.

East-West Deadlocked Over GDR Attendance at Environmental Conference

The April 19-30 plenary session of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) in Geneva provided the stage for perhaps the most determined East-West confrontation thus far over the issue of the international status of the German Democratic Republic (GDR). The Soviets and their East European allies sought to obtain GDR participation in the ECE and, failing that, demanded that the GDR attend the ECE Conference of Environmental Problems, scheduled to begin in Prague on May 3, even though the GDR was not a member of either the UN or the ECE. The fact that the conference was to take place in an East European capital was obviously considered additional leverage in the communist nations’ efforts to enhance the GDR’s international status.

At the plenum, the question of GDR participation in the work of the ECE had been proposed by the Poles; this proposal was withdrawn on April 20 when it became clear it would be defeated. Polish Deputy Foreign Minister Winiewicz in Geneva called for GDR particpation and also for the admission of both Germanies to UN membership.3 The Poles were joined by other communist nations, with the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia in particular pressing the issue of GDR participation and, later, GDR attendance at the Prague conference. At the last moment, the Czechoslovaks threatened to withdraw as hosts for the conference unless their demands on GDR participation were met.

In an effort to save the meeting, the ministerial-level conference was reduced in rank on April 29 to a “symposium of experts”. The compromise propo al to replace the conference by a symposium was introduced by ECE Executive Secretary Stanovnik, a Yugoslav. The GDR was to be invited by Czechoslovakia as a “guest” and would send observers, as had been permitted in other ECE symposia held in Eastern Europe.

East Germans at Prague Symposium

East German observers sat at a table apart from other ECE participants behind a sign stating they were from the GDR and were guests of the Czechoslovak Government; in contrast to the white identification cards of the participants, the East Germans had pink cards. However, the placard identifying the East Germans omitted the representative institution and postal address; in earlier ECE symposia, the GDR representatives had been identified by institution, postal address, and national designation—i.e., the GDR. The statement of the GDR participant, the GDR Deputy Minister for Science and Technology, was, according to a US Embassy Prague telegram, technical in content, neutral in tone, and similar to those of many other participants.

At the conclusion of the GDR statement, the Czechoslovak chairman of the symposium explained that the GDR and CSSR were neighbors and were cooperating in the field of environment, “where cooperation is essential”. As a result, the Czechoslovak Government invited the GDR to the symposium and hoped that the GDR experience could be helpful to those countries which did not have relations with the GDR.

Earlier, in his formal acceptance speech as chairman of the symposium, the Czechoslovak made an oblique reference to countries attempting to block the efforts of other countries in worthwhile international cooperation. On the other hand, at least a few Czechoslovak participants at the symposium claimed privately to have attempted to downgrade the GDR “problem”, even reviewing the GDR statement to make certain it contained nothing offensive.

Reported Atmpsphere at Symposium

US Embassy Prague reported that the political atmosphere at the symposium, particularly towards the end (May 10), was relaxed. Initial tension reportedly reflecting the hard bargaining at the ECE plenum in Geneva, the visible presence of the GDR in the conference room, and the various maladroit introductory comments of the Czechoslovak hosts at. the beginning of the symposium were said to have eventually given way to an easier East-West relationship, when the communist nations—including the GDR participants—made obvious efforts to improve the atmosphere.

During the discussions, the communists generally spoke on substantive matters. There were, however, political overtones in the statements of Polish, Soviet, and Bulgarian participants who noted the necessity of GDR participation if international arrangements in the environmental field were to be effective. The Soviets also mentioned looking forward to having the GDR as a full member at the UN-sponsored Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment in 1972.

Led by the Soviets, the East Europeans made a concerted effort to have the GDR mentioned in the report summarizing the discussions at the symposium. (The report was prepared by the Secretariat with the help of rapporteurs drawn from participants. The communists focused on a summary of several East European statements in the general debate which had expressed approval of the GDR presence. After the US rapporteur for this item rejected the Soviet rapporteur’s proposals, the communists then proposed a “compromise” in which expressions of thanks to the Czechoslovak Government for having invited the GDR would be reported. This was rejected by the Western caucus, whereupon the communists dropped the idea of including mention of the GDR.

The Role of the Czechoslovaks as Host Government

The Czechoslovak regime—which first proposed Prague as the venue of the meeting in 1967 (i.e., before the beginning of the “Prague Spring”)—undoubtedly sought to gain a certain “political rehabilitation” by continuing as host for the meeting and by taking an active role in ECE activities. At the same time, the regime may have felt that political capital would accrue to it in the communist world if it achieved a breakthrough on the GDR representation issue (where other communist nations had failed to do so). In the final analysis, however, and despite the genuine interest of the regime in cooperation on environmental problems and in hosting the ECE meeting, Prague is wholly bound to the Soviet foreign policy line and accordingly followed Soviet dictates on all problems arising during the ECE plenum and on GDR participation. The East Germans could have been expected to bring heavy pressures upon the Soviets and, particularly, the hapless Czechoslovaks, to obtain some form of GDR representation at a meeting hosted in Prague.4

Czechoslovak press commentary on the symposium was generally restrained. The strongest article appeared in the May 6 edition of Prace, the central trade union daily, which deplored the fact that the symposium did not begin in the most propitious atmosphere possible because some western nations had sharply protested against GDR participation. The article pointed to the valuable experience which the GDR could contribute and declared that the move to exclude the GDR was a remnant of the cold war, which must be eliminated.

Soviet Attitudes on Environmental and Other International Forums

Soviet tactics at the ECE plenum in Geneva indicate that Moscow may try similar tactics at selected international meetings in which the West is interested or which, in turn, have only marginal interest for Moscow, in order to enhance the international status of the GDR. This may be particularly true with respect to environmental affairs, since the Soviets reportedly have reservations about making any international commitments on the subject. During the ECE meeting in December 1970, Soviet sources indicated privately that their primary interest in environmental questions was to further their objective of convening a CES and, in the meantime, thwart any real effort to increase ECE competence in these questions.’ Perhaps Moscow’s desire to have environmental matters on a CES agenda stems mainly from an attempt to make such a conference as attractive as possible to the West, which has shown greater interest in ecology. (It might be noted that Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Romania have shown interest in East-West cooperative efforts, particularly in the ECE, to solve pollution problems.)

The Soviet attitude toward the 1972 Stockholm environmental conference is likely to depend on the political climate obtaining at the time of conference preparations—particularly on progress, or lack of it, on such vital European security issues as the CES, Berlin,. the FRG-GDR dialogue, and ratification of FRG treaties with the USSR and Poland. The pressures which the East German leadership brings upon the Soviets to pursue the GDR representation issue must also be a considerable factor in this attitude. Even before Stockholm, however, this issue seems certain to be revived as a focal point of East-West confrontation in other international forums — even though the Soviets failed to achieve a significant breakthrough for the GDR at the ECE plenum in Geneva or at the Prague symposium.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73. SCI 41 ECE. Confidential.

3 There have been other East European proposals for GDR-FRG membership. Although the FRG is not a member of the UN, it belongs to all special organizations in the UN and contributes to them financially. The GDR has been excluded from these special organizations, as well as from such subsidiary UN agencies as ECE and WHO (World Health Organization). At the end of April 1971, the GDR claimed diplomatic relations with 29 states, and consular and “other state” relations with 15 more. It also claimed to be member of 250 international organizations and a participant in 500 international treaties and conventions.

4 The Soviets have long made pro forma efforts to enhance the international status of the GDR by having them admitted as members or observers to UN organizations. The East Germans, however, undoubtedly have been dissatisfied with these efforts by the Soviets, as well as by other Warsaw Pact members, and there have been unconfirmed reports that, as a result of East German protests, Warsaw Pact members have agreed to press more vigorously the East German objectives of gaining recognition
in the international community and membership in international organizations. There appears to have been little genuine enthusiasm among the Warsaw Pact to promote East German objectives, in large part because of the unpopularity of the “Prussian socialists” in Eastern Europe.

308. Report of the US Group of Experts on the Economic Commission for Europe’s Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment 308. Report of the US Group of Experts on the Economic Commission for Europe’s Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment1

Washington, July 9, 1971.

Report of the United States Group of Experts on the Economic Commission for Europe’s Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment
Prague, Czechoslovakia
May 2-10, 1971

Title of the Meeting

The Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment sponsored by the Economic Commission for Europe was held in Prague, Czechoslovakia at the Culture Center. The Symposium itself was held from May 2-10, 1971, inclusive, and on May 11-15 attendees participated in a field trip to heavily polluted industrial areas in Ostrava, Czechoslovakia and Katowice, Poland.

Background of the ECE

The Economic Commission for Europe was established by the ECOSOC in March 1947. It now has thirty-one members: the European members of the UN (including the USSR); the Federal Republic of Germany; and the U.S. As provided for in the Commission’s terms of reference, other countries which are members of the United Nations but not members of the ECE may participate from time to time in the work of the Commission, when matters of particular interest to them are being considered. (e.g.-Japan in meetings concerned with motor vehicles and Canada on timber)

The Commission’s terms of reference are broad, and have been adapted to its changing character and work. The first years of the Commission were taken up with efforts to revive economic activity in Europe, efforts which were marked and sometimes frustrated by an increasing polarity between East and West that permanently influenced many of the procedures of the organization. This period was succeeded by one in which the cold war tensions lessened and the standing committees of the ECE (coal, gas, steel, etc) were able to broaden contacts between East and West in many fields. The Commission now appears to be moving into a third stage, characterized by an increasing concentration on problems of affluence which are endemic in most developed industrial economies.

From the U.S. view point the value of the ECE sterns from the following qualities: 1. The ECE is the only UN organization composed almost exclusively of economically developed nations. Thus, a certain community of interest may be assumed to exist in seeking solutions to the problems that confront modern industrial economies, that goes beyond the regional character of the organization.

2. Given its membership, the ECE has offered and hopefully will continue to offer opportunities for expanding East/West cooperation in technical, non-political fields including that of environment.

Conference Background

In 1967 at its XXII Plenary Meeting, the Economic Commission for Europe passed a resolution requesting its Executive Secretary “to take all necessary measures to prepare for a meeting of governmental experts from ECE countries to discuss environmental problems in their entirety.” The Government of Czechoslovakia offered to host the meeting in Prague, and the offer was accepted by the Commission. In 1970, following a United States initiative in support of a US national policy decision to focus greater attention on international environmental cooperation, the meeting was changed to an Environmental Conference with Ministerial level participation. It was planned that the Conference would approach its work in two ways: (1) via selected case studies on environmental problems; and (2) by a review of governmental actions aimed at environmental improvement based on individual government submissions. In addition to providing a forum for a major exchange on environmental problems between East and West, it was expected that the Prague Conference would establish a Group of Senior Environmental Advisers to the ECE with a mandate for developing a comprehensive ECE Program of Work on the Environment. The Conference was also to aid in coordinating international environmental activities and be a forerunner to the world wide UN Conference in Stockholm in 1972.

US View of the Conference Prior to Apri1 30, 1971

President Nixon has on a number of occasions stressed the need for cooperation among industrial nations to bring 20th century man and his environment to terms with one another. He specifically singled out the ECE as the major forum for East-West cooperation on environmental matters.

It was hoped that the Prague Conference would lay the foundation for a major long term program of environmental cooperation between Eastern and Western nations. With that view in mind and to highlight our seriousness in that regard, Mr. Russell Train of the Council on Environmental Quality, Mr. John Erlichmann, Special Counsellor to the President, and two U.S. Senators, together with Mr. Christian A. Herter, Jr. of the Department of State were designated to participate as members of the United States Delegation.

Our specific objectives at the Conference prior to April 30th were inter alia: 1. to have the Conference establish a permanent group of Senior Environmental Advisers to provide overall guidance and coordination to the varied ECE environmental activities and to implement the recommendations of the Prague Conference.

2. to have the Conference approve the United States launched initiative for the design and implementation of an information system to facilitate the flow of environmental data among ECE members.

3. to have the Conference lay the foundation for the exchange of information and the development of East-West programs in the field of solid waste management.

4. to have the Conference call for a seminar on the relationship between agriculture and environment objectives.

5. to have the Conference promote the establishment of international arrangements between contiguous countries aimed at resolving specific environmental problems relating to areas of their common interest. We had in mind the Baltic Sea, Danube River, and the Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas. Not being contiguous to any of these problem areas, it was not our intention to push cooperation on any inordinately.

6. to have the Conference set a favorable climate and offer recommendations to the 1972 UN Conference on the Environment.

ECE Plenary Session (April 19-30) Reduces Conference to A Symposium Because of the East German Problem

The ECE’s rules of procedure do not provide for formal participation in its meetings by countries that are neither members of the ECE nor members of the UN or its specialized agencies. Although East Germany is not a member of these organizations, on occasion its individual experts have attended ECE sponsored seminars and symposia held in Eastern European countries as individual guests of the host government. They have had no official status at these meetings.

The United States position prior to the Plenary meeting was to accept participation by individual East Germans in the Conference as guests of the host government, rather than the ECE, provided they were seated in a fashion that clearly indicated they were not official participants. Also we accepted the possibility that they would participate in the work of the Conference, provided their remarks were not reflected in conference documents. The thrust of such a policy was to accommodate the interest of working together on non political subjects, while not enhancing the international prestige of the East German region.

Prior to the Plenary meeting the United States had hoped the Commission at the Plenary would delegate to the ECE Conference on the Environment the authority to: 1. consider and approve on the Commission’s behalf, the establishment of a new principal subsidiary body of the Commission entitled “Senior Advisers to ECE Governments on Environmental Problems

2. agree upon the terms of reference and the short and long term programs of work and priorities of this new subsidiary body.

3. request the Executive Secretary thereafter to take all other necessary steps required for implementing decisions of the ECE Conference on environment

During the 1971 Plenary Session, the Soviet Union and its European allies sought to obtain East German entry into the ECE. Failing in that effort, they demanded that the GDR be officially invited to attend the Prague Conference on environmental problems. While the United States and other Western European nations attached great importance to the ECE Conference, they were convinced that a non-political Conference of this sort should not be used as a tool to enhance East Germany’s political status. Finally in an effort to save the meeting, a compromise was worked out. The Commission decided to:

1. “rename and restructure the ECE Conference on Problems Relating to Environment as the ECE Symposium on Problems Relating to Environment, which shall be organized in accordance with ECE practices for seminars and symposiums held outside Geneva, and with the sole purpose of providing an opportunity for an exchange of views on selected problems in this field.”

It should be noted that a Conference has exchanges of views followed by negotiated statement of conclusions and recommendations. It is empowered to make decisions and recommendations to governments. A Symposium is a meeting of technically qualified experts who are not necessarily instructed, although they may be expected to be aware of their Government’s views on the subjects under discussion. Such experts are not considered to be instructed delegates speaking for their Governments. The final report is written by the Secretariat after the Symposium is over, although often with the assistance of rapporteurs drawn from the participants. Political subjects are not discussed. Discussions are not reported as are debates in the report of a Conference, but statements and papers contributed by participants may be summarized. Sessions of a Symposium, as contrasted with Conferences, are not open to the press.

The effect of this compromise solution was to permit East German experts to participate in the Symposium as guests of the host government. The various nations reduced the level of participation in the meeting, for Ministers who do attend Conferences, do not normally attend Symposia. Thus Messrs Train, Erlichman and the Senatorial members of the proposed US Delegation withdrew at the last minute. Mr. Christian A. Herter, Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs became titular head of the United States Groups of Participants.

ECE Plenary Establishes Senior Advisers to ECE Governments on Environmental Problems

In order not to unduly interrupt its environmental program, the Commission at the Plenary succeeded in establishing the group of Senior Environmental Advisers, whose creation had originally been contemplated for the Conference. In the words of the Commission’s report on the Plenary it was agreed: “To establish a Principal Subsidiary Board of the ECE entitled ’Senior Advisers to ECE Governments on Environmental Problems’ and to authorize the Executive Secretary, upon full consultations with all member Governments of ECE to convene a meeting of this body on an ad hoc basis as soon as practicable with the following tasks: a. to take into account the discussions held at the Symposium;

b. to consider the outlines of programs of work for submission to the twenty-seventh session of the Commission

c. to outline SCE’s contribution to the Stockholm Conference on Environment.”

It became clear then that even after the difficulties experienced at the Plenary Meeting, the ECE could still hope to make a useful contribution to international environmental efforts if further political difficulties were avoided at the Symposium.

Political Atmosphere at the Symposium

Initially there was an atmosphere of tension at the Symposium, reflecting the hard bargaining at the ECE Plenary, the visible presence of the GDR and various in-appropriate comments by the Czech hosts in their opening remarks. As the Symposium progressed, the Eastern European participants made obvious attempts to improve the atmosphere. The East German observers sat at a table, apart from other participants, and behind a sign clearly indicating they were guests of the host government.

During the discussion the Eastern European participants, including those from the GDR, concentrated on substantive matters; but did make a concerted effort to have the GDR mentioned in the report summarizing the statements at the Symposium (the report was prepared by the Secretariat with the help of rapporteurs drawn from participants). The Soviet Union and its allies focused on including statements they had made in the general debate expressing approval of the GDR presence. After the US rapporteur rejected this proposal, they proposed a “compromise” in which expressions of thanks to the Czechoslovakian Government for having invited the GDR would be reported. This idea was also rejected by the West, whereupon the Eastern European nations dropped the idea of including mention of the GDR.

Forecast for the 1972 UN Conference

The Soviet Union, at the Prague Symposium, mentioned that it looked forward to having the GDR as a full member at the UN sponsored Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment in 1972. Just what their attitude will be on this issue prior to and at the Conference will depend on various political factors.

Agenda for the Symposium

In agreeing to reduce the Conference to the status of a Symposium, the ECE’s Plenary Session adopted the following agenda for. the Symposium: “A. Opening of the Symposium: 1. introductory statement by the Executive Secretary;

2. election of the Chairman and two Vice-Chairman of the Symposium;

B. Survey of the present environmental situation, including a detailed examination of problem sectors and problem areas;

C. Discussion of various means of environmental improvement through action on national and international levels.”

Despite this ostensibly reduced agenda, the Symposium covered virtually the same subject matter as had been originally planned for the Conference. It did this via selected case studies on environmental problems, and by a review of governmental actions aimed at environmental improvement based on individual government submissions. However, as explained above in constrast to a Conference Which can adopt action proposals, the Symposium. only provided for an exchange of views and a report of the various items covered.

Participation

The following tabulation shows the countries and organizations represented at the Symposium and the number of participants from each. Altogether 250 persons participated in the work of the Symposium.

A. ECE Member Countries: Austria(6)

Belgium (7)

Bulgaria (10)

Byelorussia (1)

Czechoslovakia (27)

Denmark(7)

Federal Republic of Germany(9)

Finland (7)

France (6)

Greece (1)

Hungary (7)

Ireland (2)

Italy (5)

Luxembourg (1)

Netherlands (9)

Norway (5)

Poland (10)

Portugal (7)

Romania (7)

Spain (7)

Sweden (6)

Switzerland (6)

Turkey (4)

Ukraine (2)

U.S.S.R. (9)

United Kingdom (6)

U.S.A. (11)

Yugoslavia (7)

B. Governments Participating in a Consultative Capacity Holy See (1)

Canada (5)

India (2)

Japan (2)

Tunisia (1)

C. The Following International Organizations Were Represented: 1. United Nations (a) Secretariat for UN Conference (2)

(b) UNCTAD (2)

(c) UNIDO (1)

(d) ILO (1)

(e) FAO (3)

(f) UNESCO (2)

(g) WHO (2)

(h) IBRD (2)

(i) WMO (1)

(j) IAEA (1)

(k) GATT (1)

2. Non-Governmental Organizations (a) International Cooperative Alliance (1)

(b) International Union of Local Authorities (1)

(c) World Federation of Trade Unions (1)

(d) Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (1)

(e) International Council for Building, Research, Studies and Documentation (1)

(f) International Federation of Business and Professional Women (1)

(g) International Union of Building and Savings and Loan Associations (1)

(h) International Union for the Conservation of Nature (1)

(i) European Cultural Foundation (1).

(j) International Commission of Acoustics (1)

(k) International Council of Environmental Law (1)

(l) International Federation of Landscape Architects (1)

(m) International Union for the Protection of Life (1)

(n) Stitching CONCAWE (1)

(o) Smithsonian Institution (1)

3. Intergovernmental Organizations (a) Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (1)

(b) OECD (1)

(c) EEC (4)

D. Others Present as Guests of the Host Government (a) GDR (9)

United States Participants:

Mr. Christian A. Herter, Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Environmental Affairs;

Mr. Alvin Alm - Council on Environmental Quality;

Mr. Paul Brace - Department of Housing and Urban Development;

Mr. Simon Bourgin - United States Information Agency;

Mr. Leonard Felsenthal - U.S. Mission to the European Office of the United Nations, Geneva;

Mr. Fitzhugh Green - Environmental Protection Agency;

Mr. Heyward Isham - Council on Environmental Quality;

Mr. Patrick Mulloy - Department of State;

Mr. Charles Orlebeke - Deputy Under Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban Development;

Mr. Thomas Smith - Department of State;

Mr. Laughlin Waters - Public Member - Attorney, Los Angeles

Work of the Symposium

A. Opening of the Symposium 1. Introductory Statement by the Executive Secretary

The Symposium was opened by the Executive Secretary of the ECE, Mr. J. Stanovnik, who presented an introductory statement. He indicated that a comprehensive approach was needed to solve environmental problems and that attention to the overall consequences of economic growth and technological change could no longer be postponed. He indicated that technological advances could not always be regarded as an improvement of our civilization and that the secondary effect i.e. the social and long term effects of innovation should be more properly taken into account than has been done in the past. He indicated that the development, (1) of a broader concept of human welfare, which would encourage technology that would have favorable impacts on environmental quality, and (2) of new concepts for national environmental policy were the major tasks of the symposium.

2. Election of Chairman and Two Vice-Chairmen

After the Executive Secretary of the ECE made his statement, the Officers of the Symposium were elected. Mr. K. Lobi (Czechoslovakia) was elected Chairman and Mr. Hook (Sweden) and Mr. Wilkinson (United Kingdom) were elected Vice Chairmen.

B. Survey of the Present Environmental Situation, Includinq a Detailed Examination of Problem-Sectors and Problem-Areas

1. Introductory Reports

The purpose of the introductory reports was to orient the symposium as a whole and to draw attention to the main socio-economic and other major governmental problems of environmental policy faced in different countries. The first introductory report, presented by the UK stressed that man, responsible for destroying the environment, could also re-create it. Each country, it said, must strike a balance between technological development and the welfare of society. The second introductory report presented by Czechoslovakia discussed the environmental disfunctions caused by industrialization. It cautioned against over-stressing them, since industry was the major means of increasing wealth. It urged nations to judge investments in environmental improvement by criteria other than those used in evaluating production activities. Various nations commented on the reports.

2. Problem Sectors

The Symposium then proceeded with a survey of the present environmental situation, including a detailed examination of problem sectors and problem areas. The discussion of problem sectors was based on a series of studies prepared by government rapporteurs and supplemented by other studies prepared by international organizations.

a. Energy Production

Representatives of Czechoslovakia and the IAEA summarized their papers and a discussion ensued. It was clear that this fundamentally important sector of industrialized nations is responsible for some of the very worst environmental nuisances; and since demand for energy is expected to increase rapidly - the problem will get worse. Since energy facilities serving the generation and transfer of power are widely spread over the inhabited environment, their interference cannot be said to be limited to certain industrial areas only. It was agreed that stimulation of research, relating to the most critical phases of energy production such as the desulphurization of fuel; on problems of waste heat and cooling; and environmentally safe disposal of radioactive nuclear waste is urgent. The Swiss indicated they had come. to the conclusion, based on their own experience that a water cooling system was not as effective as an air cooling system.

b. Metal Industry

The FRG paper indicated that environmental action aimed at elementary disfunctions generated in the metal industry section necessarily must focus on the preventing of air and water pollution. More research is needed to find technical solutions to the problem of red dust (ferrous oxides) as well as flouride emissions in the production of aluminum. Another urgent problem for research is to find a method for reducing noise in metal shaping processes where current noise control measures cannot be applied, and thus to eliminate the danger of loss of hearing to the workers involved.

c. Chemicals Including Petrochemical Industries

The principal paper was presented by the USSR. It dealt almost exclusively with problems of waste emissions and effluents. In the subsequent discussion, it was suggested that because certain chemicals are so toxic and so persistent, a thorough re-examination of the positive and negative aspects of the contributions of this industry to economic growth and human welfare might seem advisable.

d. Building Industry

Belgium presented a highly technical paper on pollution problems associated with the production of building materials, particularly concrete, clay and limestone. The paper detailed the extent of pollution hazards such as dust, toxic gases, fumes, acid and landscape spoilage occasioned by mining, production and transportation of these materials. Reaction to the paper was perfunctory.

e. Transportation

The paper presented by Switzerland related the increase in GNP to an increase in the volume of transportation, suggesting that the scope of the problem would continue to increase in the future. The paper dealt principally with traffic and the environment; specifically with the problems of noise, air pollution, water pollution, and aesthetics. The comments on air pollution were very general, calling for limitations on automobile emissions and the introduction of emission standards in the most general terms. It was also noted that one million cars require twenty five square kilometers of parking space, and 160-600 square kilometers of road space when circulating. From this it concluded that mass transportation is the only feasible answer to problems caused by the automobile.

F. Waste Management

The presentation by the UK made clear that the question is not one of lack of know-how on what needs to be done, but is rather a question of cost. Technically there exist ways of eliminating the major part of solid waste and of purifying polluted water flows. The burden on the waste management section would be less, if both production and conservation were geared towards reducing, instead of increasing waste by means of more sophisticated manufacturing and recycling techniques, by an increased durability of products, by their prolonged use, simplified sale and return, more systematic repair and maintenance, etc.

G. Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

Papers by Hungary and the FAO both indicated that agricultural and forestry areas which are relatively less threatened by pollution as such, are increasingly endangered by rapid industrialization. The increased use of chemical products and the mechanization of modern agriculture call for certain measures to be taken against further deterioration of these areas. Spain suggested that the ECE assume responsibility for drawing up a map showing the extent of soil erosion on the European continent. It was also indicated that the ECE and FAO should cooperate very closely on matters affecting the agricultural and forestry environment.

3. Problem Areas

An examination of related types of geographic areas, from the point of view of their environmental problems and remedial action needed was also undertaken. Discussions were based on a series of studies prepared by government rapporteurs and supplemented by international organizations. discussions revealed that the exchange of information and national experience in tackling environmental problems of complex areas was most useful as a means of promoting solutions. It also was suggested that joint practical actions could become desirable when the problems of environmental disfunctions transcended national frontiers.

a. Metropolitan Areas & Regions

The basic paper was presented by France on the Marseille metropolitan region. The region, it Was pointed out, has major problems of rapid population increase, uncontrolled land development and industrial pollution. In the discussions, stress was, laid on the need for comprehensive regional planning in order to prevent uncontrolled growth. It was suggested that international cooperation and coordination were needed in instances where the development of metropolitan regions straddle national borders.

b. River Basins

The environmental problems arising in such ecological entities as river basins were discussed on the basis of a report submitted by the United States using the pollution of the Potomac River as an example. In the discussions, it was agreed that governments must do a better job of anticipating economic and demographic growth if they are to overcome waste treatment plants receiving waste flows in excess of their capacities. The conclusion was drawn that there is a need for comprehensive institutions to operate the liquid and solid waste disposal systems of entire regions.

c. Countryside Reqions Attracting Mass Tourism

The core of this session was a well prepared paper from Yugoslavia outlining its plan for handling mass tourism in its prime tourist area - the Dalmatian coast. It stressed the need for integrated planning and organization of tourist areas, tying in the economic development of an area with firm insistence on preserving historic and scenic values. In the discussion, it was noted that tourism can and does contribute to the destruction of the landscape especially by its ancillaries such as roads. airstrips. cars. parks and restaurants, etc.

d. Industrial Regions

A participant from Poland presented a paper on industrialized regions; stressing the same disfunctions with its effects on air, water and natural landscape as was found in metropolitan areas. As in metropolitan areas, participants agreed there is a need for coordinated planning of industrial regions.

e. Historical Zones

The paper presented by the Italian participant indicated that the aim of preservation is to keep historic buildings in existence as living components of the contemporary urban nation. The great interest in preservation of historic environments would tend, he said, to show that human beings have an emotional need which cannot be satisfied by contemporary housing estates. Participants pointed out that tremendous economic and demographic pressure on valuable urban space threatened the existence of many zones of historic value and interest.

4. Panel Discussion of Major Socio-Economic Questions Relating to Environment

A panel discussion was held on major socio-economic questions relating to environment. The panel was composed of four major thinkers in the field, including Mr. Allan Kneese of Resources for the Future, who acted as consultants to the Secretariat. They agreed, among other things, that it was advisable to include the real costs of environmental improvement in the respective price of products, to prevent pollution by fines and charges, and to use various kinds of financial stimuli to persuade producers and consumers to change their preferences and technologies. It was thought that subsidies paid from the state budget would not be a strong incentive, and thus should not become the major method of financing environmental improvements. Subsidies, it was agreed, could be usefully applied under some circumstances.

The panel members found it undesirable to focus On adopting uniform standards on the international level, but emphasized the necessity for nations to develop internationally a framework for consultations to reduce conflict - both on trans-boundry pollution and effects of differing standards on international trade.

5. International Arrangements for the Exchange of Information

The discussion centered around the ECE proposal for a decentralized information system that would permit member countries to have access to current environmental information. The U.S. fully supported the report’s general conclusions that the ECE begin with a strongly decentralized transmission system with the Secretariat’s role limited mainly to receiving and transmitting requests for information to national focal points and perhaps providing methodological guidance. The US urged the Secretariat to convene an ad hoc group of experts to work out the frame of references for such a system. The USSR supported the proposal; and it was agreed that the Secretariat would call a meeting of such an ad hoc group of experts prier to this fall’s meeting of the ECE’s Senior Environmental Advisers.

C. Discussion of Various Means of Environmental Improvement Through Action on National and, International Levels 1. Government Organizational & Institutional Arrangements

Six countries made presentations under this heading, covering long term governmental objectives, national legislation, and organizational and institutional arrangements. These countries were: France, USSR, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and the United States. The presentations closely adhered to the papers previously submitted and elicited no significant new information.

The French paper was the most sophisticated and lucid of this group, while the Soviet paper restricted itself to the general endorsement of environmental virtue without specifying the regulations to effect these principles or the precise standards. Nevertheless, in private conversations, one of the Soviet participants, Mr. Kunin, Deputy Chairman, Scientific Council on Environment, Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that they were considering forming a new high-level policy and administrative organization to deal with environmental problems. This body would be headed by the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministries in order, to give it the proper impact within government, and the day-to-day operation of the group would be handled by an official of ministerial rank. In addition, the powers of the Ministry of Water Resources are to be extended and regulatory authority now given to other ministries, such as agriculture, are to be consolidated under this Ministry.

Ending their presentation the Soviets stressed particularly the basic theme that environmental action must take place on the national level and that while there could be cooperation between nations, there should be no new international body superimposed upon existing national organizations.

2. Environmental Research and Education

During this session only a few of the speakers came to terms with the subject. Mr. Isham of the United States, led off by describing two types of research organizations which the U.S. Government supported: (1) the National Science Foundation, which spent $361 million last year researching environmental systems in advanced technology and applications, and which worked closely with the Council on Environmental Quality; and (2) the Environmental Institute, recently proposed by President Nixon as a mechanism for studying problems of long-range interest to man in both policy and applied research. Both these organizations would use public and private funds.

The Delegate of the International Union for Conservation of Natural Resources came next. Environmental education of the broadest type, he pointed out, needed less instruction in specifics than in interpretation of existing knowledge, in showing man how to understand and enjoy his environment. The introduction of this approach in training teachers was said to be critical, and the Soviet Union, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, among other countries said they were already programing this approach into teacher training.

The Polish, Bulgarian, Romanian, and Czechoslovak Delegates followed by simply listing their institutional science arrangements (Academy of Sciences, university science curriculum, high school science courses), and describing them in environmental terminology.

The contribution of a second Czechoslovak speaker, an officer of the Czechoslovak Center for Pollution and Environmental Research, was interesting only because of a single sentence. “We have to pay much more attention to war and disease”, he said, “than to the struggle for proper environment.”

The UNESCO Delegate followed with a brief rationa1 plea for support of that organization’s environmental pro-grams. The World Meteorological Organization Representative described changes in the atmosphere due to non-natural causes in the last century, that made WMO’s new Global Monitoring Network of first importance in the years t. come.

In view of the long exposition by the Eastern European countries of what their universities were doing in the environmental field, very little of which was actually legitimate or new, it is regrettable that the U.S. was not prepared by proper briefing materials to fully discuss what American universities are doing. Most American universities have now reorganized the scientific and social disciplines impinging on the environment into central inter-disciplinary departments, with new curriculums to suit this purpose. Environmental studies and ecology are now among the most-sought after studies at U.S. universities. Environmental law has been set up as a separate study by many major law schools, etc. The new American contribution in environmental education is certainly the most outstanding of all, and unfortunately we were not prepared to respond.

3. Financial, Fiscal and Other Economic Measures

This topic was introduced by studies submitted by Poland and Sweden. The former considered the problems involved from the typical angle of centrally planned e onomies; the latter presented an analysis of the theoretical a well as the practical aspects implied when various economic policy devices were used in the field of environment der characteristic market economy conditions.

Discussions revealed that efforts were being made, as far as possible, to apply the principle that any damage to the environment should be charged to the economic sec ion which caused the damage. It also clearly emerged from discussions that in the long run the less costly policy in environmental matters would be to prevent rather than to cure disruptive effects.

Conclusion

The Prague Symposium on the Environment ended on May 10th with the endorsement in principle of a report prepared by the Secretariat with help of rapporteurs drawn from the participants. The GDR was not mentioned in the report, which is a reasonably good summary of discussions at the Symposium.

Two sets of draft conclusions for transmission to the Senior Environmental Advisers were prepared by the Secretariat. The first set of conclusions dealing with the discussions on problem sectors and areas was agreed to, and made part of the report. The second set of conclusions dealing with the discussions of economic, fiscal and government policies went far beyond the discussions which took place in the Symposium, and participants objected to its inclusion in the report. It will be circulated to governments as a Secretariat document for their consideration and comment prior to the meeting of the ECE’s Senior Environmental Advisers this autumn.

The Symposium ended with speeches” of good will by all concerned.

The accomplishments of the Symposium were not inconsiderable. It added momentum for environmental control and reform in both Western and Eastern Europe; it produced a valuable body of literature in problem and sector areas for the working experts; it provided rare face-to-face contact and exchange between the officials on both sides of Europe concerned with environmental correction; and it produced both a pattern for accomplishment and a warning of some dangers for Stockholm. Hopefully the Group of Senior Environmental Advisers to ECE Governments, which will have its first meeting this autumn, will construct an ECE environmental program upon the foundation laid by the Symposium. It is hoped that the Senior Environmental Advisers will adopt a long-term program of work in environment for the Economic Commission for Europe.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 ECE. No classification marking. Drafted by Patrick Mulloy on July 12.

309. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 309. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, August 5, 1971.

Subject:

U.S. Support for an Invitation to the PRC to Attend the 1972 Stockholm Conference on Human Environment

In response to Jeanne Davis’ request of Ju1y 14, 1971 (NSC #28915), I attach a paper describing the possible scenarios, for supporting an invitation to the PRC for the 1972 Stockholm Conference on Human Environment.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Attachment

U.S. Support for an Invitation to the PRC to Attend the 1972 Stockholm Conference on Human Environment

PROBLEM AND SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS

Problem:

To develop possible scenarios for supporting an invitation to the People’s Republic of China (PRC) for the 1972 Stockholm Conference on Human Environment whether or not the PRC enters the UN.

Conclusions:

The 26th General Assembly will almost certainly determine that the PRC should be represented in the UN (either through the Albanian or a dual representation resolution). The UN Secretariat will, in all probability, the automatically issue an invitation to the PRC for the Stockholm Conference.

In the unlikely event that the General Assembly recommends seating the PRC in the UN but the Secretariat does not automatically extend an invitation to the PRC (presumably because the PRC has refused to take its seat), there are several ways in which we could support an invitation to the PRC. The option we would recommend is to expand the traditional UN invitation formula (to members of the UN or its specialized agencies) by adding a new category: “any other state whose representation in the UN as been approved by the General Assembly” (option B-2-a below). This option has the fewest repercussions on other US political interests (particularly the East German problem). The PRC would then automatically be issued an invitation to the Conference by the Secretariat.

In the even less likely event that the General Assembly does not recommend seating the PRC in the UN, the traditional invitation formula could be modified to include specific reference to the PRC and the Secretariat would issue the invitation.

BACKGROUND

The Stockholm Conference on Human Environment is on the agenda of the 26th UN General Assembly. One of the issues to be considered under this item is the question of invitations to the conference. The invitation formula traditionally adopted for UN-sponsored conferences is: members of the UN, its specialized agencies, the IAEA, and parties to the Statute of the ICJ. This is commonly known as the “Vienna formula.” There have been strong indications, however, that the Soviets and their allies will be pushing hard for an invitation formula that would include East Germany. We have already informed the FRG and other key allies that we will oppose any invitation formula that would in invite or have the effect of inviting East Germany to attend the conference until such time as the Berlin negotiations and the inner-German talks have been successfully completed. We believe that at this time the majority of UN members would support a resolution providing for an invitation to the PRC while excluding East Germany and that a Soviet move to include East Germany can be defeated if we can successfully draw a distinction between PRC and East German participation.

The US has consistently supported the Vienna form la for invitations to UN-sponsored conferences because: (1) it is the only method that has been devised that clearly defines for the UN Secretariat those entities that should be considered as states for the purpose of issuing invitations to a given conference and (2) it serves other US policy interests by excluding generally unrecognized regimes such as East Germany, North Korea, North Vietnam and, in the past, the PRC from meetings of international organizations. It has been particularly useful in preventing East Germany from, enhancing its international status during the delicate Berlin and inner-German negotiations.

DISCUSSION AND OPTIONS

At the present time it appears likely that we will be able to support PRC presence at the Stockholm Conference without having to modify the Vienna formula since the 26th General Assembly will almost certainly decide the question of Chinese representation in such a way that the PRC will automatically receive an invitation under the Vienna formula. To make this possible we should consult with key UN members and with Secretariat officials to ensure that the Item on the Stockholm Conference is considered after the General Assembly has token a decision on Chinese representation. The options contained in this paper are based on the assumption that the question of Chinese representation will already have been decided by the Assembly in any one of the three possible ways available to it. (In the event that a decision on the question of invitations to the Conference should be taken before the vote on Chinese representation, only the alternatives in Contingency C would be applicable.)

Assuming that a primary objective is to make it known that the US supports the participation of the PRC at the Stockholm Conference, we will wish to consider, under any of the following contingencies, including an explicit statement to that effect either in the UNGA debate on invitations to Stockholm or in some other appropriate public statement.

One policy question not discussed is the US stance on an invitation for the GRC. Assuming that the GRC does not withdraw from the entire UN system, it is likely to continue to be represented in at least some UN Specialized. Agencies, and in normal practice it would receive an invitation. The PRC would take umbrage at the issuance of such an Invitation and probably would refuse to attend the conference if the GRC attends. If the objective is simply to have the PRC invited, to the conference we need not be concerned about the GRC aspects. If the objective is PRC attendance, however, then we must address such questions as whether to support or discourage an invitation to the GRC.

CONTINGENCY A—The PRC becomes a member of the UN and the GRC is expelled (Albanian-type resolution):

If the “Albanian” resolution is adopted, the question of extending an invitation to the PRC will automatically be resolved since the PRC, as a UN member, would be included in any invitation formula that the General Assembly adopts for the Conference.

CONTINGENCY B—The Assembly decides that the PRC should be represented in the UN without prejudice to continued GRC representation (dual representation in any of its variants):

In determining whether the PRC would or could receive an invitation to attend the Stockholm Conference under such circumstances, an important factor may be whether the PRC decides to take its seat in the UN.

1. If the PRC agrees to enter the UN, it would receive an invitation to the Stockholm Conference under the Vienna formula as a UN member.

2. In the event that the PRC refuses to take its seat (presumably because of the GRC’s continued presence) the UN Legal Office would probably rule that the will of the General Assembly had been expressed and that the PRC should be considered to be a UN member for the purpose of extending an invitation under the Vienna formula. If this contingency arises, we would wish to consult with the UN Legal Adviser and/or other key Secretariat officials to assure issuance of an invitation to the PRC.

In the unlikely event that the Secretariat decided it could not under these circumstances issue an invitation to the PRC under the Vienna formula, we would have four alternative means to support an invitation to the PRC: a. Support a resolution requesting the SYG to invite “states members of the UN, its specialized agencies, the IAEA, and parties to the Statute of the ICJ, and any other state whose representation in the UN has been approved by the General Assembly.”

Although unprecedented, this modification of the Vienna formula would have fewer immediate political repercussions than option c or an amended option b since its effect would be confined to the PRC alone. Unlike an “all states” approach, there is no administrative problem entailed in this formulation since the SYG would issue an invitation to the PRC on the grounds that the GA has already invited, the PRC to sit in the General Assembly.

b. Support a resolution requesting the SYG to invite “states members of the UN, its specialized agencies, the IAEA, and parties to the Statute of the ICJ” (traditional Vienna formula) plus “the People’s Republic of China.”

This approach might be most appealing to the PRC because of its specific UN endorsement of Peking’s role in the international community. Moreover, it would be consistent with our long-standing position that the UNGA, as a major UN political forum, is an approprtate place to determine such questions. (In UN Specialized Agencies we have frequently supported invitation resolutions consisting of the traditional Vienna formula and “any other state that the General Assembly decides to invite.” However, the General Assembly has never acted upon such resolutions.) Its greatest weakness is that its construction begs to be amended by the Soviets and others to include specific reference to other entities outside the UN system, particularly East Germany.

If the resolution were amended to include East Germany (or if the original resolution specified both by name—a more likely possibility if introduced by the other side), we could be faced with the difficult decision of voting for it in order to support the PRC or opposing it in accordance with our present German policy. However, we believe we could successfully defeat a move to include East Germany under this formulation by mustering enough votes first to obtain a separate vote on the portion of the resolution concerning East Germany and subsequently to delete that portion.

c. Support a resolution requesting the SYG to issue invitations to “all states.”

This approach would have the greatest repercussions on other political problems, especially the East German question. It would violate our commitment to Bonn and other key allies to oppose an invitation to East Germany if at all feasible. Moreover, it is the least feasible in terms of successful implementation since the SYG has repeatedly said that he cannot and will not make the determination under the “all states” rubric of what entities outside the system should be considered states for the purpose of issuing invitations to conferences.

Thus the effect of an “all states” approach would probably be to provoke severely some key allies and perhaps precipitate acrimonious and potentially dangerous controversy over the role of the Secretariat in making political determinations about the international status of entities outside the UN system, possibly without resulting in the extension of an invitation to the PRC.

Therefore we conclude that this approach should not be taken, especially since other more effective and potentially less damaging options exist.

d. Support or encourage the Swedish Government as Stockholm Conference host to invite the PRC as its guest.

This approach would have the fewest political repercussions in the UN context on questions concerning divided. states and. other entities outside the UN family and would set no new precedent as it des not alter present practice. (Host governments for UN-sponsored conferences have traditionally had the right to invite guests.) However, it would probably be least acceptable of all the options to he PRC since it is not equivalent to any action the UN itself might take and it would not connote UN endorsement of PRC presence at Stockholm. Moreover, if we adopt this approach—as we are considering doing—to deal with the question of East German participation at the Conference, we will want Stockholm to agree to strict limitations on the nature and extent of East German participation. If the PRC were invited by Stolckholm as its guest, it would be difficult not to impose the same conditions on its participation as are imposed on East Germany. It is unlikely that such conditions would be acceptable to the PRC.

CONTINGENCY C—The status quo is maintained with the PRC having no status in the UN (neither “Albanian” nor dual representation resolution is adopted):

In this contingency we could support an invitation to the PRC for the Stockholm Conference either through a GA resolution recommending the extension of invitations to “all states” (option B-2-c above), through a GA resolution recommending the extension of invitations to Vienna formula countries plus the PRC (option B-2-b above), or by encouraging Stockholm to invite the PRC (option B-2-d above). Under such circumstances option B-2-b would be most desirable because it would be most appealing to the PRC and would create the fewest to technical and administrative problems. However, we would have to be prepared to work actively with our European allies to ensure that an invitation was not extended to East Germany under an amended formulation.

CONSULTATIONS AND TACTICAL HANDLING

If Chinese representation is resolved in a fashion whereby the PRC will automatically receive an invitation through the Vienna formula, we need do nothing aside from supporting the Vienna formula for invitations and perhaps expressing our gratification that the PRC is being invited. In the unlikely event that Chinese representation is not resolved in this way and we decide that it is desirable to support one of the options under Contingency B-2, it will be necessary to consult closely with key allies in order to ensure the success of any resolution introduced to achieve our objectives under that option. (It would also be imperative to consult with the FRG to assure it that we will attempt to reach our goal of an invitation to the PRC without jeopardizing our position on East Germany. Consultations with the GRC on this issue would also be desirable.) Because many UN members would be eager to see the PRC participate in the Stockholm Conference, we do not believe that a lengthy period of consultation in advance of the resolution’s introduction is required. One or two weeks would probably suffice to reach agreement on the wording and co-sponsorship of the resolution. Whether we would wish to join in the co-sponsoring of such a resolution (assuming that it followed the lines of options B-2-a or b) would depend primarily on the extent to which we wish to underscore our suppcrt for PRC participation at Stockholm.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret. Drafted by Barbara J. Schrage (IO/UNP) on August 1 and cleared in IO, EA, EUR, L, C, and SCI.

310. Intelligence Note RSGN-16 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 310. Intelligence Note RSGN-16 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, August 12, 1971.

UN: SOVIETS PUSHING GDR PARTICIPATION IN STOCKHOLM ENVIRONMENT CONFERENCE

The USSR is using the environment issue as a political football in trying to achieve international recognition for the GDR (German Democratic Republic). To this end, Moscow has apparently decided to push hard for East German participation in the 1972 UN Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm—even to the point of threatening to boycott the conference. While such tactics are probably only continuation of their long-standing policy, they may be part of a intensive Soviet effort to register progress now on the question of GDR representation in international organizations to preempt the outcome of the on-going inner-German talks. The initial battle could be fought in the Stockholm Conference Preparatory Committee, which is scheduled to begin work on September 13 in New York, where the Soviets will probably raise the issue of an invitation to the GDR.

Early Soviet Notice. At the April ECE plenary in Prague, the Soviets and E ast Europeans pushed hard for GDR participation in a proposed ministerial-level conference on environmental problems in early May and managed to downgrade it to a “symposium of experts.”* In early June Soviet officials at the UN told the Italians that they were “deadly serious” about including the GDR in the Stockholm Conference and threatened to use the same tactics as in Prague.

A month later Nestorenko, the Soviet representative to the summer ECOSOC session in Geneva, told Ambassador Bush that the USSR understood the keen interest of the USin the environment question. He then said that the USSR felt that participation should be open to all countries, making clear that GDR exclusion would cause a serious problem for the USSR, which would be obliged to reconsider its own participation in the conference. Nestorenko urged that the US find “modalities” to avoid GDR exclusion before the end of the next UN General Assembly, emphasizing that this was a specific situation and that he was not proposing a change in fundamental US policy of opposing GDR participation in such meetings.

Swedes Under Pressure. Nestorenko also approached the Swedish representatives to ECOSOC, to whom he read a statement emphasizing (a) the “universality” the Soviets envisioned at the Stockholm Conference applied on y to the GDR, not the PRC, North Korea, and North Vietnam; (b) if the GDR dos not participate, the USSR must “reexamine” its participation; and (c) the Swedes should tell other Scandinavians about the Soviet position. Nestorenko also threatened the possibility of downgrading the conference to a symposium but made no reference to “modalities.”

The Swedes were apparently impressed by the Soviet threat and under the impression that the Soviets intend to raise the matter in the Stockholm Preparatory Committee on September 13 in New York. However, an official of the Conference Secretariat recently noted that he has observed no indication that the Swedish government is prepared to acquiesce to Soviet demands on East German Participation as a price for having the Conference.

On the other hand, Swedish Premier Olaf Palme, according to a reliable source, told West German officials that he would like to convince the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) of the necessity of inviting the East Germans because of the pressure which would be exerted on his government by the Swedish public and other Scandinavian countries to ha e the GDR invited. In addition, he was opposed to downgrading the conference to a symposium because of the resulting loss in prestige of Swede as host of a major UN conference.

West Germans Concerned. Soviet tactics are viewed with concern by West German officials, including Foreign Minister Scheel who stressed to his NATO colleagues this spring that the question of the position of the GDR in international organizations was posing increasing difficulties, This is so, said Scheel, because (a) since December 1970 there has been a recognizable decrease of resistance by many countries to GDR efforts to obtain membership in international organizaitions, and (b) as a result of the Berlin negotiations there will emerge changes which in turn will bring a change in GDR status, for example, in the form of strong pressure to accept GDR participation in other international forums such as multilateral preparations for MBFR or CES.

The FRG regards the Soviet term “modalities” as a gimmick and is afraid that the US feels so strongly about the importance of Soviet participation in the Conference that it is willing to “invent some modality” to permit GDR attendance. Consequently, they insist that the “Vienna formula” (i.e., that member of the UN, parties to the ICJ, specialized agencies, and IAEA be invited to participate) must be maintained and that for the time being the West must continue to take a hard line against GDR participation.

Soviet Policy. For years Soviet attempts on the GDR’s behalf have achieved the regularity and predictability of set exercises. Soviet tactics at the Prague conference, however, were unusual and participated concern that they represented the opening gun. of an intensive campaign by Moscow to achieve a breakthrough for the GDR.

In the interests of its peace offensive, however, in the past eight months Moscow has deemphasized the acceptance of the GDR in the UN and other international organizations as a full-fledged member. (The Soviets have also deemphasized the issue of diplomatic recognition of the GDR.)* Thus, although Moscow’s concentration on detente tactics in Europe may have led it temporarily to soft-pedal some aspects of East Germany’s desired international status, there is no doubt the basic Soviet position is unchanged.

Prospects. The Soviets have served fair warning that they intend to pursue the matter energetically, perhaps even to the point of boycotting the conference. They evidently hope to capitalize on the importance the US attaches to environmental problems, which in turn are low on the Soviet list of priorities. It is doubtful, however, that they would wish to provoke the remaining countries (i.e., those which sympathize with GDR participation but which have an interest in environmental problems) by trying to reduce the conference to a symposium. In any case such a move would need the approval of the General Assembly, which convened the Conference, and it is unlikely the Soviets could muster the required support for such a political decision.

The Soviets are likely to raise the issue at the meeting of the Preparatory Commitee, although it is expected that this move will be successfully referred to the 26th General Assembly for a decision. Regardless of the Assembly’s decision, the Swedes as hosts will undoubtedly be under continued pressure from the Soviets and others to arrange for some form of GDR particpation and may feel compelled to invite the East Germans as their guests. Such participation by the GDR would give the East Germans increased international stature at a particularly delicate time because the issue of FRG-GDR relationships now before the inner-German talks will probably not have been resolved.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret. Drafted by John J. Donovan and cleared by Frank H. Perez (both of INR/RSG.)

* For full account of Soviet and East European tactics see REUS-21 “ECE/GDR: The Prague Environmental Symposium—A Shortlived Compromise,” May 20, 1971

* See RSEN-42 “Signalling from East Berlin: Apparently Positive”, June 17, 1971 (CONFIDENTIAL); also RSEN-31 “Honecker visits Moscow: A Turning of the Screws”, May 20, 1971 (CONFIDENTIAL).

311. Memorandum From Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 311. Memorandum From Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 4, 1972.

Subject:

President’s Visit to China: Opportunities for Environmental Cooperation with China

While it is obviously premature to consider US-China government-to-government environmental cooperation, opportunities may now exist to promote informal cooperative projects between scientific groups or universities. While there have been no direct or indirect signals of Chinese interest in developing environmental Cooperation, we feel certain avenues should be explored.

We do not know the extent to which the Chinese face serious environmental problems, but there seems to be a growing awareness of them. Leo Orleans and Richard Suttmeier pointed out in the December 11, 1970, issue of Science that due to both the Maoist ethic of frugality and to considerations of public health, the Chinese have done more to combat pollution than the their relative early stage of industrialization would lead one to believe. More recently, in September 1971, Peking’s leading political journal, Red Flag, identified widespread failures in the disposal and recycling of industrial wastes, and called for major improvement in this field.

The Chinese have emphasized a “do-it-yourself” pollution clean-up. This approach, combined with continued secrecy about national problems and with propaganda efforts asserting that industrial pollution can only be solved in a planned economy, does not easily lend itself to cooperation with foreign governments or institutions. Despite this problem, however, we believe there may be opportunities for technical cooperation in two or three areas that are not intrusive into Chinese society, and where both we and the Chinese would benefit. These limited areas include:

1. Earthquake Prediction Programs

The Institute of Geophysics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences is reported to have an intensive and diverse earthquake prediction program as a result of the personal interest of Chairman Mao. The Institute maintains fourteen standard observatories in some of the 150 provincial stations built and operated by the provinces with assistance of the Institute. While much of the Chinese work in this area has been developed in isolation from other countries, Chinese scientists are reportedly proud of their progress and eager to learn more about related work in other countries. Meager reports would indicate the Chinese are working towards an operational system. Their work is apparently more advanced than ours.

2. Recycling of Industrial Wastes

For reasons of scarcity as much as for environmental reasons, the Chinese have shown deep interest in the maximum use of industrial wastes, particularly of gas, liquids, slag, and heat. The government has promoted full-scale campaigns for the productive use of these wastes.

3. Arid Land Use and Water Management

Because of their large arid areas, the Chinese might be interested in exchanging information on salinity control, soil stabilization, and water conservation measures for arid land use.

4. Conservation

The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) lists nearly 30 mammal species from China in its Red Data Book of rare and endangered species. China’s fauna includes some of the rarest and least known wildlife species in the world. International cooperation of Some form in this area might be possible, since it would not point up Chinese industrial backwardness and could provide them with favorable publicity.

Environment is a relatively nonpolitical issue on which cooperation at an early stage through private channels might open up contacts. In the first three areas mentioned above, a number of universities have active programs, while a number of private conservation groups would be interested in Item 4. The President’s visit would provide the opportunity for a sounding out of any interest. If they are at all interested, we might ask them to designate institutions to work with private institutions in the U.S.

Russell E. Train
Chairman

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Ehrlichman.

312. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon 312. Memorandum From Secretary Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, January 12, 1972.

Subject:

United States International Environmental Initiative

I recommend that you propose the establishment of a United Nations Fund on the Environment and pledge substantial United States support over three years beginning in FY 1974. Internal staff work has been prepared on the basis of a total United States committment of $100 million.

From fifteen to twenty per cent of the United States pledge would be a cash contribution to the new Fund, the balance available as United States goods and services to support agreed projects. Other industrialized countries have informally indicated that they would contribute to such a Fund if the United States takes the lead. After the third year, the United States contribution to the Fund would be on a matching basis.

This initiative, designed to meet basic United States international environmental objectives and to improve the effectiveness of United Nations agency response in this field, is the keystone of United States participation in the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, which will be held in Stockholm during June 5-16. The success of international environmental efforts, in which the United States has played a leadership role, will clearly be enhanced by a United States willingness to commit a portion of the necessary resources to meet desired objectives. (See Annex 2.)

An early announcement by you, preferably in your 1972 Environmental Message to the Congress, is desirable.

You have publicly pledged your support for the Conference. Interagency groups over the past two years, with tthe advice of non-governmental groups have developed a series of United States proposed actions for the Conference. (See Annex 3 for a description of the proposals, with cost estimates.) The proposals will contribute to our foreign policy and domestic economy interests as identified in Annex 4.

Various options regarding funding were examined (see Annex 5) to better ensure a more efficient and coordinated United Nations effort on environmental matters, appropriate means to support the programs which serve United States interests, and some stimulation to the United States economy, particularly the technological sector. Annex 6 reviews the operation of the proposed Fund and implementation of the United States pledge.

Authorization and appropriation would be sought next year in new legislation submitted by the Executive Branch to the Congress. The mechanics of the appropriation have not yet been worked out. However, an announcement of United States interest is necessary now to facilitate preparations for the Conference and to ensure positive action at the Conference.

Recommendations:

That you approve: 1. Proposing the creation of a United Nations Fund on the Environment and

2. Pledging substantial United States support ($100 million) in direct contributions, goods and services over three years beginning in FY 1974, once the Fund is established.

Approve

Disapprove

3. Announcing this initiative in your 1972 Environmental Message to the Congress. (Suggested paragraphs are at Annex 1).

Approve

Disapprove

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41 UN. A notation on the memorandum reads: “Message sent to Congress 2/8/72.” The message is printed in Public Papers: Nixon, 1972, pp. 173-189. Annexes 1-6 were attached but not published.

313. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) 313. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)1

Washington, January 14, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Environmental Cooperation with the People’s Republic of China

It was very helpful of you to have detailed a number of eco!ogical matters where we might seek to establish cooperative programs with the People’s Republic of China, as outlined in your memo of January 4. While, as you note, at the present time there is little evidence of Chinese interest in environmental cooperation, it is certainly useful for us to keep possible areas of mutual interest in mind.

We will certainly keep these ideas in mind as we proceed With planning for the President’s trip.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Haig signed for Kissinger.

314. Research Study RSGS-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 314. Research Study RSGS-1 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, January 14, 1972.

UN: SOVIETS INCREASE PRESSURE FOR GDR PARTICIPATION IN STOCKHOLM CONFERENCE

The fate of the UN Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment (June 1972) is in some doubt as the result of Soviet insistence that the German Democratic Republic be permitted to participate on the same basis as the Federal Republic of Germany. Soviet maneuvering on this issue may heighten possibilities of a direct US-Soviet confrontation over GDR participation as well as force Moscow to make a difficult choice between supporting the East Germans or leaving the Peoples Republic of China a free field at Stockholm, now that Peking has decided to attend.

ABSTRACT

Soviet threats to boycott the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment have become more believable as a result of their withdrawal, along with the Czechoslovaks, from all participation in preparations for the meeting. While Soviet actions can he viewed as a tactical maneuver, Moscow may not be bluffing after all. What is more, fear of such a boycott is already eroding the confidence of a number of supporters of the conference, both here and abroad, who can be expected to put increasing pressure on the US to reach a compromise with the Soviets on GDR participation.

Thus the Swedes as well as UN Secretary General Waldheim himself are speaking of the need for reaching some accommodation on this issue in order to avoid jeopardizing the conference. Failing that, Waldheim has suggested postponing the meeting for a year as the only alternative.

While these circumstances may enhance Moscow’s bargaining position, the Soviets, too, face a number of problems as a result of their current policy. Of particular importance here is the decision by the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to attend the conference. Can the Soviets afford to leave such a potential propaganda forum to the Chinese? On the one hand, current Soviet detente policy in Europe dictates adhering to its position of full support for the GDR in order to appease the East Germans and keep them in line. On the other hand, in the broader context of Sino-Soviet rivalry, Moscow will have great difficulty in choosing between China and the GDR.

Moscow’s threat to boycott the UN Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment (June 1972) unless the GDR (German Democratic Republic) is allowed to participate on the same basis as the FRG (Federal Republic of Germany) has raised fears in many quarters about the fate of this meeting. What is more, the recent Soviet withdrawal, along with Czechoslovakia, from the conference preparations has heightened possibilities of a direct US-Soviet confrontation over the ticklish issue of GDR participation.

Soviet Position Consistent.

As early as June 1971 the Soviets had indicated that they were “deadly serious” about full GDR participation in the Stockholm Conference. Any failure to achieve their objective would thus oblige them to reconsider participating in the confererce. On the other hand, Soviet officials seemingly sought to mollify US objection to full GDR participation by suggesting that “modalities” could be devised that would do justice to the GDR as well as still accommodate US reservations on this point.

The heart of the issue revolves around preservation of the “Vienna Formula”. The Vienna Formula stipulates that only members of the UN, parties to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), specialized agencies, and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) can be invited as full participants to UN meetings of the type of the Stockholm Conference. But at the September 1971 New York meeting of the Preparatory Committee on the Stockholm Conference the Western allies sought to circumvent the problem of GDR participation by agreeing to a US proposal to invite the East Germans as expert technical advisers (without being specifically named) under the conference’s rules of procedure. This gambit met with a solid Soviet rebuff. The resultant deadlock over this is ue in the Preparatory Committee for Stockholm led to its being referred back to the General Assembly for a decision.

Meanwhile, the US and others held many discussions with the Soviets in an effort to reach a compromise arrangement for GDR participation. Throughout, however, Soviet officials maintained their opposition to the Vienna Formula, advocating either an “all states” or “member states of the UN” formula, and insisted on full GDR equality with the FRG. Finally, the Soviets even proposed that the decision on sending invitations as well as the conference itself be postponed if no solution were found before the end of the current General Assembly session.

These protracted and apparently fruitless discussions eventually found the General Assembly approving the retention of the Vienna Formula as part of the resolution on the UN Conference on the Human Environment by an overwhelming margin (104-9-7). This victory came in the wake of a defeat of two Sovietsponsored amendments to modify the resolution (a) by adding the phrase “and other interested states” to the Vienna Formula (43-57-20); and (b) by postponing the conference and the decision on participation (7-70-29).

Stepped-Up Boycott Pressure.

Even before the final vote was taken on the above resolution, the Soviet, Czechoslovak, and Hungarian delegates warned the other delegations that passing the Vienna Formula would oblige them “to reconsider their participation in the conference”. The Yugoslav delegate made a similar announcement.

Subsequently, the Soviets and Czechoslovaks made good on their threat and did not participate in the early January 1972 session of the IWG (Intergovernmental Working Group), which is currently working on the important conference declaration. In absenting themselves, the USSR and Czechoslovakia justified their decision on the grounds that the “imperialist forces” had rejected the socialist demand that independent states such as the GDR, North Korea, and North Vietnam should be allowed to attend.

Weakening by UN Secretary General….

According to a January 6 press report from Geneva, Conference Secretary General Maurice Strong (a Canadian) called off a scheduled visit to Moscow and Prague when the Soviet and Czechoslovak governments informed him that his visit would be “inopportune” at the present time. This cancellation and the Soviet boycott threat have worried Strong to such an extent hat he has urged UN Secretary General Waldheim to intervene with the Big Four (minus the PRC) to solve the Stockholm invitation issue. Strong also urged that the Secretary General consider requesting a special Assembly session to amend the General Assembly formula by adding a GDR clause to the existing participation formula. On January 12 Waldheim suggested to US Ambassador Bush that either arrangements be worked out so that the GDR could attend, or that the conference be postponed for a year. He urged Bush to contact the UK but said nothing about the USSR and France.

…and the Swedes. Although officially optimistic, the Swedes see a real threat to the usefulness of the entire conference were the Soviets and other Eastern Europeans to absent themselves because of the retention of the Vienna Formula. The Swedes too, at one point, advocated holding a special General Assembly session to decide on additional invitations.

At the same time, the Swedes have shown great reluctance in becoming directly involved in any resolution of this problem. At a January 7 press conference the Swedish official in charge of conference preparations commented on the Soviet and Czechoslovak absence from the IWG to the effect that the conference would be “of less importance if the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc countries do not attend, particularly to us and other countries on the Baltic.” Sweden was going ahead anyway. He noted that the solution of the GDR question could wait as late as May, since official invitations would not go out until spring; but he emphasized that it is the UN, not the Swedish government which was responsible for deciding who gets invited. His position seems to diminish hope that the West Germans could persuade the Swedes to work out some arrangement with the GDR.

Effect on Third World Countries.

The Brazilian UN delegation has used the imbroglio over the GDR invitation issue as a means of venting distrust of international environmental activity which it sees as adding prohibitive costs to developing nations’ fledgling industries. The Brazilians have told Strong that they are considering boycotting the Stockholm Conference as well if the USSR and the East Europeans do not attend. Strong has persuaded them, however, to urge their government to refrain from implementing this threat until he has had a chance to talk with President Medici on his forthcoming visit to Brazil. Strong an others feel that if a major less-developed country like Brazil boycotted the Stockholm meeting, additional Third World defections might follow with the result of making the conference virtually meaningless.

Moscow’s boycott tactics apparently are making headway, and the US can expect increased pressure, both foreign and domestic, for reaching a compromise with the Soviets. With no change in their respective positions however, a direct US-Soviet confrontation over the issue of GDR participation seems unavoidable.

Soviets Not Bluffing.

While Soviet actions can be viewed as tactical maneuvering on balance, Moscow does not appear to be bluffing. For one thing, environmental problems still remain low on the list of Moscow’s priorities, reports of increased Soviet interest in the Stockholm Conference to the contrary. This being the case, the Soviets may have a bit of leverage on the Western allies, particularly the US, who want the Conference to succeed. Consequently, although the Soviets probably prefer not to have a direct confrontation with the US over GDR participation at this time, there appears little likelihood that the USSR will settle for anything less than official East German participation without voting rights and in any event will insist on parallel treatment of the GDR and the FRG.

In this context, the attendance of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) at the conference raises the question whether the USSR could chance to leave such a potential propaganda forum as the Stockholm meeting to the Chinese. Moscow already has displayed some sensitivity on this aspect by publicly contrasting the Soviet and Czechoslovak decision to withdraw from conference preparations with China’s reported readiness to take part, despite the “discriminatory” participation formula. On the one hand, in light of Soviet detente policy in Europe, Moscow could at small cost to itself stick to its position in order to appease the East Germans and keep theni in line during the ratification of the Polish and Soviet treaties with West Germany and the signing of the final quadripartite protocol of the Berlin agreement. On the other hand, in the broader area of Sino-Soviet rivalry, Moscow will have great difficulty in choosing between China and the GDR.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Donovan and cleared by Perez.

315. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon 315. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) and the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon1

Washington, February 5, 1972.

SUBJECT:

United States International Environmental Initiative

At Tab A is a package from Secretary Rogers recommending that you take the initiative to propose creation of a United Nations Fund on the Environment.

The proposal has been given an intense Executive Office review. The consensus, with which we agree, includes the following elements: -- An initiative by you proposing the creation of a voluntary UN fund on the environment would be desirable internationally and domestically.

-- The US should be prepared to commit $50 million over 5 years starting in FY 1974, provided our contributions are matched equally over the whole period by the rest of the world (in effect, a $100 million fund) and provided acceptable projects can be mutually agreed on.

-- The full US contribution should be in cash, rather than a portion tied to US goods and services.

-- We should not rule out additional contributions if the fund proves successful.

-- Substantive progress on global environmental issues, not just creation of a fund, is our ultimate goal. Hence this initiative should be coupled with vigorous US efforts to develop a sound analytical and coordinating capability for environmental affairs in the UN and to assure that solid programs are developed.

-- Your 1972 environmental message is the logical vehicle for announcing this initiative (which would also be mentioned in the Annual Foreign Policy Report).

The following points were considered in the Executive Office review: -- You are, already on record as supporting international environmental activity.

-- Domestically, the proposed initiative would help pre-empt the field from would-be critics who might wish to argue that the Administration was not doing enough in this field.

-- The amount—a $100 million fund—is large enough to provide psychological impetus. It cannot be attacked for being too small, since we would clearly state it to be a starter, and would consider more money if justified. On the other hand, we protect ourselves against charges that it might be too large by requiring that mutually acceptable programs be agreed on.

-- A full cash contribution is preferable to tying a portion to US goods and services, because we should not contradict our more general policy of untying US development loans. Furthermore, tied contributions would restrict the Fund’s freedom of operation, detract from its international character, and inhibit contributions from others.

-- Our requirement that our contributions be matched by the rest of the world should make the program more salable in the Congress. It is also consistent with the Nixon Doctrine, by encouraging others to shoulder part of the burden. After 5 years, we might wish to reduce our percentage contribution.

-- This initiative would give the Stockholm Conference the chance to produce a substantivc international program. Conference Secretary General Strong is himself contemplating such a proposal. At this point, there remains a danger that the Conference might suffer from a Soviet boycott (because East Germany will not participate on an equal footing with the Federal Republic) or even be postponed. However, even should this happen—or the conference generally fail—we think the proposed initiative would remain a strong plus for you.

-- The initiative would provide a focus for international activity in the environmental field. This would be useful in protecting the environment, and good for the UN. It would also be consistent with your position that the UN should address the new tasks for diplomacy.

The only issue is over the terms of US matching. George Shultz, John Whitaker and the Treasury Department believe our contribution should not exceed 40%, which has been a more traditional level for majcr voluntary contributions to international organizations. On this basis, our contribution would be $40 million over 5 years.

However, we prefer the 50/50 formula for several reasons. It will be more likely to stimulate the kind of program we want and to dramatize US leadership. A 40/60 basis sounds more permanent, whereas we would plan to lower our percentage after the 5 year interim period. 50/50 is not unprecedented as a start-up contribution. We were prepared to contribute up to 100% of the seed money for the narcotics and population funds.

RECOMMENDATIIONS:

1. That you agree to propose a voluntary UN environmental fund of at least $100 million over the next 5 years.

Agree

Disagree

2. That the US offer to contribute on a 50/50 matching basis $50 million over 5 years starting in FY 1974 provided mutually acceptable programs can be agreed on. If the fund were successful, we would consider providing more.

Agree

US should offer $40 million on 40/60 matching basis (as Shultz, Whitaker and Treasury recommend) RN

Other

3. That language to this effect be included in your 1972 Environmental Message and a reference made in the 1972 Annual Foreign Policy Report.

Agree

Disagree

Ed David concurs with this memo. So do George Shultz and John Whitaker, except for recommendation #2. This proposal is also acceptable to State.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CQE I. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. The initials “RN” are next to the option of recommendation 2 that the “US should offer $40 million on a 40/60 matching basis.” There is no indication that the President approved the other recommendations.

316. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Eliot) to the President’s’ Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 316. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of State (Eliot) to the President’s’ Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 1, 1972.

See S/S 7204581 for White House Comments dtd 3/7/72

Subject:

Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment: Draft Declaration

Preparations for the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment have included the development of a draft Declaration on the environment which will be presented to the Conference for adoption. At the last meeting of the Intergovernmental Working Group (IWG) of the Preparatory Committee which was assigned the task of developing this Declaration, the Japanese introduced a draft principle urging the end to nuclear testing. The United States Delegation was instructed to oppose this proposal on the grounds that the subject of nuclear, testing was more appropriately dealt with in other forums.

The Japanese were, however, able to generate considerable support in the IWG and the draft reported out by that Group, with explicit United States reservation, reads as follows: “Man and his environment must be spared the serious effects of further testing or use in hostilities of weapons, particularly those of mass destruction.”

The only other reference in the draft Declaration to military aspects is contained in a paragraph of the preamble which reads as follows: “Meanwhile immense resources continue to be consumed in armaments and armed conflict, wasting and threatening still further the human environment.” A copy of the report of the IWG together with the full text of the draft Declaration is attached.

The fourth and final meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Stockholm Conference will take place in New York, March 6-17. This Committee will consider the IWG report on the draft Declaration.

The Department of Defense has reservations concerning both paragraphs quoted above, as reflected in the attached memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Environmental Affairs. Essentially, the Department of Defense believes that the paragraph relating to testing goes beyond current United States policy concerning nuclear weapons testing and that it may also place an undesirable restriction on the testing and use of conventional armaments. Furthermore, with reference to the preambular paragraph quoted above, the Department of Defense does not believe that resources consumed in armaments “waste and threaten” the human environment.

The Department of State, on the other hand, believes that both provisions cited above are consistent with United States policy and objectives, as expressed in United States voting positions on various UN General Assembly resolutions and in Presidential statements, The Department of State recommends, and is seeking Department of Defense agreement to, the following position for the forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory Committee: (1) that the United States Delegation withdraw its reservation on paragraph 21 of the principles and interpose no objection to it and to preambular paragraph 4; (2) that the United States Delegation reserve the right to make the United States interpretation of paragraph 21 (that nuclear test bans must be within the context of adequately verified agreements) known and recorded in the conference proceedings when the Declaration is adopted by the Stockholm Conference; and (3) that the United States Delegation actively resist any attempts to reopen the language of the Declaration as a whole.

The Department of State’s position on this question is further elaborated in the response to the Department of Defense, copy attached. We expect to receive a favorable response on our approach from the Atomic Energy Commission by the end, of the week.

Your approval of the foregoing position is being sought pursuant to your memorandum of February 17, 1972 regarding clearance of statements concerning nuclear test ban policy.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by John Trevithick (IO/SCT) on February 28, and cleared by IO, SCI, ACDA, and PM. Carson signed for Eliot. The IWG Report, DOD Memorandum, and State Memorandum were attached but not published.

317. Intelligence Note RARN-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 317. Intelligence Note RARN-7 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, March 2, 1972.

BRAZIL: IF DEVELOPMENT BRINGS POLLUTION, SO BE IT

Brazil’s opposition to anything that hints at the development of ecological standards at the June UN Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment reflects deeply held fears that such controls can thwart its impressive economic growth and fulfillment of its destiny as a world power. Thus the Brazilians’ overriding commitment to development is unlikely to be diminished by even the most cogent arguments for attention to environmental problems. At the Conference the Brazilians can be expected to vigorously lead those who consider controls a threat to their development, and they will continue to encourage whatever large-scale investment that Will support their development goals, even if it means “importing pollution”.

The Brazilian position. Although the June UN Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment is unlikely to recommend actions leading to obligatory international pollution standards, Brazil has nevertheless taken a strong stand against what it considers encroachments on its national sovereignty. Brazil’s official policy, reflected in preliminary discussions, places developmental goals above pollution control and seeks to force the developed countries to assume responsibility for controlling pollution. While Brazilian attitudes toward pollution are not monolithic, those who make policy, such as President Medici, the Foreign Office, and powerful Minister of Finance Delfim Netto, are in close agreement and claim international standards will be used to keep the developing nations dependent. Others, such as some members of the weak Congress and the President of the Institute of Ocean Studies, admit the dangers of pollution, but typically argue for Brazilian solutions to Brazilian problems. Most believe that Brazil’s environmental problems differ from those of the developed countries and that sanitation, nutrition, and health problems in themselves are forms of pollution which can best be overcome through the process of development itself.

Brazilian aspirations. The fifth largest country in the world, Brazil has historically viewed itself as a potential world power. Now that the Brazilians see themselves actually entering an era of greatness, they are also seeking a role of spokesman for LDCs and leader of the Latin American nations. With the most sophisticated industrial establishment in South America and dramatic disparities in regional development, Brazil has problems and aspirations common to both the developing and developed world. Given this duality, Brazilians look at the Stockholm Conference both as a threat to their development ambitions and as an opportunity to play a leadership role among the LDCs. Moreover, Brazil has little to lose by taking a pro-development position at the Conference. Such a position reinforces national aspirations at home and puts pressure on the developed countries to provide additional assistance to cover the costs of pollution control.

Controls a threat. Brazil’s impressive economic growth has provided a major underpinning for the three military regimes in power since the 1964 coup. Although continued military rule is unlikely to be threatened unless the economy takes a drastic and unforeseen downturn, present leaders recognize that much of the passive acceptance that permits their current style of authoritarian rule depends on continued prosperity. This prosperity has been fueled in significant part by the growth of industrial exports which would be most vulnerable should international pollution controls be established.

Manufactured export growth averaged 50% in 1969 and in 1970. In 1964 the share of manufactures in Brazil’s total exports was 6.5%; in 1970 it reached 16.6%. Furthermore, 52% of manufactured exports go to the US, Europe, Japan, and Canada, countries more immediately concerned with pollution problems and in a better position to absorb the costs of controls, especially since they are more likely to develop the necessary technology. Should these countries impose their own standards, the Brazilians might have to partially retool in order to retain their markets. Moreover, even though the additional costs of importing new technology may be low, the amount is uncertain and, in any event, could affect the competitive advantage of Brazil’s manufactured exports.

Brazil may also be concerned about the possibility that international lending agencies may adopt environmental standards for projects they finance, thus adding to borrowing costs. As the largest customer of the Export-Import Bank and the IBRD, even minimal standards would add to Brazil’s already large foreign debt.

Still another consideration may explain the Brazilians’ intransigence on ecological issues. Part of the country’s grand design of national development and defense includes the colonization of the Amazon region, in itself equivalent to the 10th largest country in the world. The ecological implications of disturbing the balance of nature through development of the Amazon region are not only difficult to judge, but appear an unnecessary distraction to a government that wants to incorporate the region into the national life and “counteract external threats and neutralize longtime foreign desires for Amazonia as a region to be enjoyed by others.” Nor is Brazil interested in giving an edge to critics of its intensive hydroelectric programs, a sensitive issue with Argentina which is concerned with its down-river riparian rights.

Prospects. Given the Brazilians’ commitment to development and tremendous confidence that their vast resources will preclude serious damage to environmental balance, it is unlikely that even the most cogent arguments for attention to ecological problems will make the Brazilians more cooperative. At the Stockholm Conference they can be expected to be aggressive advocates of national sovereignty and the responsibility of the developed countries to shoulder the burden of pollution control. The Brazilians may consider environmental factors in projects when the cost is minimal, especially in congested, developed areas like Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. But generally they will continue to encourage large-scale investment that supports their development goals, even if it means “importing pollution.” In the future, Brazil may even become a “pollution haven” for enterprises seeking to escape the restrictions of countries with controls.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth M. Schimel and cleared by Godfrey H. Summ (both of INR/RAR).

318. Memorandum of Conversation 318. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 3, 1972.

Subject:

US/USSR Environmental Agreement

Participants:

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Sakovich, Cultural Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Chairman Train, CEQ

Dr. MacDonald, CEQ

Deputy Assistant Secretary Richard T. Davies, Department of State

Christian Herter, Jr., SCl/EN, Dept. of State

Jack Perry, EUR/SOV, Dept. of State

W.A. Hayne, CEQ

H.H. Janin, CEQ

In response to an opening question from Ambassador Dobrynin, Chairman Train explained the role and functions of CEQ. Turning to the substance of the meeting, Chairman Train observed that the President has attached high priority to improving our international environmental contacts and opportunities for cooperation. Touching briefly on our multilateral contacts and our bilateral arrangements with Canada and Japan, Chairman Train said we had carefully noted the numerous indications of Soviet interest in environmental cooperation with the US, and that the US was equally interested in developing a strong environmental program with the USSR.

Chairman Train said that we proposed to explore with the USSR the desirability of the heads of state agreeing in principle at. the Summit in May to develop a bilateral environmental agreement. This would go beyond the existing Exchanges agreement and would include new initiatives such as the development of joint working projects. Chairman Train gave the Ambassador a paper containing both a brief description of ten areas for possible US/USSR cooperation and some points which might eventually be included in the agreement itself.

Ambassador Dobrynin, Chairman Train, and Mr. Davies then discussed the relationship between this proposal and the existing Exchanges Agreement. It was understood that the US proposal would be a separate agreement. Pending the conclusion of any such agreement, negotiations should go ahead on the eleven environmental items on environmental cooperation already proposed for the 1972 Exchanges Agreement. If an environmental agreement were concluded, these topics would later be subsumed under its umbrella.

Ambassador Dobrynin said that while he could not speak for his government, he personally approved of a bilateral environmental agreement and believed it would be favorably received in Moscow. Going beyond what Chairman Train had said, the Ambassador repeatedly made the point that since his government did not have a single central agency to deal with the environment, it would be highly desirable for us to provide him with a draft agreement showing as many specific details of our proposal as possible. He stressed that an official communication of this sort was necessary to rivet the Soviet bureaucracy’s attention on a bilateral agreement and to permit high-level coordination. Otherwise, he said, various parts of the US proposal would be farmed out to different ministries and long delays and inaction would result.

The Ambassador raised the subject of the heads of government actually signing a bilateral agreement in May, and spoke very favorably about this possibility. The previous remarks of the Chairman and Secretary Davies covered the possibility of an “agreement in principle” at the Summit, and no direct response was made to the Ambassador’s suggestions.

Ambassador Dobrynin said that he would communicate the substance of the conversation to Moscow but would not send the details of the ten areas for mutual cooperation until the US could provide him with a more detailed draft agreement.

It was agreed that the US would provide further information on the bilateral agreement within about two weeks, and that there would be no public disclosure of this project.

(Given to Ambassador Dobrynin)

A. Suggested Areas for Bilateral Environmental Cooperation 1. Water Problems

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should exchange information and develop pilot projects for water purification systems and waste water treatment plants. The proposal might include joint work on the environmental problems of rivers and the eutrophication of lakes. Lake Baikal and Lake Tahoe might be “twinned. Experiences with pollution from pulp paper plants could be compared, with the aim of improving existing technology. In addition, joint studies of river basins could be profitably undertaken.

2. Solid Waste Management

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should jointly study and undertake pilot projects in solid waste problems and treatment., Attention would focus on (1) processing and recovery of metal,. mineral and energy values from urban solid wastes; (2) utilization and disposal of solid wastes from mineral industries; (3) extracting residual minerals from petroleum industry wastes; (4) disposal and utilization of hazardous industrial chemicals; (5) reuse and disposal of ash from power generating plants; (6) disposal and utilization of agricultural wastes; (7) disposal and storage of radioactive wastes from commercial sources.

3. Biological Consequences of Environmental Pollution

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should establish a joint working group to determine “environmental criteria.” This would involve identifying the points at which specific pollutants or toxic substances begin to cause measurable damage to humans, animals, and plants. While standards of ambient air and water quality may properly differ from country to country and region to region, this basic criteria of damage to a given organism from a given dosage would presumably apply worldwide.

4. The Effects of Pollution on Marine Life

A. U.S.-U.S.S.R. task force would direct research to study the effects of pollution, including oil spills on marine life. Joint oceanographic expeditions would study selected maritime areas in depth.

5. The Economics of Pollution and Pollution Clean-up

U.S. and Soviet economists would trade information and methodology for measuring (a) the social costs of pollution, (b) the social costs of pollution clean-up, and (c) cost/benefit ratios. A joint U.S.-U.S.S. R, task force would select scholars and other experts to travel and work in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R.; would designate points of contact for exchange of informal correspondence; and would host seminars, in conjunction with universities, etc., on the economics of the environment.

6. Earthquake Predictions

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should undertake joint research projects on earthquake prediction, including long-term exchanges of specialists and exchange of research results.

7. Oil Pollution

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. would exchange existing information and develop new techniques of oil pollution prevention and control, including both accidental and deliberate discharges. This would include problems of ship design, and the transportation and storage of petroleum.

8. The Arctic and Subarctic Environment

A joint working group would be established to direct subgroups conducting research on the arctic and subarctic environment. Rather than confining itself to information exchange, the task force would seek the active involvement of U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists in joint research projects in the laboratories and cold regions of each country. These projects would result in jointly-authored research papers and a general increase of knowledge about these areas.

9. Increasing Agricultural Productivity in Arid or Semi-Arid Lands

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should carry out joint studies and practical experiments on water management in arid and semi-arid areas. Investigation of salinity control, fertilizer run-off, and related areas of water management should also be undertaken.

10. Wildlife

The U.S. and U.S.S.R. should exchange information and conduct joint research in wildlife management, with special attention to endangered species. A US-USSR task force should organize subgroups to study the following general areas: (1) wildlife information exchange, including taxonomic collections; (2) wildlife research and surveys; and (3) wildlife management and technology (with special emphasis on promoting international agreements or other needed actions to protect polar bears and marine mammals, including whales). In addition, specific exchanges of animals could be included.

B. Some Key Points for Bilateral Agreement

1. The US and USSR will exchange information and conduct cooperative activities by various means as mutually agreed, including but not limited to, joint working groups of experts, technical symposia, pilot projects, and visits of experts.

2. In addition to the areas of bilateral cooperation initially agreed upon, other subjects of mutual interest in the fields of ecology and environment may be considered at any time.

3. Each Government will designate a principal coordinator responsible for implementing its part of the cooperative program. Each coordinator may designate other individuals or organizations to assume responsibility for carrying out certain tasks under the agreed program.

4. The implementation of the agreement should be subject to the provisions of Section I of the US-USSR Agreement on Exchanges and Cooperation in the Scientific, Technical, Educational, Cultural and Other Fields signed at Moscow, ________1972.

Draft Agreement on Cooperation Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in the Fields of Ecology and Environment

The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics:

Taking into account that the protection and enhancement of the environment are of great significance for the USA and USSR and also for all other countries;

Recognizing that contemporary scientific, technical, and managerial achievements can, if applied with adequate knowledge or control of their effects, improve man’s ability to live in harmony with his environment;

Considering that economic and social development for the benefit of future generations requires the protection and enhancement of the human environment today;

Have agreed as follows: I. The Parties will engage in broad scientific, technical, and managerial cooperation in fields involving the environment in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement.

II. The Parties will exchange information and conduct cooperative activities by various means as mutually agreed, including but not limited to, joint working groups of experts, technical symposia, pilot projects, and visits of experts.

III. The Parties undertake to study the possibilities for cooperation in the following fields: water problems, solid waste management, biological consequences of environmental pollution, effects of pollution on marine life, economics of pollution and pollution clean-up, earthquake predictions, the Arctic and subarctic environment, increasing agricultural productivity in arid or semi-arid lands, and wildlife. Other subjects of mutual interest in the fields of ecology and environment may be considered at any time.

IV. Each Party shall designate a principal coordinator responsible for implementing its part of the cooperative program. Each coordinator may designate other individuals or organizations to assume responsibility for carrying out certain tasks under the agreed program.

V. The implementation of this Agreement shall be subject to the provisions of Section I of the US-USSR Agreement on Exchanges and Cooperation in the Scientific, Technical, Educational, Cultural and Other Fields signed at Moscow _____,1972.

VI. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prejudice other arrangements for cooperation between the two countries.

VII. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years unless extended by mutual agreement. The termination of the Agreement shall not affect the validity of any arrangements made under the present Agreement.

In witness whereof, the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed the present agreement.

Done, in duplicate, in the English and Russian languages, both equally authentic, at ___ this____.

For the Government of the United States America

For the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ II. Secret. The meeting took place at the Council on Environmental Quality. Copies were sent to the U.S. participants, the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, and Sonnenfeldt.

319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman) 319. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to the Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)1

Washington, April 6, 1972.

Subject:

Chairmanship of Stockholm Delegation

Reference is made to an informal indication of the Secretary of State’s possible interest in heading the Stockholm delegation.

In my previous memorandum on this overall subject, I had indicated that the Secretary of State was the one member of the Cabinet who could chair the delegation without creating jurisdictional problems among the different agencies.

At the same time, there are strong reasons against the Secretary of State being designated formally as head of the delegation: 1. Insofar as I am aware, no foreign minister has been designated by any government as head of its Stockholm delegation. Sweden itself is chairing the entire conference with its Minister of Agriculture. France, Canada, U.K., Holland, Japan, Norway, Germany, Spain, etc., are all designating their chief environmental guy as head of delegation. At this late hour, to designate Rogers would throw all these other countries into a quandary.

2. Designation of the Secretary of State would signal a U.S. effort to shift the conference from a substantive environmental orientation to a political orientation. Such a step would seem particularly unfortunate in view of the continuing East-West disagreement over the status of East Germany. It seems to me that the commitment of the Secretary of State guarantees further politicizing of the conference in this respect.

Related to the latter point is the fact that apparently Stockholm will be the scene of various radical meetings during the Conference, including the so-called “People’s Lobby.” These groups evidently intend to charge the U.S. with “ecocide” in Southeast Asia. Whatever their plans, it seems clear that there will be a fair amount of radical political activity. The formal designation of the Secretary of State as head of the U.S. delegation would very likely serve to encourage and invite this kind of activity.

It would be perfectly appropriate and even desirable (depending upon the situation as it develops) for the Secretary of State to attend any part of the Conference that he wishes. He would in fact chair the U.S. delegation at any time he is so present. And he would be fully accepted as such by all parties. If he wished to attend the opening plenary session and speak for the U.S., that would be perfectly right and fitting and there would be no problem whatsoever about this. He would not have to be designated in advance as head of the delegation in order to do this. He simply chairs our delegation as a matter of course whenever he is present.

Thus, my strong recommendation is that the Secretary not be formally named Chairman of the U.S. delegation, that he retain all of his options during the next two months of East/West discussions, and then attend or not, speak for the U.S. or not, as the situation then dictates.

Russell E. Train
Chairman

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ II. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Kissinger and Whitaker. Printed from a copy that indicates that Train signed the original.

320. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 320. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, April 27, 1972.

World Heritage Convention

I wish to bring to your attention a success for the Department of State in achieving an objective announced by President Nixon in his environmental message sent to the Congress in February 1971. The President had called on the nations of the world to agree to the principle that natural areas and cultural sites of unique significance should be treated as the heritage of all mankind and accorded special recognition and protection as part of a World Heritage Trust. A special meeting of government experts representing 60 nations and meeting in Paris from April 4-22, prepared a draft Convention for the Protection of the Cultural and Natural World Heritage. This Convention will be submitted to the UNESCO General Conference in October 1972 for approval and will be opened for signature at that time.

In the draft convention adopted by the UNESCO special committee, states parties would agree that certain natural areas and cultural sites are of out-standing universal value and form part of the world’s heritage. An international committee would draw up a World Heritage List of such areas and sites as well as a list of such properties threatened by serious and specific dangers. Each state would agree to take national measures to protect the world heritage located on its territory as well as to cooperate in international preservation activities. An international fund would be created, made up of voluntary contributions from governments and private sources, from which the international committee (to be known as the World Heritage Committee) would finance international assistance for the conservation and management of this heritage. The committee would give priority to assisting areas or sites in immediate danger.

Carl Salans headed the United States delegation at the Paris negotiations, in which the President’s Council on Environmental Quality, the National Park Service and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation were represented. I think it is generally agreed by these other agencies—and it was widely recognized at the UNESCO meeting—that because of State Department leadership, the United States delegation was able to overcome widespread resistance among other governments to many of our positions and, in the end, to achieve every single one of the objectives envisioned by President Nixon.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41. Unclassified. Drafted by Salans on April 26.

321. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon 321. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee (Irwin) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 29, 1972.

SUBJECT:

International Environmental Negotiations

On May 19, 1972, Dr. Kissinger requested that the Under Sceretaries Committee* review pending international negotiations on the environment and submit a report for your consideration. The status of these negotiations is reviewed below and outstanding issues related to then Ocean Dumping Convention are presented for decision.

Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment

The United Nations Conference on the Human Environmemt will be held at Stockholm June 5 to 16, 1972. U.S. positions covering over 90 recommendations for international action and a declaration on the human environment have been prepared by the interagency Committee on International Environmental Activities chaired by Christian A. Herter, Jr. There are no outstanding interagency disagreements on these positions.

The Under Secretaries Committee understands that the Chairman of the U. S. Delegation, Chairman Train of the Council on Environmental Quality, is reporting directly to you on plans for U.S. participation in the Stockholm Conference.

World Heritage Trust

Following your initiative of February 8, 1971, concerning establishment of a World Heritage Trust, a draft convention was developed in a meeting of experts at UNESCO. At this time, the interested agencies are reviewing the draft, which will be formally circulated by UNESCO in June, with the objective of completing a convention at the UNESCO General Conference later this year. This Committee will forward a separate memorandum on this subject should unresolved interagency disagreements develop.

Ocean Dumping Convention

Also on February 8, l971, you instructed the Secretary of State, in coordination with the Council on Environmental Quality, to develop and pursue international initiatives directed toward banning unregulated ocean dumping and strictly limiting ocean disposal of materials harmful to the environment.

Pursuant to this directive, the U.S. tabled a draft convention during June, 1971, at a preparatory meeting for the Stockholm Conference. The draft was further discussed at Ottawa in November, 1971, and Reykjavik in April, 1972. The United Kingdom has called a working level meeting at London May 30-31, 1972, to complete the drafting of the convention. This meeting is to be followed by a plenipotentiary meeting later this year.

Our effective participation in the London meeting requires resolution of two interagency disagreements. These involve: (1) the treatment of military vessels and aircraft, and (2) procedures for amending annexes to the convention which are concerned with specific substances and criteria.

The Department of Defense is submitting its views and recommendations of other interested agencies are presented below.

Objectives. In seeking; an acceptable ocean dumping convention, our objective has been to provide for regulation of the ocean dumping of all industrialized states and thus avoid possible economic disadvantages to the U.S. from domestic dumping restrictions. Further objectives have been to achieve the first international step in controlling land-source marine pollution and to accomplish this in a forum other than the Law of the Sea Conference where developing coutries might attempt to use the matter as a bargaining lever.

The achievement of these objectives must be consistent with the national security needs of preserving the freedom of mobility and secrecy of movement of U.S. Military vessels and aircraft through and over the world’ s oceans. Consequently, it is essential that foreign states not be able to use the convention, as a basis for interfering with operations of U.S. military vessels or aircraft.

Options for Treatment of Military Vessels and Aircraft. There are two approaches: (1) exemption of military vessels and aircraft, and (2) application of the principle of sovereign immunity.

Under the exemption approach, military vessels and aircraft would be exempt from the application of standards set by the convention. Although international standards would not apply, flag states would still be able to apply standards to their own vessels, and coastal states would continue to be able to apply standards to foreign military vessels and aircraft in their territorial seas, internal waters and ports.

The following considerations argue against pursuing this course: --The Reykjavik meeting in April of this year was attended by 29 interested countries The U.S. held to the position of exemption for military vessels and aircraft but recelved expressions of possible support from only two other countries. Others pressed for the sovereign immunity approach (discussed below), and this approach was reflected in the report of that meeting.

--If it should now prove possible to secure agreement on the exemption among industrialized countries, developing countries would probably reopen the matter in the broader law of the sea context. A number of developing countries are opposed to an exemption for military vessels and aircraft, and injection of the ocean dumping problem into the law of the sea context could not only open an undesirable debate on military vessels and aircraft but also stimulate exhorbitant claims of jurisdiction by coastal states.

--In the final analysis, most states are insisting in many forums that all vessels and aircraft observe appropriate pollution control standards. Our major allies in the law of the sea negotiations are the twelve parties to the Oslo Convention which is concerned with dumping in the North Sea. That Convention granted sovereign immunity (but not exemption) to military vessels and aircraft. We can reasonably expect to reach agreement on the sovereign immunity approach in the Ocean Dumping Convention.

Under the accepted international law principle of sovereign immunity as it relates to dumping by vessels and aircraft, warships and military aircraft are subject to the legislative jurisdiction of a coastal state when they are in its territorial sea, internal waters or territory, as well as the 12-mile “contiguous zone” for certain purposes. However, under this principle, the coastal state can take only one type of enforcement action—expulsion of the vessel or aircraft from its territory. It can also submit a diplomatic protest and claims to the flag state.

The practical effect of the application of this principle in the ocean dumping context is that the standards and terms of the Ocean Dumping Convention would apply to all military vessels and aircraft. However, coastal states would have no enforcement powers over foreign military vessels and aircraft other than expulsion. On the high seas, enforcement would remain the prerogative of the flag state. In this connection, it should be emphasized that the Ocean Dumping Convention is consistent with ending U.S. domestic legislation and would place no greater obligations on our military vessels and aircraft then already contemplated under this legislation.

We note that in its separate remarks on this matter, the Departnent of Defense states: “Although military vessels and aircraft adhere to more stringent pollution standards than contained in various conventions, deviations may be required due to operational necessity.” Under Article III of the Ocean Dumping Convention, it is specifically provided that “disposal of matter incident to or derived from the operation of Vessels or aircraft… shall not constitute dumping.” For military vessels and aircraft this could cover training operations or other normal activities. In addition, Article V provides that dumping prohibtions shall not apply where the safety of human life is threatened, for example, in accidents at sea.

As regards specific prohibited substances, the Ocean Dumping Convention, as drafted, provides that each party has the option of declaring that it does not accept proposed amendments. This can also serve to safeguard our military interests should unacceptable proposals be put forward in the future. Moreover, our delegation to the London meeting is instructed to eliminate from the draft convention any obligation of the parties to the convention to adhere to more stringent prohibitions or criteria which might be established in regional dumping conventions.

In addition to such safeguards as the foregoing, the Department of State and the Council on Environmental Quality believe that, if considered essential, the U.S. could urge the inclusion in the Ocean Dumping Convention of an emergency waiver procedure.

In summary, achievement of a global ocean dumping convention is important to our national interests. The success of the London Meeting is critical to establishment of such a convention outside of the law of the sea negotiations where this matter would be more difficult to deal with in view of the attitudes of developing countries. The Council on Envirouental Quality and the Environmental Protection Agency believe the U.S. may be required to accept the sovereign immunity approach if a meaningful convention is to be achieved, although they are prepared to initiate discussions in London on the basis of the exemption approach. The Department of State understands the preference of the military for this exemption approach and has sought such an approach in the past. These efforts did not succeed. The Department believes it would be unrealistic to pursue this approach in the two-day meeting in London and regards the sovereign immunity approach—together with other provisions of the draft convention—as adequate to meet our security interests.

Recommendations on “Exemption” and “Sovereign Immunity”

The Department of State recommends that the sovereign immunity approach be adopted as the U.S. position at the London meeting on the Ocean Dumping Convention.

Approve

Disapprove

The Department of State further recommends that if it is decided to seek the exemption approach, the U.S. Delegation should have discretion in using one or more of the severalformulations available for that approach, and that the sovereign approach be available to the U.S. Delegation as a fallback position.

Approve

Disapprove

The Council on Environmental Quality and the Enviromental Protection Agency recommend that the U.S. Delegation to the London meeting take the initial position of urging acceptance of exemption of military vessels and aircraft proposing one or more of several possible formulations. They further recommend that should this not be accepted, the U.S. Delegation should be authorized to accept sovereign immunity for military vessels and aircraft.

Approve

Disapprove

Amendment Procedures

The Ocean Dumping Convention will contain three annexes: one listing substances the dumping of which would be prohibited subject to narrow exceptions, one listing substances the dumping of which would only be permitted by specific permit, and one setting forth provisions to be considered in establishing criteria governing the issuance of specific permits and the granting of general permission for dumping of all other substances.

The Department of State, Council on Environmental Quality and the Environmental Protection Agency support the present U.S. positions of an amendment procedure for revising annexes to the Ocean Dumping Convention under which an amendment would enter into force for only those parties ratifying that amendment after ratification by two-thirds of the parties to the Convention. The three agencies would also consider acceptable the same procedure changed so that amendments would enter into force for all parties except those that opted out by declaring non-acceptance within a specified time. These procedures would permit a party to choose in each case between the desirability of uniform regulation of ocean activity under international agreement and countervailing specific national interests. The Department of Defense supports amendment procedures requiring the unanimous agreement of all parties.

Procedures under which a treaty can be amended by fewer than all parties are commonplace. The particular requirements of these procedures tend to vary by category of agreement. However, in the category of regulatory agreements, the present U.S. position on the Ocean Dumping Convention is more conservative than the procedure most frequently followed in current international practice, i.e. the adoption of internationally binding requirements subject to opting out within a specified period. Examples of such treaties are the Universal Postal Union Convention of 1874, the 1944 Chicago Convention (ICAO), WHO, WMO, the IMCO Facilitation Convention, the Road Traffic Convention, the Whaling Convention, the Atlantic Tuna Convention, and the 1954 Oil Pollution Convention as amended.

The achievement of expeditious non-unanimous amendment procedures is an essential tool in multilateral diplomacy in an expanded international community. Without the U. S. simply could not easily achieve objectives we regard as desirable or essential. For example, the U.S. fought long and hard to achieve the “opting out” Protocol to the Atlantic Fisheries Convention because of urgent domestic conservation and economic needs. The old unanimous ratification procedure simply was not responsive or fast enough for us.

If unanimous amendment to annexes is required, it would be virtually impossible to take account of changes in technology and knowledge which dictate either additions or deletions which may be of economic or political benefit to the United States, since any country would be able to veto an international obligation which might otherwise subsist between other important countries with which the United States competes. In effect, even the smallest country would have a veto power. On the other hand, under the two-thirds approach, the United States would have greater ability than most countries to tailor results to its own needs or to marshal a “blocking third.”

There is moreover, no reason whatever to think a unanimous amendment procedure would be acceptable to other countries. This procedure was proposed at Reykjavik by Denmark, whose representative seemed totally unaware of precedents to the contrary. The proposal was supported by no one and opposed by a sufficient number of countries to lay the proposal to the rest.

In summary the unanimous agreement approach to amending the annexes to the Ocean Dumping Convention would not serve our interests and might well prove impossible to negotiate—an outcome which could prevent agreement on the entire convention. The two-thirds approach or the variation permitting states to opt out of particular amendments would, therefore, be preferable. Neither of these approaches would adversely affect our security interests since, under the two-thirds approach, a specific amendment would not be applicable if we chose not to ratify it. Under the variation of this approach, we could, if necessary, opt out of objectionable amendments.

Recommendation on Amendment Procedures

The Department of State, the Council on Environmental Quality, and the Environmental Protection Agency recommend that the United States position on amendment procedures for the annexes be to support either two-thirds ratification for amendments to come into effect for those states ratifying such amendments, or the variation allowing individual states to opt of amendments.

Approve

Disapprove

John. N. Irwin II
Chairman

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. There is no indication that the President approved or disapproved any of the recommendations.

* For the purposes of this report, the Under Secretaries Committee has included, in addition to regular members, the Council on Environmental Quality and the Environmental Protection Agency.

322. Intelligence Note REC -11 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 322. Intelligence Note REC -11 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, May 31, 1972.

STOCKHOLM ENVIRONMENT CONFERENCE: AFRICAN POSITION

Within the past few months there have been indications that some African representatives may strongly challenge developed countries’ “doctrine” on environmental matters at the upcoming Stockholm Conference—perhaps as strongly as Brazil has done on previous occasions. While they may be overridden by more moderate view of other African representatives, their views linking environment and development will be with us in the years to come.

ECA Verus OAU . The Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) is attempting to disassociate itself from the guidelines adopted at an April meeting in Dakar at the UN’s Institute for Economic Development and Planning (IDEP). The representatives of eight African nations concluded that meeting with a proposed “joint African stand” which was sent to the members of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The meeting a1so called for a caucus of African nations in Stockholm, two days prior to the opening of the UN Conference on the Human Environment on June 5,0 discuss and adopt common African positions on agenda items. (The OAU will be having its annual summit June 5-15 in Rabat. The USG has taken a hands-off approach to these deliberations for fear that any efforts on our part would be counter-productive and in the hope that the more moderate African states will modify the proposed position.*

Africans Suspicious of Developed Countries’ Motives. The Dakar group of experts take the position that the documents prepared for the Stockholm Conference “give far more weight to the preoccupations of the industrialized countries than to the more serious ones of the developing countries.” The group also states that the problems to be discussed at Stockholm are of a political nature and urges representation there by African cabinet ministers backed by experts. The group recommends that “a11 African countries should demand a reappraisal of all the regulations, methods and models, imposed from abroad which have so far governed the economic decision of some African countries and which have led to a ruinous exploitation and waste of their natural resources.”

Dakar Group Proposes Reparations. The group contends that African nations have a “right to reparation by countries which have partially based (and continue to base) their growth on this exploitation.” The talk of reparations does not appear to mean actual reparations, but rather compensation in the form of increased foreign aid. The “polluters-must-pay” principle for ongoing activities is endorsed. The proposed strategy is to attempt to split the Americans from the Europeans at the Stockholm Conference by saddling the Europeans with the onus of colonial exploitation in Africa through talk of reparations.

A Self-Centered Development Model? The Dakar group does not see any conflict between development and environment, provided development is “within the framework of a model specifically designed to serve the interests of Africa’s population.” Although the model is not spelled out, there is a hint of it in the group’s call for an examination of all mining and power projects “in the perspective of long-term self-centered development.” The group also calls for regional cooperation, particularly with regard to river basins and coastal areas.

On population growth and labor the group proposes stating that:

They reject the argument according to which a halt to population growth, advocated in certain quarters as a way of halting the advance of the “colored peril”, is one of the preconditions for development and for safeguarding the human environment in Africa.

They reject the idea of African people being simply considered as a factor of production, as cheap labour, which only worsens inequalities in the international division of labour or the use of Africans to feed the growth of the advanced industrialised countries.

The Ideas Will Linger After the Rhetoric Dies. It is doubtful that such polemic language will end up in the proposed “joint African stand,” if one is adopted, but this direction of thinking may well surface. The Dakar group’s proposals reflect not only an increasing African militancy on development matters, but an attempt to link a series of development-related issues. Thus, the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment is seen as a forum for going beyond purely environmental matters into political, social, trade, and economic questions. The basic position worked out in Dakar in April 1972 likely will reappear in some form at the UN Conferences on the Law of the Sea in 1973 and on World Population in 1974 as well as in other forums.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Drafted by Jim B. Marshall and cleared by J. Ghiardi, both of INR/REC.

* The drafters of the Dakar guidelines were Messrs. Humbaraci and Ben Salah of the Environmental Secretariat in Geneva and Samir Amin of IDEP. Dr. Amin is Director of this UN Institute in Dakar, stays in the favor of Senegal’s President Senghor, is a Marxist, and is no longer considered a citizen of his country of birth, Egypt. Dr. Amin was one of the two major forces behind controversial papers distributed at the African Population Conference in Ghana during December 1971.

323. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 323. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, June 8, 1972.

SUBJECT:

U.S. Preparations for UN Environmental Conference

At Tab A is a report from Russell Train listing U.S. goals for the UN Environmental Conference now meeting in Stockholm. These are: --Development of international agreements to improve the environment.

--Improvement of global systems for monitoring overall environmental areas such as the atmosphere and the oceans.

--Coordination Of national research programs.

--Strengthening training, education and public information Programs.

--Establishment of an international center to help exchange information.

--Encouragement of regional programs.

--Establishment of a voluntary fund for the environment administered by a small UN staff.

--Establishment of a non-governmental mechanism to give scientific advice to the UN and individual countries on priorities for international action.

Mr. Train feels that the U.S. Delegation is well prepared and in an excellent position to press for items of major interest to the U.S.

Tab A
Memorandum from the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon

Washington, June 1, 1972

SUBJECT:

U.S. Preparations for UN Conference on the Human Environment—June 5-16, Stockholm

I wish to inform you of the status of U.S. preparations for the UN Conference on the Human Environment to be held in Stockholm, June 5-16. Over a two-year period, a very intensive effort, involving 21 Federal agencies and considerable citizen participation, has resulted in the identification of U.S. priorities for international action at the Conference and the development of U.S. position papers on a large number of specific Conference proposals submitted by the United Nations Secretariat. The Under Secretaries Committee has reported to you on agency positions in a more specific manner.

U.S. Priorities

The overall U.S. objective for the Conference is to raise the level of national and international awareness and understanding of environmental problems and to increase national, regional and global capabilities to recognize and solve those problems which have a serious adverse impact on the human environment. By doing so, we will maintain and improve our overall international economic, competitive position as other countries adopt control measures comparable to our domestic programs.

On the basis of well-defined intra-agency proposals and initial cost estimates, agreement has been reached on the following U.S. priorities for Conference action: 1. Support for the development of a range of conventions, agreements, and other mechanisms to conserve and improve the environment consistent with other U.S. policy objectives. (For example, considerable time and effort is being spent on negotiating an international ocean dumping convention that would bring other countries into line With our proposed domestic legislation.)

2. Improvement of existing systems for global monitoring including ‘human health, the atmosphere, the oceans, and terrestrial environments.

3. Development of arrangements to coordinate national research programs concerned with environmental problems of regional or global significance.

4. Strengthening of training, education and public information programs.

5. Establishment of an international referral center to facilitate exchange of environmental information useful in problem solving.

6. Encouragement of regional programs designed to deal with environmental problems common to several countries.

7. Establishment of a small highly qualified UN secretariat to develop and coordinate environmental programs and administer a Voluntary Fund for the Environment. We will strongly oppose any effort to establish a new specialized UN agency for the environment.

8. Support of, a non-Governmental mechanism to provide scientific advice to the UN and to nations on, for example, priorities for international action.

U.S. Positions

Through an interagency mechanism which has met continuously r the last two years, the U.S. position on about 100 proposals international action, recommended by the UN Secretariat, has been developed. Position papers on all these proposals have received interagency clearance. The recommendations of the Secretary of State’s Advisory Committee (the Baker Committee) have been carefully considered and incorporated, where feasible, into the U.S. positions.

I believe this is a remarkable example of productive interagency cooperation. As Chairman of the U.S. Delegation to Stockholm, I feel that we are well prepared and in an excellent position to press clearly and forcefully for those Conference items of major interest to the United States.

Russell E. Train
Chairman

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Sent for information. A stamped note on the memorandum indicated the President saw it. McDonald signed the attached report for Train.

324. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon 324. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon1

Washington, June 19, 1972.

Subject:

UN Conference on the Human Environment

The UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, June 5-16) concluded on schedule, last Friday night.

It is my personal assessment that the Conference was a success. The United States played a strong role and gained practically all of its objectives.

The United States proposal for a $100 million Environmental Fund (your personal initiative in your February 1972 Environmental Message) provided the single concrete proposal which helped pull the entire action program together. Our commitment of $40 million toward the Fund was matched by about $25 million in specific pledges by other governments. A number of other expressions of general support were given.

The Conference also recommended establishment of a small, permanent environmental unit in the UN to coordinate UN environmental activities. This was another key US objective. Other major US objectives which were approved: support for an ocean dumping convention, support for a 10-year whaling moratorium (to be tested next week at the International Whaling Commission meeting in London which I am attending), approval of your recommendation for a World Heritage Trust, and a global environmental monitoring program.

We consistently opposed “politicizing” of the Conference with war and similar issues, and had good success, given the makeup of the Conference. We also consistently opposed using the Conference as an excuse for new development “add-ons”. However, it is evident that it is not possible to discuss environmental protection wit the LDC’s completely outside the context of development objectives.

The absence of Soviet Russia and the Eastern bloc countries was noted at the outset and thereafter went practically unremarked. Soviet non-participation had little effect on the Conference wok.

China, on the other hand, played a very visible role in the Conference. While they tended not to enter into substantive discussions in the working committees (and, in fact, gave little evidence of having much substantive environmental competence in their delegation), it was plain that they were using the Conference to identify strongly with the “Third World” and to establish their leadership in that regard. While others can doubtless appraise their performance better than I, it is my view that they failed to win any new ground in this respect, and actually seemed to be losing ground at the end. China was alone at the closing session in not agreeing to a Declaration on the Human Environment.

Aside from my brief and quite measured reply to the Chinese attack on US policy, we avoided any criticism of China and entered into no direct arguments. Chinese attacks tended to be directed at “the superpowers” and at the “nuclear monopolists.”

* * *

The US played a major role in the preparation for the Stockholm Conference and in the Conference itself. We now have an opportunity for positive follow-up activity. For example, a number of Conference recommendations (e.g., regulation of ocean dumping, control of toxic substances) are directly keyed to items in your domestic legislative program. The Stockholm recommendations should be called to the attention of Congress (already done by cable from Stockholm in the case of ocean dumping.)

Domestic follow-up should have an effective public dimension. There were about 500 accredited private organizations at Stockholm—many American. They are anxious to participate further and this interest can be developed effectively. Public discussions this summer and autumn, particularly at regional meetings, can help provide continuing attention to the Administration’s very positive environmental program. I have already suggested to Bill Rukelshaus that we utilize EPA’s regional organization to help this effort, recognizing that a number of other agencies, such as Interior, have a special interest. Media coverage, particularly TV, should be sought. Members of the US delegation at Stockholm, such as Shirley Temple Black, have indicated their readiness to help in such an effort.

This effort should get underway rapidly while public and media interest are high.

I also recommend your personal identification with the Stockholm Conference at the earliest practical date. I believe you should endorse the results in general terms.

A draft statement for your consideration is attached.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. The memorandum is unsigned. The draft statement was attached but not published. Copies were sent to Erhlichman and Kissinger.

325. Report on the UN Conference on the Human Environment from the Vice-Chairman of Delegation (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers 325. Report on the UN Conference on the Human Environment from the Vice-Chairman of Delegation (Herter) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, July 28, 1972.

CLASSIFIED REPORT OF THE UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON THE HUMAN ENVIRONMENT
STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN
JUNE 5-16, 1972

SUMMARY

On the whole, the Conference was a considerable success in terms of U.S. interests. 109 action proposals were approved. We supported all but two—one dealing with compensation for the LDCs, the other with an international fund for housing.

As to the Declaration, it was finally approved by acclamation, with the exception of the PRC who simply could not accept the provision on the effect of nuclear weapons on the environment. On this issue the PRC was totally isolated.

With respect to Institutional Arrangements, after intensive negotiation, a very complete resolution was accepted providing for an Executive Director, a 54-country Governing Council, an Interagency Coordinating Board and a Fund. The result is largely satisfactory to us.

On the Fund, 6 countries in addition to the U.S. have pledged specific amounts. A dozen or more countries additionally have pledged a contribution but without naming a figure. It is fair to assume that we will get pledges for the full $100 million.

Congress has already indicated by resolution that it is broadly in favor of such a fund.

The PRC, with Tanzania and Algeria, pursued throughout a fairly activist radical line. They did not prevail and there was no major confrontation between the DCs and LDCs. In fact, an extraordinary willingness to get results was manifested in both camps. Brazil, Egypt, and India were particularly helpful.

Canada and France were unhelpful; the UK gave us unusually fine support.

The USSR did not attend, nor any of the Easter Bloc except Rumania and Yugoslavia. No one seemed to care.

The Specialized Agencies fought us every inch of the way on the proposed Institutional Arrangements.

Maurice Strong and his Secretariat did an outstanding job both during the preparatory period and at the Conference itself.

The U.S. Delegation (35 delegates, 25 technical advisers) was constructive, interested, and held together. The Delegation included 11 members of Congress.

However, any delegation this size is difficult to handle and requires special attention. In particular, where the White House participates in the Conference and has appointed a number of delegates, extra effort must be undertaken with respect to both administrative arrangements and public relations.

1. Soviet Bloc Participation

Romania and Yugoslavia were the only countries from Eastern Europe to attend the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment. The Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries boycotted the Conference because the Western powers would not allow East Germany to attend the Conference as a full-fledged participating member of the United Nations. It is worth noting that the absence of the Soviet Delegation was only mentioned in passing by four or five speakers and the Conference went on without them. No one seemed to care whether they were absent or not.

Neither Romania nor Yugoslavia played a major role in the Conference deliberations, although Yugoslavia worked constantly for an acceptable Declaration, particularly in regard to Principle 26 concerning the use of nuclear weapons.

2. PRC Participation

The People’s Republic of China sent a 16-man delegation to Stockholm and their delegates attended all of the Conference sessions. Their role was a strange one, however. They rarely spoke or voted in any of the committees or in the Plenary itself on substantive issues. Their general debate speech was so highly critical of the United States that the United States exercised its right of reply and urged in a low-key tone that political issues should not be discussed in this forum.

The PRC from the outset of the Conference sought to establish a leadership role with the Third World, particularly the Africans and Asians. They immediately urged that the draft Declaration be reopened for further discussion even though the document before the Conference was the result of months of exhaustive negotiation and many countries urged that it be accepted without amendment. The PRC sentiment was shared by a number of other developing countries.

The PRC was primarily interested in eliminating in the Declaration any reference to nuclear weapons and their effect on the environment, a principle which the rust of the world insisted on retaining. Even the United States was able to agree on the language which was finally approved, and at the end of the Conference, when the Declaration was adopted by acclamation, the PRC insisted it be recorded as not voting. It was totally isolated. At an earlier stage of the proceedings, it found itself with France and Gabon as the only countries voting against a ban on atmospheric testing.

There is no question that the members of the PRC delegation were inexperienced at conducting themselves in an international conference and earlier concessions made by their delegation were obviously countermanded in Peking. The entire experience must have been humiliating.

The Chinese speeches and their general attitude were blunt, uncooperative and in most instances without finesse. They did not negotiate—they merely pronounced. Their role appeared to be one of spoiler and propagandist with virtually no interest in substantive proposals. A Latin American (Mr. Eglesias of Uruguay) told a member of the United States Delegation that he had asked a member of the PRC Delegation why they had painted themselves into a corner on the Draft Declaration since the Chinese were widely respected for their wisdom and experience. He was told “We have ample wisdom but no experience.”

3. Sweden

The President of the Conference, Mr. Bengtsson, was an able and effective Chairman and succeeded in maintaining the Conference schedule. Two working members of the Swedish Delegation also did an extraordinary job. Dr. Hans Blix represented his Government in the prolonged negotiations on the Draft Declaration and Mr. Ove Heyman chaired the informal Working Group discussions on institutional arrangements. Both delegates performed in an outstanding manner and were a credit to their Delegation and to their country.

4. Brazil

Because the PRC, and to some extent Tanzania and Algeria, tended to preempt the traditional extremist LDC positions, Brazil found itself working very closely with the United States and other countries that had participated extensively in the preparations for the Conference. Brazil had played a constructive part in negotiating a draft declaration and resolution on institutional arrangements and rather than go along with efforts to change these documents, Brazil defended them stoutly.

In addition, through their chairmanship of Committee III, dealing with environmental pollution and institutional arrangements, they made it quite clear that an advanced developing country was completely capable of handling such a position.

Ambassador Carlos Calero Rodrigues, Chairman of Committee III, conducted the work of the Committee with ability, clarity and effectiveness. In addition, he showed courage and skill in the Plenary when he spoke in support of the draft resolution on institutional arrangements and as able to convince the Algerian Delegation to withdraw an amendment which would halve seriously undermined the effectiveness of the resolution. Mention should also be made of the outstanding work of Bernardo Brito of the Brazilian Delegation who worked long, hard and effectively on the problems of institutional arrangements and the draft declaration.

5. France

The French Delegation was generally speaking, uncooperative and unconstructive, particularly with respect to institutional arrangements. It should be pointed out, however, the Ministry of Environment is pushing very hard to get a contribution to the Fund from the French Ministry of Finance.

6. Australia

Single-handedly the Australian Delegation forced the expansion of the previously agreed size of the Governing Council from 48 to 54 members. This was done for purely nationalistic reasons in an effort to ensure their participation in the Governing Council and all arguments with regard to efficiency passed them by.

7. Federal Republic of Germany

The Federal Republic of Germany did not fair well diplomatically. Their unending demand for membership on the Governing Council of the Fund, to be spelled out in writing and based on contributions to the Environmental Fund, was overbearing and clumsy, and led some Developing Countries to accuse them of trying to subject the Fund to the exclusive control of the donor countries.

8. Canada

The Canadian Delegation was most unhelpful on various occasions and in the opinion of some untrustworthy. Particularly, Mr. J. Allen Beesley was difficult and uncooperative throughout the complex negotiations on the draft declaration. He continually courted the PRC and at no time really supported the United States Delegation in advocating its position.

9. Egypt and India

Both countries were very useful with the less-informed developing countries’ delegations in persuading them to take a moderate and intelligent stand on the declaration and the resolution on institutional arrangements.

10. United Kingdom

The United Kingdom, having taken a very negative attitude throughout the Preparatory Committee meetings, fielded a high level delegation, including Mr. Peter Walker, Secretary of State for the Environment, and Mr. Eldon Griffiths, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment. Their contribution was effective, constructive, and forceful. They could not have been more cooperative with the United States.

11. Specialized Agencies

All of the major Specialized Agencies spent a considerable amount of time, energy and effort in lobbying with the developing world and certain Developed Countries (e.g., UNESCO with Belgium, IAEA with the United States) against the institutional arrangements resolution. They were all fearful that the resolution would place constraints on their own jurisdiction in the environmental field and were responsible for the introduction of various crippling amendments. The United States Delegation and others were aware of these lobbying efforts and in the vast majority of cases were able to prevent these amendments from passing.

12. Secretariat

Mr. Maurice Strong, the Secretary General of the Conference and his small staff, in cooperation with United Nations personnel and personnel from Sweden, performed in a magnificent manner and were successful in carrying out a major conference with success.

13. Miscellaneous

a. The “Group of Ten” caucused every day and although there was by no means common agreement on many issues, we can expect to see the expanding Common Market acting more and more as a bloc in various international fora. Already this tendency is beginning to appear in the OECD.

b. Contrary to expectations, there was no major confrontation between developed and developing countries. The general seriousness and concern of the developing country delegations to achieve positive results was impressive and reassuring. It is most encouraging to realize that after two weeks there was virtually worldwide agreement on over 100 action proposals and the two specially sensitive subjects, the Declaration and the resolution on institutional arrangements.

14. U.S. Administrative Arrangements and Public Relations

If the United States ever fields as large a delegation again (35 delegates, 25 technical advisors) to an international conference, a strong administrative contingent should be on the spot well in advance of the arrival of the delegation. This is particularly true where the White House has selected some of the delegates, is represented itself on the delegation, and has a particular political interest in the welfare of its appointees.

The same admonition is valid with respect to public relations, when there is a distinct White House presence. The State Department on the whole is well geared up to handling normal press and media arrangements and in terms of substantive coverage of the Conference did a good job. After the first few days, when it became apparent that the press was not getting intelligent information about the Conference, daily press briefings were instituted and this helped a good deal in improving the tone of the coverage. These press briefings should have started the weekend before the Conference began.

Where the White House is concerned, however, there is a need for a special type of talent that, on t e whole, the Department does not possess. The White House is very adept at creating publicity at any cost, including all sorts of public relations gimmickry and continuous photographic coverage, It is recommended that at future conferences of this kind, where there is a special White House interest, the White House be asked to send along the sort of specialized talent described above.

15. The United States Delegation

The Delegation was too large for easy handling. It was possible, however, to give every member of the Delegation an assignment, if only for two or three days, as a member of a team dealing with a particular subject matter. Each team had professional staff support.

The entire delegation, including technica1 advisors, met every day at 8:30 with remarkably full and consistent attendance. These daily briefings normally were conducted by the Chairman, and provided the only opportunity to give the delegation the necessary instructions for the work at hand, to hear complaints, and to keep everyone abreast of what was going on.

In my judgment, where a delegation is as large as this one in the future, an officer should be assigned exclusively to handle both the personal and professional needs of its members. Even though the Embassy provided Control Officers for each delegate, a difficult feat considering the size of our Embassy in Stockholm, most of the Control Officers simply disappeared once they hid their charges safely tucked away in a hotel room. It became necessary to correct this situation after the fist two or three days.

Despite the size of the delegation, including about a dozen congressional representatives, and some very distinguished non-governmental individuals, all of whom could have behaved like prima donnas, the delegation was exemplary in terms of supporting previously agreed U S. positions on a great variety of issues. By and large, the membership was both knowledgeable and interested, and hopefully had a sense of participation. With extremely few exceptions, the technical advisors did an outstanding job.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential.

326. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) 326. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)1

Washington, August 4, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Implementation of US-Soviet Environmental Agreement

This is in reply to the CEQ memoranda of May 30 forwarding recommendations on implementation of the US-Soviet Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection signed by the President in’ Moscow on May 23.

The President has requested the Under Secretaries Committee to monitor implementation of bilateral US-Soviet agreements signed during the Moscow visit, including the environmental agreement. Within this framework, the President has approved the recommendation that you chair the US side of the US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environment Protection. He has also directed that you serve as US Coordinator for the agreement. He has asked me to forward the enclosed letter designating you as Chairman and Coordinator for the US side and requesting you to arrange for consultations with your Soviet counterparts in the near future in Moscow on specific cooperative projects to be carried out under the agreement.

There is no objection to the initial membership, and the provisions for additional members, as recommended in your memorandum for the US side of the Joint Committee.

Your proposed press release has been reviewed and revised. You should coordinate timing of the release with the White House press office.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Ehrlichman and Ziegler. Nixon’s letter to Train is Document 327. On April 28 the White House authorized sending a delegation to Moscow to negotiate an ad referendum environmental cooperation agreement based upon previously exchanged drafts. Dr. Gordon MacDonald headed the delegation. (Memorandum from Hillenbrand to Kissinger, May 1; ibid., Box 719, Country Files, Europe, USSR, Vol. XXII) On May 6 the environmental negotiations were successfully concluded. (Memorandum from Sonnenfeldt to Kissinger, May 6, ibid.) The text of agreement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 26, 1972, pp. 921-923.

327. Letter From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) 327. Letter From President Nixon to the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train)1

Washington, August 4, 1972.

Dear Russ:

On May 23, 1972, I signed in Moscow the Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection. Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The agreement provides for the establishment of a US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection to oversee the process by which this cooperation is carried out.

I am pleased to designate you as Chairman for the United States side of the Joint Committee, and as U.S. Coordinator for the bilateral agreement. In this latter capacity, you should do all you can to see that interested departments and agencies of our Government participate in the Joint Committee’s work.

As a first, implementing step, you should arrange for consultations with your Soviet counterparts in the near future in Moscow on specific cooperative projects to be carried out under the environmental agreement. I look forward to receiving your report on the results of these consultations.

Sincerely,

Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. No classification marking.

328. Intelligence Note RESN-102 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research 328. Intelligence Note RESN-102 Prepared by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1

Washington, August 11, 1972.

THE SOVIETS IN THE INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENT: AFTER STOCKHOLM

Media Critical. Soviet media references to the UN Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm June 5-16, have not been numerous, but have followed a substantially critical line. They have emphasized Soviet pique over exclusion of the GDR, which led to the boycott of the Conference by the USSR and all of its allies except Romania. In June, New Times (Issue 26) commented that the Conference “could have played a big role in eliminating the dangers facing humanity had all states been given an equal chance to participate….’ Izvestiya of June 22 made a similar point. The New Times article, also, in a rare reference to the substance of tie Conference, commented that serious differences preceded adoption of the Declaration of Principles and that the Western press had been critical of the conference results.

These same Soviet commentaries also noted the criticism of US “destruction of the natural environment in Indo-China” voiced at the conference by Swedish Prime Minister Palme and others (but without mentioning the Oven more strident attacks by Peking). In a July 1 broadcast, commentator Boas Belitskiy argued, further, that a “first step in protecting the environment must of course be the halting of the American war in Vietnam” and that “halting the arms race would provide the most funds” for protecting the environment.

Soviet UN Mission Noncommittal. During an informal discussion in New York on July 25, Soviet Ambassador Issraelyan indicated a lack of instructions, but he did reflect Soviet unhappiness regarding some aspects of the conference recommendations for UN institutional arrangements. He repeated familiar Soviet objections to formation of “new bodies” such as the Environmental Coordinating Board and to the establishment of a potentially independent (and expensive) Executive Director. His concern over the proposed 54-member Governing Council for environmental programs, however, seemed to revolve principally around the related handling of the German question; he raised no objection to the Governing Council per se. Moreover, Issraelyan seemed worried over a reported rumor that the Soviets are no longer interested in environmental protection and took pains to point out evidence of continued Soviet interest. (Maurice Strong reportedly received some assurance also of Soviet willingness in principle to approach environmental problems through the UN before he accepted the post of Secretary General at Stockholm.)

Probable Soviet Positions. As comments by the media and Issraelyan suggest, the Soviets probably still regard environmental questions as subordinate to more general political considerations. While they have demonstrated increasing public concern with domestic ecological problem e.g., in Lake Baikal, the Volga River, and the Sea of Azov—on the international scene they still seem to view environmental protection primarily as an issue for diplomatic exploitation (by or against the USSR), and as one they prefer to handle in a bilateral or perhaps regional context. Issraelyan’s lack of instructions also suggests that a detailed review may be underway in Moscow of the various Stockholm resolutions, and perhaps of overall Soviet policy on international environmental issues with regard to their handling in the UN and other fora.

Given the conflict between the Soviets’ boycott and denunciation of the Conference, on the one hand, and their desire to show a favorable public record on environmental issues, on the other, it would be logical for them to abstain on the upcoming UN General Assembly vote concerning the Stockholm Declaration of Principles, particularly since it would be a largely pro forma noting of the conference resolution. In this connection the Soviets might assert that the reference in the Declaration’s Preamble to the “duty of all governments” has been contradicted by the non-universality of the Conference, which they so strenuously deplored. They might wish, furthermore, to avoid even the limited commitment to international responsibility for environmental damage and related economic assistance set forth in the Declaration. Abstention would help the Soviets finesse all these problems, and perhaps give them some cause for satisfaction over their absence from Stockholm.

On the other hand, the Soviets would probably oppose outright—in its resent form anyway—the resolution requiring states to provide information on “activities or developments within their jurisdiction…whenever they believe, or have reason to believe, that such information is needed to avoid the risk of significant adverse effects on the environment in areas beyond their national jurisdiction.” This proposal was referred to the General Assembly after opposition, largely from Brazil, prevented its adoption at the Conference; even though it leaves the decision up to the individual government, it is the sort of undertaking which conflicts strongly with the Soviet penchant for secrecy.

Regarding the Stockholm proposals for UN institutional arrangements, the Soviets will probably feel required to take a more active role. (Simultaneous, and perhaps more intense, efforts in bilateral and regional contexts like the CSCE are not to be excluded, however.) Issraelyan’s discussion of the Governing Council suggested that the Soviet Union regards the question of German representation as a matter of principle; at the very least, preferential treatment of the FRG vis-a-vis the GDR is precluded. It would also be consistent with the previous Soviet position for them to attempt to fashion a closer and more specific channel for subordinating the Council to the UN Economic and Social Council; but the Soviets will probably shy away from fighting a losing battle, if that is the way it seems to be turning out. Judging from Issraelyan’s reaction, and fro Soviet policy on the UN Developnent Program, for instance, the USSR would probably participate in the Governing Council if the German aspect could be satisfactorily resolved. The Soviets might eventually feel committed to ante up a minimum contribution to the Environment Fund, as well.

As for the establishment of the Environmental Secretariat and Director, the Soviets will probably again be guided by their longstanding opposition to establishment of independent secretariats and directors in any UN body and their general dislike of increased expenditure. They can be expected, therefore, to try to limit the independence of the Secretariat and its director.

One tactic the Soviets may also consider, in furtherance of their several goals, would be a separate resolution that would seek to expand the tie-in between disarmament and environmental protection. Such a course would permit them to boost their favored disarmament topics—a comprehensive nuclear test ban and a World Disarmament Conference. At the same time this tie-in would help defer pressure for specific actions and expenditures that the Soviets dislike. The major consideration here, as in most other issues, would probably be the question of how much support such an effort wold attract, as opposed to its cost in terms of depicting the Soviets in and obstructionist role.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, SCI 41-3 UN. Confidential. Drafted by Robert T. Willner and cleared by Martin Packman, both of INR/REU.

329. Memorandum From A. Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 329. Memorandum From A. Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 1, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Publicity and Other Arrangements for CEQ Chairman Train’s Visit to the Soviet Union

CEQ Chairman Russell Train is preparing to go to Moscow for the first meeting of the US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection, scheduled to begin on September 18. You should be aware of the steps Train is taking and contemplating with a view to giving his trip maximum impact and publicity. You may wish to give him guidance on points raised in the following paragraphs.

1. Proposed Meeting with President and Dobrynin. In the schedule proposal from John Whitaker at Tab B (sent to you from Chapin’s office for your advice and recommendations) it is recommended that the President agree to meet with Train and Dobrynin during the period September 11-13. Whitaker says that he and Chuck Colson recommend Dobrynin’s participation to maximize the favorable domestic story. He adds: “Henry Kissinger will probably feel too high visibility for a relatively unimportant agreement.”

It makes sense to have Train meet with the President before he goes to Moscow—the President and Podgorny signed the environmental agreement during the Summit. However, I do not think it would be appropriate for Dobrynin to be involved. The substantive purpose of Train’s meeting with the President would be to receive the President’s guidance on the forthcoming environmental talks with the Soviets. The point is that it would be incorrect for the Soviet Ambassador to be present. If you agree, the memorandum for General Haig’s signature to David Parker at Tab A would advise him that Dobrynin should not be included in the meeting.

2. Train is assembling a high-level delegation that will include Chris Herter, Jr., the Under Secretaries of HEW, HUD and Transportation, the Administrators of EPA and NOAA, Interior, the National Science Foundation, Shirley Temple Black, the Executive Director of the National Wildlife Foundation and several members of his own staff.

He is requesting a special mission aircraft from General Scowcroft. He has informed Embassy Moscow that he is interested in the possibility of making an official gift of several rare Przewlasky horses to the Soviet Government in connection with his trip (see telegram at Tab C). We have asked his staff to check with us on the timing of any press announcement with regard to the trip and the make-up of the US Delegation—if the schedule proposal is approved, it would be logical for this announcement to be made following his meeting with the President. We have also asked its staff to check with us before anything further is done with regard to the horses. I personally question the decorum of the horses gift idea. Coming as it would close behind the Summits’ exchanges of Pandas, Musk Oxon, Cadillac and Hydrofoil, it seems too ostentatious for the purposes of the environmental meeting (an embossed, leatherbound set of CEQ publications would, in fact, be more appropriate).

If you agree, I recommend that either you or General Haig give Train a call, and gently rein him in on the horses idea.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1. That you approve the memorandum for General Haig’s signature to Parker at Tab A.

Approve

Disapprove

2. That you approve General Haig’s calling Train to advise that the proposed gift of several Przewalsky horses would be inappropriate.

Approve

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Administratively Confidential. Sent for action. Tabs A-C were attached but not published. Next to the first sentence of the second paragraph of section 1, Kissinger wrote in the margin: “I favor it.” Kissinger wrote next to the sentence in the second to last paragraph opposing a gift of horses: “I agree, it is crazy.” Kissinger initialed his approval of both recommendations.

330. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 330. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 25, 1972.

SUBJECT:

US-USSR Environmental Agreement—Train Meeting with President

Russ Train’s environmental talks in Moscow went well. On Thursday, September 21, he and his Soviet counterpart signed a memorandum of understanding ‘providing for the implementation of several cooperative projects. He is currently touring various environmental sites of interest in the USSR and will be returning to the United States October 4.

John Whitaker will soon be submitting a schedule proposal to the President recommending that he meet with Train and, possibly, the Sierra Club and National Wildlife members of the U.S. Delegation. Whitaker also wishes to recommend that the President agree to have Ambassador Dobrynin participate in his meeting, believing that Dobrynin’s participation will have good domestic impact. However, he wants to be sure that you approve of Dobrynin’s participation before he so recommends in the schedule proposal.

The President will just have concluded his meetings and dinner with Gromyko, which will draw wide publicity in the US (and world) press. Viewed alone, the proposed involvement of Dobrynin in the environmental meeting does not pose a problem. However, there is a question as to how frequently the President wants to have “Soviet-contact publicity.”

May I please have your guidance on this as soon as possible.

RECOMMENDATION

That you indicate whether or not Whitaker should recommend Dobrynin’s involvement in a possible Presidential meeting with Russ Train in early October.

Yes. OK or Dobrynin to participate

No, No Dobrynin involvement

(NOTE: I personally think that Russ ought to let the President have a bit more of the action and the credit on this whole thin. All the reports out of Moscow on his mission had the flavor of the President having done a little advancing for Train in May and now we have the main act.)

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Administratively Confidential. Sent for prompt action please. There is a check mark next to the option not to include Dobrynin.

331. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 331. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, October 9, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Russell Train’s Report on his Environmental Talks with the Soviets

Russell Train has returned from the Soviet Union where he chaired the US side during the first meeting of the US-USSR Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection. He has forwarded a report on the results of his mission (Tab A). You will be meeting with him on Monday, October 9, 19720 to receive his oral report.

Train’s visit went quite well. In summary: --on September 18, Train was an official guest at the opening session of the Supreme Soviet during which Kirillin delivered an address on the USSR’s environmental problems;

--the September 18-21 meeting of the Joint Committee produced agreement on some 30 bilateral environmental projects to be implemented under the agreement;

--from September 22-October 3, Train toured environmental sites of interest in the USSR;

--On October 4, Train met for 90 minutes in Moscow with Podgorny.

Train reports that Podgorny extended personal regards to you on behalf of himself, Brezhnev and Kosygin; said that he wishes you success in the election; and added that there are many more issues between our two nations and that he looks forward to signing many more documents with you.

With regard to Train’s report, I would add only that we have encountered one potential problem, that relating to earthquake prediction. The press has picked up the idea that the earthquake prediction projects agreed to by Train and his Soviet counterparts — projects which provide for the installation of jointly operated earthquake detection devices in the US and USSR — may inadvertently have provided an arms control breakthrough, i.e., the means effectively to detect underground explosions, permitting us to proceed with an underground test ban.

We have advised the Council on Environmental Quality and ACDA not to encourage these attempts at linkage between environment and arms control, to note that earthquake prediction was specifically called for in Article 2 of the Summit Environmental Agreement, and to note that monitoring devices are routinely employed in most environmental research projects.

Attachment
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Train) to President Nixon

Washington, October 6, 1972

Subject:

Meeting with Chairman Podgorny and Implementation of U.S.-Soviet Environmental Agreement

On October 4, 1972, I met for 90 minutes in Moscow with N. V. Podgorny, Chairman of the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet.

The meeting was in connection with the first session of the Joint U.S.-Soviet Committee on Environmental Protection established in May by the Agreement signed by Podgorny and yourself. The Committee met in Moscow starting September 18, and concluded an implementation agreement which was signed September 21. The implementation agreement initiated over 30 specific projects for environmental cooperation between the U.S. and USSR embracing all of the eleven subject areas covered by the May agreement.

Following the conclusion of the implementation agreement, I had a ten day, nine thousand mile trip that took me to Leningrad, Irkutsk-Lake Baikal, and to Yakutsk on the Lena River in eastern Siberia. (I attach a copy of a report on the trip which I have the American press in Moscow on my return.) The arrangements and hospitality provided by the Soviets were outstanding. Portions of my trip represented “firsts” for any Americans. The only negative factor was the adamant refusal by the Soviets to permit any U.S. press accompaniment on the trip. It would seem that the better relations established by your May visit do not extend to our press. This is something I believe we should work on.

The Soviet Government makes few bones today about it environmental problems, although continuing to give lip service to the Marxist line that capitalism/private property is inherently polluting while socialism is not. I was an official guest on September 18 at the opening session of the Supreme Soviet and heard V. Kirillin, Chairman of the State Committee on Science and Technology, give the main address which outlined the USSR’s environmental problems and objectives.

Soviet efforts to curb both air and water pollution are well behind ours, although the problems are serious. Auto emissions are not yet a major problem. Pollution abatement technology and monitoring instrumentation are behind ours. The general level of sophistication in environmental research is lower. The Soviets tend to be strong on data gathering in some areas, weak on relating the data to decision-making, and weaker yet in dealing with the different pieces of data as part of complex systems. Government responsibility for environment seems badly fragmented. They have a built-in problem in the fact that the polluter and the regulator are one and the same (the Soviet Government). And, finally, they lack generally the kind of public accountability and citizen involvement (other than by the scientific communiy) that is such a significant element in our society. With all that, it seems evident that the Soviet Government is attaching an increasing priority to environmental protection, welcomes our bilateral relationship, and is probably developing major new government decisions in the area.

Podgorny was accompanied by Kirillin at his meeting with me. He seemed tanned, vigorous, and in good health (although I had been told he was ill). I extended your personal regards and he reciprocated very warmly on behalf of himself, Brezhnev, and Kosygin. He said he wished you success in the election; said that the “entire world, other than China, thinks the May meetings in Moscow very productive;” said he looked forward to signing many more “documents” with you—that there remain “many more issues” for our two nations; expressed his satisfaction that the various agreements signed in May, including the environmental agreement, are being implemented so vigorously, referring particularly to SALT. I emphasized the interrelationship of the environment agreement with the health, space and science and technology agreernents and said that in the trade area the U.S. hoped it would be able to sell pollution abatement equipment to the USSR.

Podgorny expressed his strong support for the environmental agreement and said, “our agreement for the protection of the human environment is not only significant for our bilateral relations but for international cooperation; it creates a positive political climate. We are striving for this and will continue to strive for it in the future.”

Podgorny said that, while the USSR had been working for protection of the environment since the revolution 54 years ago, they recognized that other governments were likewise working on the problem. In this connection, he said, we know of the’ several statements and messages of Mr. Nixon on the subject, and we have read these with interest.

(Incidentally, Podgorny talked at length about the Olympics, praising the performance of both USSR and U.S. athletes, and likewise the “brilliant” showing of the GDR. He inquired about your interest, in sports as both participant and spectator and said “the next time he comes to Moscow we will see a game together.”)

He closed by again asking me to convey the best, wishes of himself and his associates to you and took me out into the corridor to show me the chess set which you had presented to him and which is on display. He said he did not think that Fischer had played on it.

Our program for environmental cooperation which you initiated in May is off to an excellent start. Soviet interest seems strong. In terms of strengthening and broadening institutional and individual contacts and relationships between our two countries, there are immense political gains for both sides.

Russell E. Train
Chairman

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Agency Files, Box 217, CEQ I. Confidential. Sent for information. Copies of Train’s report were sent to Ehrlichman and Kissinger. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it.

Chapter 6. Oceans PolicyChapter 6. Oceans Policy

332. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 6, 1969.

Nitze presented Department of Defense view on the continental shelf and related issues.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-5. Secret.

333. Circular Airgram CA-406 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts

Washington, January 23, 1969, 1025Z.

The Department summarized U.S.-Soviet Law of the Sea negotiations held in New York on December 16-18, 1968, and enclosed a draft convention, dated December 20, which included a revised article on preferential fishing rights for coastal states.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Carter on January 17; cleared by McKernan, Springsteen, EA/J, Interior, and Defense; and approved by Meeker. Sent to Ankara, Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, London, Luxembourg, Madrid, Oslo, Paris, Reykjavik, Rome, Tokyo, and USNATO. Repeated to Canberra, Moscow, Ottawa, and USUN. The first two articles of the enclosed convention, negotiated ad referendum by U.S. and Soviet representatives in July 1968, are undated. The third article is dated December 20, 1968. No drafting information appears on the draft convention. The memorandum of discussion with the Japanese Embassy was not found attached.

334. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Belman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, March 18, 1969.

Belman reviewed the 2 years of interactions with the Soviet Union, concerning Law of the Sea issues, and recommended consultations with NATO allies. Johnson approved the recommendation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OA Files: Lot 72 D 505, Box 2, Law of the Sea NATO. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted in L/SPA by Carter and Belman; cleared by McKernan and Springsteen; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson on March 20. Johnson added the following handwritten suggestion below his initials: “Suggest we consider whether we should not make simultaneous approaches to other selected countries such as Japan and some ARA state.” Tab A is published as the enclosure to Document 333. Attached but not published at Tab B was an unsigned and undated report, which recounted the results of talks between U.S. and Soviet experts and surveyed the current status of international opinion on the limits of territorial waters, free passage through straits, and fisheries. Tab C is published as Document 333. Attached but not published at Tab D was an unsigned and undated memorandum, which listed amendments to the draft article III on fisheries proposed by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. response to the Soviet proposals. Attached but not published at Tab E was a March 11 information memorandum from McKernan to Meeker that indicated that S/FW believed consultations through NATO channels would steer the fisheries negotiations away from provisions acceptable to developing countries, therefore making widespread agreement impossible.

335. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (De Palma) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, April 2, 1969.

De Palma noted the increased tempo of United Nations work on Law of the Sea issues and outlined key issues requiring United States attention.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted in IO by Deputy Assistant Secretary David H. Popper. Copies were sent to U, J, and C. Published from an uninitialed copy.

336. Letter From Secretary of the Interior Hickel to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, April 15, 1969.

Hickel requested an interdepartmental review to consider the interests of the U.S. fishing industry in formulating policy priorities for potential upcoming law of the sea conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential.

337. Memorandum From the Acting Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Belman) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, April 21, 1969.

Belman forwarded to Rogers information pertinent to the issues raised by Interior Secretary Hickel’s letter of April 15, 1969, and included a draft reply.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S and initialed by Walsh. Drafted by Belman and concurred in by McKernan and by Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Malcolm Toon (EUR). David S. Black was Under Secretary of the Interior from 1967-69. For Tab A, see Document 339. For Tab B, see Document 336.

338. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, April 23, 1969.

Hillenbrand recommended lodging a formal protest to a recent Canadian announcement expanding certain boundaries of Canadian internal waters and establishing expanded offshore zones that might exclude foreign fishing activities. Johnson approved the recommendation.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted by John C. Griffith, Office of Canadian Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs on April 22 and cleared by Springsteen, EUR/CAN, and S/FW, and in draft by Belman. Johnson apparently approved the recommendation. The approval line is marked in an unknown hand as follows: “4/25/69, 12:00 noon.” Tabs A, B, C, and D were not found. For Tab E, see Document 333. Tab F, April 23, was a draft note from Rogers to Canadian Ambassador Ritchie expressing disappointment that the Canadian Government notified Washington only a few hours before the public announcement and registering the hope that U.S. officials would have the opportunity to consult and comment upon any proposed legislation the before it was submitted to the Canadian Parliament

339. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Interior Hickel

Washington, April 28, 1969.

Responding to Hickel’s April 15 letter, Rogers assured him that consideration would be given to U.S. fisheries interests in developing Law of the Sea positions.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Belman on April 21.

340. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Aldrich) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, May 29, 1969.

Aldrich opposed compromise language proposed by the Department of the Interior concerning seabed principles. Johnson disapproved Aldrich’s recommendation to continue efforts to secure an agreed continental shelf boundary and a moratorium on seabed claims.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, General Files on NSC Matters, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, NSC/Misc. Seabed. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Carter, who also drafted the undated “Seabeds Moratorium-Background and Considerations.” Copies were sent to Richardson, Samuels, Pollack, and Popper. Johnson disapproved the recommendation on June 2.

341. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 12, 1969.

Osgood discussed the imminent potential conflict between U.S. policies concerning ongoing seabeds treaty negotiations, a potential Law of the Sea treaty, and a longstanding fishing rights dispute with Peru. He outlined disagreements between Executive Branch agencies, and recommended preparation of a policy options study. Kissinger approved preparations of a NSSM.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970 (2 of 2). Secret. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation and wrote on the final page, “do brief memo to Pres + NSSM for study.” An attached June 19 note from Haig to Osgood reads, “Henry has read you memorandum and asked that you coordinate with Pete Vaky and Mort Halperin in the preparation of a brief memorandum for the President, forwarding an NSSM for the President’s approval, which will initiate the necessary study.”

342. Circular Telegram 103620 From the Department of State to All American Republic PostsZ

Washington, June 24, 1969, 2054Z.

The Department registered concern over Uruguay’s assertion of expanded territorial sea claims and the potential for further claims by other Latin American governments.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Carter on June 23; cleared in S/FW, ARA, L/ARA, ARA/APU, ARA/BR, the Departments of Defense and Interior; and approved by Assistant Legal Adviser for Economic Affairs Richard A. Frank. Edward M. Korry was the U.S. Ambassador to Chile. Gabriel Valdes Subercaseaux was the Chilean Foreign Minister.

343. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 1, 1969.

Laird expressed concern that U.S. defense needs were not being taken sufficiently into account in the multiple, interrelated, sea law-related negotiations taking place concurrently. He recommended preparation of a National Security Study Memorandum on an expedited basis.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

344. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 7, 1969.

Osgood recommended referring Law of the Sea questions to the Under Secretaries Committee rather than issuing a National Security Study Memorandum.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. For the final signed versions of Tab A and Tab B, see Documents 349 and 347. Tab C is published as Document 343.

345. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 7, 1969.

Executive Branch representatives discussed with Senator Henry “Scoop” Jackson differences and concerns about Law of the Sea issues. All agreed on the need for a moratorium on seabed boundary claims. The Interior department reserved its position regarding the U.S. negotiating stance on seabed boundary issues in upcoming negotiations at the UN.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollack and approved in J. The conversation was held in Jackson’s office. For the seabed principles proposed by the United States at the UN Ad Hoc Committee to Study the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor Beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction, see UN Document A/AC.135/25 (June 28, 1968).

346. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 9, 1969.

Rogers informed Kissinger that the Department of State disagreed with the Department of Defense proposal to prioritize Law of the Sea questions. He proposed that the government continue to work toward resolving internal differences without altering U.S. positions concerning several ongoing negotiations with sea law implications.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

347. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Laird

Washington, July 12, 1969.

Kissinger informed Laird that rather than issuing a National Security Study Memorandum, the Under Secretaries Committee would consider how to coordinate Law of the Sea policy.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. The attachment is published as Document 348.

348. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, July 12, 1969.

Kissinger concurred with Rogers that the National Security Council need not deal with Law of the Sea matters presently. Kissinger requested the Under Secretaries Committee attempt to resolve the outstanding issues concerning Executive Branch disagreements and potential conflicts between the U.S. negotiating positions on various sea law negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

349. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary of State (Richardson)

Washington, July 12, 1969.

Kissinger requested that Richardson convene the Under Secretaries Committee to consider coordination of U.S. policy concerning the Peruvian fishing dispute, the definition of a boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabed, and a seabeds arms control agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Secret.

350. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, July 22, 1969.

Osgood provided an update on the status of negotiations between Executive Branch agencies to develop coordinated positions on the interrelated issues of Peruvian fisheries, definition of the continental shelf, and seabed arms control.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Sent for information. Published from an uninitialed copy.

351. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig)

Washington, July 23, 1969.

Osgood explained the current state of Executive Branch interagency negotiations concerning Peruvian fisheries policy. He also suggested that the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger have the opportunity to examine any resultant bilateral agreement before it was signed.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Published from an uninitialed copy.

352. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig)

Washington, July 24, 1969.

Osgood noted that the concerned Executive Branch agencies had agreed on a negotiating position for upcoming fisheries talks with Peru and assured Haig that the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger would have a chance to review any bilateral accord produced.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. After the penultimate sentence, Osgood inserted a handwritten note that read: “But I shall not send it. Instead, I have communicated its message to McKernan on the telephone. He assured me that HAK would have an opportunity to see the agreement before it is signed. He also assured me that he would keep me informed, through a special secretariat in his office, of the conference developments.” A handwritten notation by Osgood on the attached letter reads: “Not sent. Communicated telephonically.” Department of State Circular 175, December 13, 1955, outlined procedures for the negotiation and signature of treaties and other international agreements. See Arthur W. Rovine, Digest of United States Practice in International Law 1974, (Washington: U.S. Department of State, 1975), pp. 199-215.

353. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Members of the Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment

Washington, August 11, 1969.

As chair of the Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment, Johnson furnished to the committee a draft resolution on seabed principles to guide the U.S. delegation at the August 1969 UN Seabeds Committee meeting and a memorandum of understanding among Executive Branch agencies concerning the seabed boundary principle.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, General Files on NSC Matters, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, NSC/Misc.-Seabed. Limited Official Use;Noforn. A copy was sent to Christopher Phillips at USUN.

354. Circular Airgram CA-4850 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts

Washington, August 29, 1969, 1313

The Department requested that the addressed posts discuss major issues with members of the host governments’ delegations to the forthcoming 24th UN General Assembly meeting. The published section of the enclosure deals with seabeds issues.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, UNGA-3. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by the IO/UNP staff and approved by Greene. The published section of the enclosure is enclosure 5 and is classified as Limited Official Use. Sent to all posts except the following to which it was repeated for information: Algiers, Bern, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, Khartoum, Moscow, Prague, Saigon, Seoul, Sofia, Warsaw, USINT Cairo, USUN, USOECD Paris, US NATO, the mission at Geneva, and USEC Brussels. The remainder of the airgram, which deals with General Assembly issues unrelated to Law of the Sea negotiations, is not published.

355. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, September 3, 1969.

Stevenson registered his opinion that U.S. acceptance of a 12-mile limit to territorial waters in seabed arms control negotiations would not prejudice the more general U.S. policy of not recognizing territorial claims beyond 3 miles.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OA Files: Lot 73 D 391, Box 9, Law of the Sea USG Position. Confidential. Drafted by Carter.

356. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 12, 1969.

Osgood outlined the effects on international negotiations of disagreement among Executive Branch agencies concerning delineation of the continental shelf boundary. He noted increasing Congressional attention to the issue and anticipated that the Under Secretaries Committee might soon meet to address the issue.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it. For Tab A, see Documents 350, 351, and 352. For Tab B, see Document 349. Senator Claiborne Pell (D-Rhode Island) was chair of the Oceans and Space Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

357. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, October 13, 1969.

Stevenson explained the rationale and methodology behind a worldwide canvass of governments to determine the prospects for a general Law of the Sea conference. The canvass utilized the attached aide-mimoire as a basis for discussion.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D113, Box 7, NSC/MISC/Law of the Sea. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Carter on October 9. Copies were sent to U, J, C, AF, EA, EUR, NEA, ARA, IO, H, E, and S/FW. For the text of the draft articles attached, see Document 333.

358. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Greene) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, November 10, 1969.

Greene listed the Law of the Sea-related subjects and organizational issues to be addressed over the ensuing 6 months.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Drafted by McIntyre and cleared by Stevenson, McKernan, Pollack, and in E. Published from an uninitialed copy.

359. Memorandum From F. Allen Harris, Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser to Selected Bureaus of the Department of State

Washington, December 2, 1969.

Harris circulated a proposed U.S. Government position on the seabed boundary sent by Stevenson to other Executive Branch agencies.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Confidential. The memorandum was sent to Staff Assistant John D. Stempel (U), Staff Assistant Richard W. Baker (J), Staff Assistant David Biltchick (S/PC), McIntyre, Deputy Director George Dolgin (SCI/SE), Adviser Clarence W. Nichols (E/ORF), William L. Sullivan (S/FW), and Deputy Director William J. Trainor (INR/XR). The attached analysis of the major proposals was not found. Tab B is attached but not published.

360. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 2, 1969.

Osgood informed Kissinger of the continued disagreement among Executive Branch Agencies concerning determination of the continental shelf boundary and the proposal to enact a moratorium on further deep seabed claims of exploitation. Kissinger agreed to receive a briefing on the issues involved in anticipation of an Under Secretaries Committee meeting on the topic.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. Kissinger initialed his approval. Attached at Tab A was a letter from Laird to Hickel, November 13, in which Laird expressed concern that granting certain offshore seabed exploitation leases by the Interior Department might jeopardize U.S. security interests. Tab B is published as section III of Document 341. Next to the statement in paragraph 2 that the differences between the Defense, Interior, and State Departments had not been resolved, Kissinger wrote, “Why?” Also in the third paragraph, after the sentence, “I do not know whether it will succeed” Kissinger wrote in the margin, “We should issue order that this can’t be done pending undersecretaries meeting. Put on agenda of next meeting with Richardson.” Concerning Behr’s forthcoming memorandum Kissinger wrote, “Succinct, I hope.” In the recommendation, Kissinger crossed out “one-hour” and wrote “1/2.” Next to his initials Kissinger wrote, “Have-1/2 hour.” Below Kissinger’s approval, written in a different hand, is an indication that the briefing was tentatively scheduled for December 23 at 3:00pm.

361. Memorandum From Robert Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 5, 1969.

Behr summarized a briefing that explained the Department of Defense position on Law of the Sea issues, especially concerning the continental shelf.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger wrote at the top of the page: “Let’s get it before the Under Secretaries committee.” J. B. Parker wrote below Kissinger’s note: “Col. Behr is taking follow up action.” Both notes were written on December 11.

362. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Washington, December 15, 1969.

Stevenson reported that a resolution passed by the recent UN General Assembly made a general Law of the Sea conference likely. He recommended that the administration should prepare for the conference by creating an office to coordinate Department of State policy and establishing an interagency working group to coordinate U.S. governmental efforts.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Pollack. Drafted by Oxman and concurred in by McKernan and Greene. Johnson initialed his approval of both recommendations on December 24. Tab A, the final version of the resolution as adopted by the General Assembly, is UN Document 2574A (XXIV), December 15, 1969. Tab B is Document 333.

363. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 20, 1970.

Osgood outlined the Law of the Sea issues likely to be determined at an upcoming meeting by the Under Secretaries Committee. He attributed the fundamental dispute among Executive Branch agencies to differing values ascribed to military security and commercial exploitation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Secret. Sent for information.

364. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 26, 1970.

Osgood described the potential clash between the U.S. response to the Peruvian fisheries dispute and joint U.S.-Soviet attempts to negotiate a new Law of the Sea treaty. He recommended an examination of the issues to determine what options the Under Secretaries Committee might consider. Kissinger approved the recommendation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval on February 3 and wrote next to his initials: “It needs a formal structure. Do a joint paper with State.”

365. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 30, 1970.

Osgood summarized the Under Secretaries Committee meeting convened to consider the continental shelf boundary question. When it became evident that the representatives of the Departments of State, Defense, and Interior could not agree, Richardson concluded he would make a separate recommendation to the President.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 (3 of 3). Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it.

366. Airgram CA-1381 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, March 10, 1970, 1907Z.

The Department forwarded instructions for the March 1970 meeting of the UN Seabeds Committee, including amendments to previous U.S. positions.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by McIntyre, Simsarian, and Oxman on March 10; cleared with SCI, E, S/FW, PM, L, ACDA, Defense, Interior, Commerce, Transportation, Justice, NSF, and NCMRED; and approved by Greene. Repeated to London, Moscow, the Mission at Geneva, and USNATO. Telegram 133845 was sent to USUN and repeated to the Mission at Geneva, USNATO, London, and Moscow. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-6)

367. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 12, 1970.

Eliot reported the results of a meeting between Canadian representatives and Department of State officials to discuss an impending Canadian claim over Arctic waters. He highlighted the significance of Canadian actions for current Law of the Sea negotiations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret. Drafted by Neuman and cleared by Johnson, Stevenson, and McKernan, and with EUR/CAN, Defense, Interior, and Transportation.

368. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, undated.

Kissinger informed Nixon that proposed Canadian legislation to protect Arctic waters and fisheries would prejudice U.S. interests and recommended that the President telephone Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. Nixon called Trudeau and arranged for a team of U.S. representatives to travel to Ottawa to discuss concerns.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, March 1969-August 1970 (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. Next to the approval line, Nixon wrote: “ I called Trudeau. He agreed to hold up until he talked to team-I informed Alex of the call-I have one reservation-perhaps appointing Packard puts too much military emphasis.” According to Document 369, Nixon called Trudeau on March 17. In the attached March 16 memorandum to Nixon, Rogers also explained the dangers posed to U.S. interests by unilateral Canadian action and outlined in detail the points he would convey to Ambassador Cadieux immediately after Nixon spoke to Trudeau.

369. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to President Nixon

Washington, March 21, 1970.

Johnson summarized the results of meetings held in Ottawa between a team of U.S. government representatives and Canadian officials. He noted that although the Trudeau administration would likely moderate certain aspects of their impending Arctic legislation, domestic political pressures would likely produce a result adverse to U.S. interests.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, March 1969-August 1970 (1 of 2). Confidential. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates the information was included in the President’s Daily Brief for March 21. An additional notation reads: “OBE/D.” On April 1 the Canadian Government proposed legislation to control Arctic pollution, regulate fisheries, and extend territorial waters (External Affairs [Canada], May 1970, pp. 130-131). On April 15 the Department of State lodged a formal protest with Ottawa, noting the potential impingement on U.S. interests and the likelihood of impairment to UN-sponsored sea law negotiations. See Department of State Bulletin, May 11, 1970, pp. 610-611.

370. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, March 26, 1970.

Osgood identified several significant developments that increased the urgency of reaching a decision about U.S. seabed policy.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates a copy was sent to Haig and that he had seen it. Another notation next to the subject line reads, “Re Urgency of Decision.” There is no indication of approval or disapproval of the recommendations.

371. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)

Washington, April 7, 1970.

Osgood assessed the impact on domestic industries of a narrow continental shelf. He presented an alternative interpretation to that espoused by the Department of the Interior.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for information.

372. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, April 8, 1970.

Osgood outlined the possible effects on U.S. commerce of a narrow continental shelf boundary and a proposed international authority for seabed exploitation. He raised several policy questions related to the issue.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Haig and Lord. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it on May 23. Tab A is published as Document 371.

373. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, May 8, 1970.

Kissinger outlined policy alternatives the United States might adopt in international negotiations to determine the extent of national jurisdiction over the continental shelf and the nature of the regime governing seabed use beyond that boundary. Kissinger recommended adopting either the Department of Defense position or the position proposed by Under Secretary of State Richardson.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume II, March 1970-December 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval of the Richardson position on May 20

374. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson)

Washington, May 13, 1970.

Neuman proposed establishing a small consultative group of representatives from selected governments to negotiate Law of the Sea issues confidentially and build support for U.S. positions.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. A copy was sent to Oxman.

375. National Security Decision Memorandum 62

Washington, May 22, 1970.

The President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Kissinger communicated to concerned Executive Branch agencies the decision taken by President Nixon on the principles to be adopted in international negotiations about continental shelf and seabed issues.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret.

376. Statement Issued by President Nixon

Washington, May 23, 1970.

The President proposed that the resources of the deep seabed be exploited as the common heritage of humankind, establishing a 12-mile limit for territorial seas, and a guarantee for free transit through international straits.

Source: Public Papers: Nixon, 1970, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1971), pp. 454-456.

377. Circular Airgram CA-3320 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts

Washington, June 18, 1970, 1305Z.

The Department requested posts to communicate U.S. sea law positions to host governments and solicit responses. The Department also addressed confusion about two parallel, but separate initiatives, one dealing with uses of the seabed, and the other concerning the regime for of the waters above the seabeds.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Confidential. Drafted by Salisbury and Harrison on June 16; cleared by McIntyre, E, S/FW, L, Oxman, and the Departments of Defense and Interior; and approved by Stevenson. Attached but not published were Richardson’s May 27 statement, a Questions and Answers paper, a Factsheet, and Stevenson’s February 18 speech.

378. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, July 25, 1970.

Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Haig warned Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State Robert Brown that the Department of the Interior was attempting to convince the President to revisit NSDM 62. Brown informed Department of State Legal Adviser Stevenson, who indicated his intention to implement NSDM 62.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 3, NSDM 62-5/22/70-Convention on Shelf and Seabeds. Secret. Prepared by Brown. For NSDM 62, see Document 375.

379. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, July 29, 1970.

Stevenson forwarded a draft Law of the Sea treaty prepared by an inter-agency task force.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, General Files on NSC Matters, NSC/Misc-Seabed. No classification indicated. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. For Attachment 1, see Document 376. Attachments 2 and 4 are dated July 29. Attachment 3, August 3, is entitled, “Draft United Nations Convention on the International Seabed Area, Working Paper” and is available as UN Document A/AC.138/25.

380. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Harry Dent of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, August 8, 1970.

Kissinger emphasized the President’s resolve to implement his seabeds decision, briefly explained the rationale behind that decision, and offered opportunities for input to domestic constituencies displeased with the policy.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume II, March 1970-December 1970, (1 of 2). Confidential. Tab A is published as Document 376. For Tab B, Richardson’s statement before the Special Subcommittee on Outer Continental Shelf of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, U.S. Senate, May 27, 1970, see Department of State Bulletin, June 15, 1970, pp. 737-739. George Herbert Walker Bush (R-Texas) was a member of the House of Representatives from 1967-1971.

381. Memorandum From Charles Pittman of the Office of Ocean Affairs, Department of State to the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman)

Washington, August 28, 1970.

Pitman presented an analysis of Latin American attitudes about Law of the Sea matters that highlighted divisions between governments in Central and South America.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OES Files: Lot 75 D 88, Box 1, untitled folder. Confidential. An August 28 cover letter from Neuman to the Law of the Sea Executive Group indicated that this document, prepared by the Law of the Sea Task Force, was circulated to the U.S. delegation to Buenos Aries negotiations and to those dealing with Law of the Sea and seabeds issues at upcoming UN meetings. For the Lima Declaration, see UN Document A/AC.138/28, August 14, 1970. Rogelio Valdivieso Eguiguren was Ecuadorian Minister of Foreign Affairs. Robert McClintock was U.S. Ambassador to Venezuela. Gonzalo Facio Segreda was Costa Rican Minister of Foreign Relations.

382. Airgram CA-5062 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, September 30, 1970, 1102Z.

Acting Secretary of State Irwin issued instructions on sea law matters for the U.S. Delegation to the UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by McIntyre on September 25; cleared by Stevenson, E, IO/UNP, S/FW, and the Departments of Interior and Defense; and approved by Herz. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, the Mission at Geneva, and USNATO.

383. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson)

Washington, October 20, 1970.

Neuman reviewed the range of national interests involved in Law of the Sea negotiations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret.

384. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, December 21, 1970.

Sonnenfeldt explained the circumstances surrounding, and impact of, the Canadian announcement establishing fisheries closing lines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, Volume II, Mar 70-Aug 71. Confidential. Sent for information. In the last two sentences, Kissinger underlined from “seems to” through “committee” and wrote in the margin, “Which one? To what end?” Tab A, not published, is a December 18 memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. For Tab B, see Department of State Bulletin, February 1, 1971, p. 139.

385. Telegram 211200 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

Washington, December 30, 1970, 2355Z.

In anticipation of upcoming NATO consultations on Law of the Sea issues, the Department summarized the relevant resolutions adopted by the 25th UN General Assembly.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Limited Official Use. Drafted on December 28 by Oxman, Salisbury and Francis S. M. Hodsoll (IO/UNP); cleared by Stevenson and Herz, and in S/FW and EUR/RPM; and approved by Hillenbrand. Repeated to USNMR SHAPE and USUN.

386. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 14, 1971.

Sonnenfeldt updated Kissinger on the response by the Law of the Sea Task Force to the Canadian announcement establishing fisheries closing lines.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, Volume II, Mar 70-Aug 71. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is published as Document 384.

387. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Laird

Washington, February 10, 1971.

On behalf of the President, Kissinger directed the Secretary of State to submit, in conjunction with other agencies, options and recommendations for a negotiated settlement to the fisheries dispute with Ecuador.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 283, Agency Files, Department of State, Vol. X, 1 December 1970-15 April 1971. Secret; Limdis. Also sent to Secretary of Defense Laird. Copies were sent to the Secretary of the Interior, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the director of the CIA. Between mid-January and mid-February 1971, Ecuadorian naval vessels seized 18 U.S. fishing boats operating within the 200-mile exclusionary zone claimed by Ecuador. The Ecuadorian government imposed fines in excess of $850,000. On January 18, 1971, the United States government suspended military sales to Ecuador under Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act, which states, “No sales, credits, or guaranties shall be made or extended under the Act to any country during a period of one year after such country seizes, or takes into custody, or fines and American fishing vessel for engaging in fishing more that twelve miles from the coast of that country. The President may waive the provisions of this subsection when he determines it to be important to the security of the United States or he receives reasonable assurances from the country involved that future violations will not occur, and promptly so reports to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate. The provisions of the subsection shall not be applicable in any case governed by any international agreement to which the United States is party.” On February 1, 1971 the government of Ecuador ordered all U.S. military personnel to leave the country. For the response to this document, see Foreign Relations 1969-1976, E-Vol. 10, American Republics, 1969-1972.

388. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense Laird and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, April 9, 1971, 10:57 a.m.

Laird and Kissinger discussed the influence of private interests in Law of the Sea negotiations and Laird’s concerns about national security. “Bill” refers to Secretary of State Rogers, who attended an Organization of American States meeting in San Jose, Costa Rica, from Tuesday, April 13 through Friday, April 16. Brigadier General Robert Pursley was Military Assistant to the Secretary, Department of Defense.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Kissinger Transcripts, Chronological File, Box 9, April 8-14, 1971. No classification.

389. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers

Washington, April 14, 1971.

Stevenson summarized the historical development and current status of the South American fisheries dispute.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Horace F. Shamwell, Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser and Nordquist on April 13 and cleared by Oxman.

390. National Security Study Memorandum 125

Washington, April 21, 1971.

On behalf of the President, Kissinger directed the Law of the Sea Task Force to examine options for accomplishing U.S. ocean policy objectives.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. For NSDM 62, see Document 375. For the President’s statement of May 23, 1970, see Document 376.

391. Memorandum of Conversation

Brasilia, May 11, 1971, 10:00 a.m.

Department of State Legal Adviser Stevenson and other representatives sent by President Nixon met with Brazilian officials to discuss problems associated with Brazil’s claim to a 200-mile limit.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OES Files: Lot 75 D 88, Box 1, LOS Ecuador (January-July) 1971. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Stephen Low on May 17. The meeting was held at the Brazilian Foreign Ministry.

392. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, May 20, 1971.

Kissinger informed Nixon that he was waiting for the response to NSSM 125 before considering recommendations submitted by the Departments of State, Defense, and Commerce concerning South American fisheries disputes.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-183, NSSM Files, NSSM 125 [2 of 3]. Secret. Sent for information. For NSSM 125, see Document 390. Kissinger sent a memorandum the same day to Rogers, Laird, and Stans, indicating that consideration of their recommendations concerning the fisheries disputes would be deferred pending completion of NSSM 125. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, OES/OLP/OCEANS Files: Lot 90 D 180, Box 3, POL 33.14(c), CEP talks on fisheries)

393. Circular Airgram CA-2554 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts

Washington, May 28, 1971, 1104Z.

The Department transmitted a summary and analysis of the March 1971 meeting of the Seabeds Committee, which served as the Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Pitman and McIntyre on May 5; cleared by McKernan, Herz, Oxman, EUR/CAN, ARA/LA/APA, AF/I, EA/RA, and NEA/RA; provided for information to Defense, Interior, and NOAA; and approved by Stevenson.

394. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy, Arnold Nachmanoff, and Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, undated.

Kennedy, Nachmanoff, and Wright outlined alternatives for dealing with Brazilian territorial sea claims and related fisheries problems. They recommended bilateral negotiations, preferably to begin in the autumn but immediately if necessary to avoid a crisis.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. Sent for action. Sent under a May 27 covering note from Nachmanoff to Haig that reads: “The Brazilian Navy is drawing up rules of engagement for June 1 on the fishing regulations which are due to go into effect. This means we must make our approach-if the President approves our recommendation-no later than Monday.” Nachmanoff urged Kissinger to take the issue up with the President the next day. Nachmanoff also noted that the Department of Commerce had just endorsed the Department of State’s position. There is no indication of approval or disapproval by Kissinger, but Document 395 indicates he brought the matter to the attention of the President. In the penultimate sentence of the penultimate paragraph, the correction “negotiations with” is written between “entering into” and “Brazil.” For Tab 1, see Document 397. Tab B is a May 25 memorandum from Rogers to Nixon.

395. Conversation Between President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 29, 1971.

Nixon and Kissinger agreed that the highest priority for U.S. oceans policy should be to secure free navigation on the high seas and through international straits.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Recording of conversation between Nixon and Kissinger, Oval Office, Conversation No. 507-4. No classification marking. The portion of the discussion transcribed was part of a conversation covering a variety of subjects that began at 8:13 a.m. and concluded at 10:32 a.m. The editor transcribed the portion of the conversation printed here specifically for this volume. Assistant to the President H. R. Haldeman was also present at the meeting but did not speak during the portion of the conversation transcribed.

396. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, May 29, 1971.

Kissinger recommended negotiations with the Brazilian Government concerning the fisheries dispute.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. For the text of the NSDM attached at Tab A, see Document 397.

397. National Security Decision Memorandum 111

Washington, May 29, 1971.

President Nixon approved negotiations with the Brazilian Government concerning fisheries issues. He stipulated that discussions should commence in autumn 1971 but could begin sooner if the Brazilian Government insisted.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. A copy was sent to the Secretary of Commerce. Another copy was sent to Haig.

398. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, June 2, 1971.

Kissinger informed Nixon of the Ecuadorian Government’s decision to refrain from seizing U.S. fishing boats in waters claimed by Ecuador. In exchange, Ecuadorian officials indicated that they hoped that U.S. military sales would be reinstated.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret;Exdis. Sent for information. Published from an uninitialed copy. Carlos Mantilla-Ortega was the Ecuadorian Ambassador to the United States.

399. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, June 22, 1971.

Rogers informed Nixon that, in exchange for an Ecuadorian promise to cease seizures of U.S. fishing vessels, the Department of State intended to release loans to Ecuador. Rogers believed those actions would to improve relations with Ecuador and enhance the U.S. position on crucial Law of the Sea provisions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret. Attached was Section 620(o) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (as amended), which reads: “In determining whether or not to furnish assistance under this Act, consideration shall be given to excluding from such assistance any country which hereafter seizes, or imposes any penalty or sanction against, any United States fishing vessel on account of its fishing activities in international waters. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable in any case governed by international agreement to which the United States is a party.” (Ibid.)

400. Analytical Summary Prepared by John Negroponte of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, undated.

The memorandum summarized the report prepared in response to NSSM 125

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [1 of 2]. Top Secret. A draft dated June 22, 1971 is ibid., Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume III, 1971. The summary was prepared to provide information for an upcoming SRG meeting on the topic (see Document 403). The summary drew upon a lengthy study, dated June 26, submitted to Kissinger in his capacity as Chairman of the NSC SRG by Stevenson in his capacity as Chairman of the Interdepartmental Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Group to Prepare a NSSM 125 Study (ibid.)

401. Memorandum From John Hedley of the Office of the Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency to Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, June 29, 1971.

Hedley noted that certain options suggested in NSSM 125 might prove counterproductive and suggested considering long-range changes in technology when calculating national defense requirements.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-55, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125), 7/12/71 [1 of 2]. Top Secret. John H. Hedley was a member of the Office of the Deputy Director for Intelligence.

402. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, July 6, 1971.

Kissinger evaluated the Department of Defense and Department of State views on the fisheries dispute with Brazil, and recommended Nixon defer action on negotiation for an agreement.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-183, NSSM Files, NSSM 125 [3 of 3]. Secret. A stamped notation reads: The President has seen."

403. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting

Washington, July 12, 1971, 4:30-6:45 p.m.

The Senior Review Group met to consider NSSM 125 and to consider how to promote U.S. Oceans policy in international and bilateral negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-112, SRG Minutes, Originals, 1971. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the White HOuse Situation Room. For the attached instrucitons to the U.S. delegation to the UN Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee, see Document 405.

404. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, July 22, 1971.

Kissinger reviewed the positions that might be adopted by the U.S. delegation to the Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee (the Seabed Committee). He recommended accommodating the fisheries interests of other states, a more flexible approach to defining seabed boundaries, and emphasizing the importance of U.S. security interests with other delegations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122. Top Secret. Sent for action. For Tab A as approved, see Document 405. Nixon did not initial the recommendation, but the attached slip indicates that he approved the recommendation on July 22.

405. National Security Decision Memorandum 122

Washington, July 22, 1971.

The President provided guidance for the U.S. delegation to the Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee and issued instructions concerning other aspects of U.S. oceans policy.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122-7/22/71-US Oceans Policy. Top Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The document, as published, incorporates an amended second page that was circulated to all addressees on July 27. Haig initialed the document, indicating that he had seen it.

406. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, August 4, 1971.

Rogers proposed a scenario for ending the suspension of military sales to Ecuador and resuming fishing negotiations with the Ecuadorian and Peruvian Governments.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. For the text of Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act, see the source note to Document 387.

407. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, August 5, 1971.

Nachmanoff explained the importance of resuming fishing negotiations with the Ecuadorian Government, and perhaps with the Peruvian and Chilean Governments, as quickly as possible.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Sent to Kissinger through Haig. Haig’s handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “If no reply in 48 hours approve for President.” Concurred in by Levine, Clift, and Kennedy. Haig initialed for Levine and Clift. The attached memorandum is published as Document 408.

408. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, August 9, 1971.

Kissinger recommended a strategy for resolving the fisheries dispute with Ecuador, and possibly Peru and Chile, while simultaneously advancing U.S. oceans policy in Law of the Sea negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it. Nixon initialed approval of the recommendation on August 11 and wrote, “K inform Connally,” indicating he wished Kissinger to inform Treasury Secretary John B. Connally. Tab A is published as Document 406.

409. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 7, 1971, 10:00 a.m.

The Spanish Ambassador to the United States Arguelles recounted his recent discussion with the Spanish Foreign Minister Lopez Bravo concerning Spain’s straits policy, which was at odds with U.S. policy.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Landau. The conversation was held in Johnson’s office at the Department of State.

410. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon

Washington, October 8, 1971.

Johnson discussed Spanish opposition to the U.S. oceans policy, and attached a draft letter from Nixon to Franco.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret.

411. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, October 8, 1971.

Kissinger summarized an attached memorandum from Secretary of State Rogers to Nixon that discussed recent Law of the Sea negotiations and assessed the prospects for acceptance of U.S. policy preferences.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume III, 1971. Secret. Sent for information. The attached document is not published. Notations on the memorandum and the attachment indicate that Nixon saw them.

412. Memorandum Prepared by the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson)

Washington, undated.

Legal Adviser Stevenson outlined the measures taken to implement U.S. oceans policy at the July-August meeting of the Seabeds Committee, acting as the Preparatory Law of the Sea Committee. Stevenson concluded with proposals for future action.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122. Secret. Sent under an October 14 covering memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. For NSDM 122, see Document 405. A typed notation at the end of the memorandum reads, “This memorandum has been cleared with other agencies as appropriate.” The formal statements of the U.S. delegation at the Seabeds Committee meeting were not annexed but are printed in United States Congress, Senate, Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 92nd Congress, 1st Session, December 1971, Part 1, The Law of the Sea Crisis: A Staff Report on the United Nations Seabed Committee, the Outer Continental Shelf and Marine Mineral Development (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1972). The Department sent a summary report containing similar information as circular telegram CA-4763 to all diplomatic posts on October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8)

413. Telegram 4815 From the Embassy in Spain to the Department of State

Madrid, October 22, 1971, 1205Z.

Ambassador Hill described his conversation with General Franco after handing him President Nixon’s letter.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

414. Telegram 194015 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain

Washington, October 22, 1971, 1629Z.

The Department forwarded background information about the U.S. Law of the Sea position for Ambassador Hill to use in deliberations with Spanish officials.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Cleared with L/OA, EUR/SPP, S/S, and the White House. Approved by Stevenson.

415. Telegram 3859 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, October 26, 1971, 2230Z.

U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Bush reported continued Spanish opposition to the U.S. position on international straits.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Madrid and Defense. Sent with a request to pass to the Office of Ocean Affairs in the Department of Defense.

416. National Security Decision Memorandum 139

Washington, November 5, 1971.

The President directed the Departments of State, Defense, and Commerce to pursue negotiations with the Chilean, Ecuadorian, and Peruvian Governments to resolve the fisheries dispute without conceding the U.S. position on crucial Law of the Sea issues.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 97-144. Secret. Copies were sent to the Departments of Interior and Transportation, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the JCS, and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The Ad Hoc Group Report, authored by Stevenson, outlined scenarios and negotiating positions for dealing with South American fisheries disputes. Accompanying memorandum communicated the views of the Department of State concerning the various options proposed and recommended an interim licensing arrangement. Both are attached to an October 6 memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. (Ibid., RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122, 7/22/71-U.S. Oceans Policy) A joint October 4 memorandum from the Departments of Defense and Commerce favored the status quo as long as South American governments made statements regarding freedom of navigation and free transit that did not contravene the U.S. position. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122)

417. Telegram 224617 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain

Washington, December 14, 1971, 2022Z.

The Department transmitted the text of General Franco’s reply to President Nixon on the international straits issue.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Towell; cleared with L/OA, and in substance with the White House; and approved by Deputy Assistant Secretary Russell Fessenden (EUR). Repeated to Quito for Stevenson.

418. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, January 2, 1972.

Kissinger provided an update on fisheries dispute with Ecuador, Peru, and Chile. He recommended a compromise with the Ecuadorian Government that would not prejudice the U.S. position on issues vital to national security.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-229, NSDM Files, NSDM 139. Secret. Sent for action. There is no indication on the memorandum of Nixon’s approval or disapproval of the recommendation, but Tab A, published as Document 419, issued instructions that follow the recommendations advanced in this memorandum. Tab B is a December 24 memorandum to Kissinger from Irwin, in which he recommended a compromise with Ecuador that is encapsulated in NSDM 147 (Ibid.). At Tab C is an undated draft of proposed amendments to the Fisherman’s Protective Act. Tabs B and C are not published.

419. National Security Decision Memorandum 147

Washington, January 4, 1972.

The President approved submission to Congress of an amendment to the Fishermen’s Protective Act and issued instructions for further negotiations with the Ecuadorian Government.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. A note attached to a January 6 copy of this NSDM, which was addressed by McIntyre apparently to Samuel De Palma, reads: “Sam: Meyer, Stevenson and McKernan feel the emphasis placed on Ecuador’s straits position is wrong and are trying to get greater negotiating flexibility from the White House.” (Department of State Files, OES/OLP/OCEANS Files: Lot 90 D 180, Box 3, POL 33.14(c), CEP talks on fisheries).

420. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 6, 1972.

Irwin recommended against requiring the Ecuadorian Government to support the U.S. position on freedom of transit through international straits as a quid pro quo for ending the ban on foreign military sales.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 147-1/4/72-Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru, and Chile. Secret. Drafted by Irwin and Stevenson and concurred in by Meyer and McKernan.

421. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, January 8, 1972.

The Department specified the reasons for accommodation with the Peruvian Government in order to reduce tensions over the fisheries dispute.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-FISH US. Secret. Drafted in ARA/EP by R. L. Ridgway and cleared in ARA/EP by Deputy Director Richard F. Weber, and Executive Assistant B. Scott Custer, Jr., (U), in substance by McKernan, and in draft by Deputy Assistant Secretary John H. Crimmins (ARA) and Stevenson. Copies were sent to Carter (Defense) and Johnson (NOAA).

422. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, Secretary of Defense Laird, and Secretary of Commerce Stans

Washington, January 14, 1972.

Kissinger informed Rogers, Laird, and Stans that President Nixon approved renewal of Foreign Military Sales to Peru.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-FISH US. Secret.

423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, February 22, 1972.

In preparation for the February-March 1972 session of the UN Seabeds Committee, Stevenson forwarded a report that recommended amendments to the U.S. negotiating positions indicated in NSDM 62 and NSDM 122.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122-7/22/71-US Oceans Policy. Unclassified. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. On March 1 Eliot sent a memorandum to Kissinger indicating that the Departments of State, Defense, Commerce, and Interior had cleared the report. (Ibid.) For NSDM 62, see Document 375. For NSDM 122, see Document 405.

424. National Security Decision Memorandum 157

Washington, March 13, 1972.

The President approved instructions for the U.S. delegation to the preparatory meeting for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference and requested a report to guide the development of subsequent negotiating positions.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

425. Letter From Spanish Chief of State Franco to President Nixon

Madrid, March 15, 1972.

Franco communicated Spanish objections to a section concerning free passage through straits in Nixon’s February 9, 1972, foreign policy report to Congress.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL SP-US. No classification indicated. Published from a copy that bears Franco’s typed signature. The letter was received in the Department of State and forwarded to Kissinger for the President by Eliot under a March 24 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) Nixon’s Report to Congress, “U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: The Emerging Structure of Peace” is published in the Department of State Bulletin, pp. 314-418. See pp. 409-411 for the section that refers to ocean policy.

426. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon

Washington, March 24, 1972.

Haig reported that fisheries negotiations with the Brazilian Government had produced an acceptable draft agreement. The pact enabled both parties to reserve their juridical positions until commencement of the Law of the Sea conference in 1973.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 772, Country Files, Latin America, Brazil, Vol. III, 8/1/71-12/72. Confidential. Sent for information. Irwin signed the attached memorandum for Rogers.

427. Circular Airgram A-4339 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts

Washington, May 1, 1972, 1028Z.

The Department updated posts about Law of the Sea negotiations, instructed posts to promote U.S. positions with host governments, and requested information about host government attitudes.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Limited Official Use. Repeated to USNATO, Geneva, OECD, and USUN, CINCPAC for POLAD, and CINCEUR for POLAD. Drafted by McIntyre and Otto Eskin (IO/UNP) on April 28; cleared in draft in IO, EUR/CAN, NEA/RA, AF, L/OA, S/FW, ARA, EA/RA, Defense, Commerce, NOAA, and Interior; and approved by Stevenson.

428. Memorandum From Ashley Hewitt of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 22, 1972.

Hewitt informed Kissinger about the Department of State strategy for negotiating the fisheries dispute with Ecuador.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 793, Country Files, Latin America, Peru, Vol. III, 1/72-12/31/73. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is attached but not published.

429. Memorandum From Denis Clift and Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, May 25, 1972.

Clift and Levine summarized the position of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Defense Department concerning free transit through and over international straits.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 383, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume IV, 1972, (3 of 3). Top Secret. Sent for information. The memorandum indicated that it was from Sonnenfeldt as well, but only Clift and Levine initialed it. Tab B is UN Document A/AC.138/SC.II/L.4 (July 30, 1971). The appendices cited in Tab A were not attached.

430. Circular Telegram 96469 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts

Washington, June 1, 1972, 1716Z.

The Department outlined U.S. interim policy concerning seabed uses and requested responses from certain governments.

Source: Department of State Files, OES/OA/MLP Files: Lot 92 D 208, Classified (interim policy documents), Santo Domingo Declaration. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Oxman, McIntyre, and Ratiner (Interior); cleared in draft with EA/RA, EUR/CAN, S/FW, IO, DOD/ISA, and NOAA; and approved by Stevenson. Sent priority to Bonn, Brussels, Canberra, Copenhagen, the Hague, London, Moscow, Oslo, Paris, Reykjavik, Rome, Tokyo, Valletta, Vienna, and Wellington. Sent by pouch to all other diplomatic posts.

431. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 1, 1972.

Eliot forwarded Legal Adviser Stevenson’s report on the February-March 1972 meeting of the U.N. Seabeds Committee, including information about concurrent bilateral discussions held with other delegations.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 338. Confidential. Robert T. Curran signed for Eliot.

432. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 9, 1972.

The memorandum summarized Legal Adviser Stevenson’s report on the February-March 1972 U.N. Seabeds Committee meeting.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 383, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume IV, 1972 (3 of 3). Confidential. Sent for information. For Tab A, see Document 431.

433. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, June 20, 1972.

The memorandum summarized a lengthy report and accompanying instructions prepared for the U.S. delegation to the July-August 1972 preparatory meeting for the Law of the Sea Conference.

Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret. Attached but not published is Attachment 1-Response to NSDM 157-consisting of 70 pages of detailed recommendations for the U.S. delegation to the July-August 1972 Seabeds Committee meeting. For Attachment 2, see Document 431.

434. National Security Decision Memorandum 177

Washington, July 18, 1972.

The President amended the instructions for the U.S. delegation to the July-August meeting of the UN Seabeds Committee (acting as the Preparatory Committee for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference). He amplified the importance of gaining international support for U.S. positions on exploitation of marine resources, determining territorial sea boundaries, and free transit in international straits.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Decision Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Transportation and the Director of Central Intelligence. Section A, Recommendation 3 of the June 20 report (see Document 433) stated: “Propose that the LOS treaty provide that state aircraft, exercising the right of free transit provided for in the U.S. straits proposal, (a) will respect International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards, recommended practices and procedures as they apply to civil aircraft over the high seas, provided that they shall not be required to do so in special circumstances of operational necessity, and (b) will at all times operate with due regard for the safety of navigation of civil aircraft.

435. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon

Washington, August 15, 1972.

Haig recommended accepting a compromise on the question of international straits at the July-August UN Seabeds Committee meeting. Nixon approved the recommendation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-235, NSDM Files, NSDM 177 [1 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon indicated his approval of the position taken by the Departments of State, Commerce, and Interior. Tab A, an August 14 memorandum from Irwin to Nixon, outlined in more detail the issues summarized by Haig. (Ibid.) Kissinger communicated the President’s decision to the Secretaries of State, Commerce, and Interior in an August 15 memorandum. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8)

436. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Irwin to President Nixon

Washington, August 29, 1972.

Irwin proposed a scenario for breaking the deadlocked fisheries dispute with Ecuador while protecting the U.S. position on key Law of the Sea principles.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential. The attachment was not found.

437. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to President Nixon

Washington, September 15, 1972.

Laird registered Department of Defense concerns about the scenario for resolving the Ecuadorian fisheries dispute proposed by the Department of State.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential.

438. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, September 29, 1972.

In response to NSDM 177, Stevenson forwarded recommended instructions on law of the sea matters for the U.S. delegation to the 27th UN General Assembly. He also forwarded a report on the July-August meeting of the UN Seabeds Committee.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Only the summary of the lengthy report on the July-August UN Seabeds Committee meeting, sent to the Department and all diplomatic posts on August 18 as telegram 3844 from Geneva, is published. The full text of telegram 3844 is ibid.

439. Memorandum From Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)

Washington, October 19, 1972.

In preparation for the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea scheduled to commence in 1973, Sonnenfeldt and Clift reviewed timing, location, and representation issues that required consideration by President Nixon.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent to Kissinger through Haig. Concurred in by Kennedy. The memorandum indicated that it was also from Sonnenfeldt, but only Clift initialed it. For Tab A, see Document 441. For Tab B, see Document 438. Tab C includes brief letters indicating concurrence in the report and recommendations: from the Department of State, Eliot to Kissinger, October 13, from the Defense Department, Laird to Kissinger, October 20, from the Commerce Department, Pollock to Kissinger, October 11, and from the Interior Department, Morton to Kissinger, October 12.

440. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, October 24, 1972.

Kissinger informed Nixon of a proposed scenario for resolving the fisheries dispute with Ecuador. Nixon approved lifting the suspension on Foreign Military Sales and a flat fee payment in exchange for informal assurances that the Ecuadorian Government would refrain from seizing U.S. fishing vessels within 200 miles of the Ecuadorian coast.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon initialed approval of both recommendations. Tab A is published as Document 436. Tab B is published as Document 437. At Tab C was a September 22 memorandum from Office of Management and Budget Director Caspar W. Weinberger to Nixon. At Tab I was Presidential Determination 73-4, issued on October 27, which directed Rogers to inform Congress of the waiver but retained its classified status for national security reasons. (Ibid.) Tab II is published as Document 442.

441. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon

Washington, October 26, 1972.

Kissinger recommended that Nixon approve a NSDM dealing with questions arising from preparations for the 1973 UN Law of the Sea Conference. Nixon approved the recommendation.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon initialed his approval. For Tab A, see Document 443.

442. National Security Decision Memorandum 194

Washington, October 27, 1972.

In an attempt to resolve the Ecuadorian fisheries dispute, while safeguarding U.S. oceans policy, the President authorized a resumption of military sales to Ecuador and approved bilateral negotiations.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Decision Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Confidential. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

443. National Security Decision Memorandum 196

Washington, October 31, 1972.

The President approved instructions for the U.S. delegation to the UN General Assembly regarding the timing, location, and program of work for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Transportation and the Director of Central Intelligence. The General Assembly adopted a resolution on December 18 that provided for an organizational session of UNCLOS III in November-December 1973 and a substantive session in April-May 1974. The resolution expressed the expectation that subsequent sessions of UNCLOS III would convene until an agreement was concluded. The General Assembly also called for an accelerated work schedule for the Seabed Committee during 1973 (UN Document A/RES/3209(XXVII))

444. Airgram A-12376 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 23, 1972, 0826Z.

The Department informed concerned posts of private consultations between the governments most interested in deep seabed exploitation.

Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Oxman on December 21; cleared with IO/UNP, EA/RA, EUR/CAN, EUR/GER, EUR/SOV, and L/OA; and approved by Stevenson. Also sent to Moscow, Paris, Tokyo, USUN, and Geneva. Repeated to Bonn. The enclosure entitled “Comparison and Analysis of Seabeds Regime and Machinery Proposals,” summarized and assessed ideas for organization and operation of an international deep seabed exploitation agency.

332. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to Secretary of State Rusk 332. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, January 6, 1969.

Dear Dean:

In response to an inquiry from Len Meeker about a year ago, we have had the security implications of the continental shelf question under intensive review. It now appears that the thrust of international affairs as well as the terms of the 1958 Geneva Convention will require a review of the U.S. position on the outer limit of the continental shelf in the very near future. Therefore, it appears timely to send you the Department of Defense view of this subject, developed in coordination with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Briefly, our view is the following. First, a continental shelf regime limited to the 200 meter isobath would be the most compatible with our national security interests. Second, if some alternative is required, we would prefer some limit [less than 1 line not declassified]. Third, no continental shelf regime [less than 1 line not declassified] should be considered. Fourth, regardless of where the outer limit of the continental shelf is fixed, there must be a clear reaffirmation of the continued freedom of the superjacent waters and air space beyond the limit of the territorial sea.

The interests of the United States would be best served if the territorial seas and straits questions were settled before any international agreement is reached on defining the outer limit of the continental shelf.

Attached is a short paper which sets forth the principal concerns which have influenced our views.

Sincerely,

Paul

Enclosure

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE VIEW ON THE CONTINENTAL SHELF AND ISSUES

The protection of U.S. national security requires that, to the extent it is possible to do so, large areas of sea and air space be preserved free for military uses. In order to maintain the highest possible degree of flexibility for military activities the DOD has traditionally opposed the extension of national sovereignty beyond the three-mile territorial sea and the superjacent air space. However, the U.S. position with respect to maximum freedom to use the sea and air space has been eroded to the point where, at this moment, [1 line not declassifed].

Decisions which caused this erosion (e.g., in Indonesia, Peru, Ecuador, the Soviet Union, Communist China, and elsewhere) may appear, in any given case, to have been the exercise of practical and intelligent options. Unfortunately, in the aggregate and over time, these decisions have worked a change in international law to the detriment of our national security. It would appear that to a great extent, this erosion was made possible by our failure to provide sufficiently visible manifestations of the assertion of our legal rights following the failure of the Geneva Law of the Sea Convention to agree on a territorial sea limit eleven years ago. The U.S. is just now beginning to experience the full impact of that failure.

Nor is the DOD any longer able to take comfort in the assurance, such as that given when the United States established a special jurisdictional zone claiming exclusive fishing jurisdiction, that zones of limited jurisdiction will remain limited in character. It appears that this can only hold true when (1) the zone of limited jurisdiction fully accomplishes the purpose for which it was established (i.e.: is not a compromise zone with competitory interests laboring to alter its character) and (2) the zone is established multilaterally with clear and precise protections for those interests which we do not want subjected to national or international jurisdiction.

The process of erosion which the U.S. has suffered with respect to the regime of law applicable to territorial seas very probably would not have occurred if the world had agreed on a territorial sea limit adequate to the economic and defense needs of most states and, in addition, had agreed positively to a regime of continued freedom of the seas for all other activities. It follows therefore that, in the absence of a relatively universal agreement on a single territorial sea limit and on freedom of transit through and over straits, the DOD position on the continental shelf issues must, of necessity, be influenced by the possibility of collateral effects on the superjacent waters and air space.

With respect to the seabeds and deep ocean floor beyond national jurisdiction the Department of Defense has agreed to the U.S. proposing that the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee be asked to take up the question of arms control on the seabed with a view to defining those factors vital to a workable, verifiable and effective international agreement which would prevent the use of this new environment for the emplacement of weapons of mass destruction. Such a study would not place the U.S. national security in undue jeopardy. However, a general prohibition against military activities on the seabed and ocean floor beyond the outer boundary of the continental shelf would make necessary and mandatory a thorough re-evaluation, from a national defense standpoint, of the most favorable shelf outer boundary. Assuming that no such general prohibition against military activity is agreed to, it is possible to state the Department of Defense views on the continental shelf.

From a national security point of view no particular defense requirements are foreseen which would cause this Department to urge broadening the continental shelf beyond the narrowest possible limit, in this case the 200 meter depth curve. Moreover, it is considered that under the existing circumstances any extension of the continental shelf beyond a 200 meter limit could degrade the U.S. national security. Under present international pressures, for example, a wider continental shelf can only give rise to claims which will have the effect of placing larger areas of the ocean bottom under national sovereignty, thereby subjecting our seabed activities to coastal state control. This can be expected to result in larger areas of the superjacent waters eventually being placed under increasing coastal state control. As was pointed out above, this problem would be reduced in severity if international agreement on limits of territorial waters and the freedom of transit through and over straits were to be achieved.

Although the Department of Defense would prefer the 200 meter line and considers it to be the most desirable outer limit, if overriding considerations require that a compromise position be offered, it is felt that a limit [less than 1 line not declassified] coupled with reaffirmation of the principle of freedom of the high seas in superjacent waters and air space, would not have excessively degrading effects on national security. However, if other U.S. government departments and users propose limits to the continental shelf beyond the 200 meter depth curve they should be asked to demonstrate that these overriding interests and activities will generate real values which would be unobtainable to the nation without some wider limit.

[2 lines not not declassified] will be in serious jeopardy under any conceivable regime in which control is exercised by a nation, state or international organization no matter how limited the purpose of that control. For technical reasons [2 lines not declassified].

Some legal regimes can be suggested which would create less interference with this defensive system than others. Nonetheless, from a Department of Defense standpoint, it is much more important for the Department of State to be aware that, unless a decision is made to forego this defensive system, it would not be possible for this Department to recommend that the United States encourage, sign or ratify a treaty which could have the effect of degrading this system. It does not appear that it will be adequate to have appropriate language included in the travaux preparatories nor to rely on complex constructions placed on existing treaties for the protection of the U.S. right to install and use this system. If the continental shelf limit were to be extended [less than 1 line not declassified] the national security interests would require that the U.S. obtain substantially worldwide agreement that no state may impair the freedom of military use of its continental shelf by foreign nations. Such a widespread agreement appears highly unlikely. Therefore, the United States should forego any consideration of a continental shelf limit beyond the [less than 1 line not declassified].

A variety of regimes for the seabed and deep ocean floor have been suggested in both the international and interagency communities. These involve schemes for the exercise of sovereignty out to 2500 meters or, at the other extreme, plans for international ownership of the ocean bottoms up to the boundary of continental shelf jurisdiction. This Department cannot evaluate which, if any, of these regimes would be in the acceptable group in advance of knowing their details. It is obvious, however, that regimes affording the least jurisdiction and control would be the most compatible with the U.S. national security interest.

To the extent that United States deliberations on a legal regime for the seabed and deep ocean floor involve considerations of jurisdictional control beyond [less than 1 line not declassified] that control must be carefully circumscribed so as to make impossible any construction which would permit interference with the high seas character of the superjacent waters and air space, or with military uses of the seabed. This, of course, refers only to those military uses which are consistent with an arms control agreement, if and when such an agreement comes into being. It is also recognized that such military uses could not unreasonably interfere with other lawful activities.

It is therefore concluded that, first, a continental shelf regime limited to the 200 meter isobath is the most preferable from the DOD point of view. Second, if some alternative is required, Defense would prefer some limit between [less than 1 line not declassified]. Third, no continental shelf regime [less than 1 line not declassified] should be considered. Fourth, regardless of where the outer limit of the continental shelf is fixed, there must be a clear reaffirmation of the continued freedom of the superjacent waters and air space beyond the limit of the territorial sea.

It is considered that the establishment of a boundary governing the extent of jurisdiction of coastal states on exploration and exploitation of resources of the continental shelf, before an agreement is reached on the limits of territorial seas and on guaranteed passage through and over international straits, would adversely affect the interests of the United States. Other nations would tend to accept this “first agreed boundary” as a boundary for full national sovereignty. Since this would place serious restrictions on military operations, the Department of Defense believes that the territorial seas and straits questions should be settled before any agreement is reached on defining the outer limit of the continental shelf. This does not preclude simultaneous consideration of both questions.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-5. Secret.

333. Circular Airgram CA-406 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts 333. Circular Airgram CA-406 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1

Washington, January 23, 1969, 1025Z.

Subject:

Law of the Sea Talks with the Soviet Union

Ref:

CA-9870

1. On December 16, 17 and 18, the U.S. and the Soviet Union held a second round of expert level talks concerning the possibility of a new Law of the Sea Conference; this second round was held in response to Soviet initiative coupled with a suggestion that they would unilaterally proceed with a worldwide congress if we did not agree to a second round. The first round in July was reported in CA 9870. Attached are three draft articles produced by these talks. At this second round the Soviets informed us of their agreement to Articles I and II, agreed ad referendum in July, and that they agreed with us that a provision recognizing some special fisheries rights for coastal states beyond 12 miles would be important in securing the adherence of enough countries around the world to make possible a meaningful treaty establishing the 12-mile limit and clear rights of passage through and over international straits. At the December talks agreement was reached, ad referendum, on a fisheries article which recognizes limited, carefully defined preferential rights for a coastal state beyond the 12-mile territorial sea or fishery zone. We expect to learn the Soviet Government’s reaction to Article III in the near future. If the Soviets wish to raise questions with us a about Article III, they will ask the U.S. for a third round of consultations, probably to occur in Moscow at an early date.

The following are clarifying points concerning Article III;

a. Paragraph A provides that before a coastal state can unilaterally apply the measures provided for in paragraphs B, C, and D, it must first try (for six months) to negotiate them with other interested states.

b. Paragraph B is a conservation provision which restates Article 7 of the 1958 Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas.

c. Paragraph C provides that a coastal state may adopt measures to reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of a particular stock of fish if it has undertaken substantial investment for the reproduction of this stock (e.g. through the establishment of hatcheries).

d. Paragraph D provides that a coastal state may reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of a particular stock of fish where harvest of that stock has substantial importance to the economy of a coastal state or a region thereof. The measures adopted by the coastal state to this end will be effective only in the zone of activity of coastal fishing vessels, based exclusively in ports of the coastal state, of such a size and character that they cannot be relocated to other areas of the high seas (i.e. they cannot engage in distant water fishing). The only exception to this limitation on the zone of application of such measures is that the coastal state may enforce catch limitations beyond this zone if this is necessary to assure that the coastal state fishing vessels can continue to catch the reserved portion of the stock of fish within the zone of activity referred to earlier. These catch limitations can be effective only in an area which is “in the vicinity of and adjacent to” the coastal state 12-mile limit.

e. All coastal state measures adopted pursuant to paragraphs B, C. and D must satisfy the specific criteria referred to in the numbered subparagraphs of these respective paragraphs in order to be effective against third states. If there is a dispute as to whether these criteria are met, it is to be resolved pursuant to paragraph F, referred to below.

f. Paragraph E makes it clear that beyond the 12-mile limit established by Article I, all states may fish, on an equal basis, for all stocks of fish, or other living marine resources, which are not subject to coastal state regulations under paragraphs B, C, or D and may also fish for that portion of a regulated stock of fish which is not reserved to the coastal state under paragraphs C or D.

g. Article III also contains a settlement of disputes provision (paragraph F) which is cast in two alternative forms: One provides for a binding decision; the other provides for findings of fact and recommendations which are advisory in character. If the latter form is adopted and the parties refuse to accept the Commission’s findings and recommendations, the Article is silent regarding the continued effectiveness of unilaterally adopted coastal state measures. We told the Soviets we could accept either approach. They said Moscow had not made up its mind which it preferred, but would reach a decision on this issue soon.

3. FYI. Paragraph D of Article III is likely to be paragraph which causes greatest concern to countries with distant water fishing interests. When explaining this article embassies should emphasize the limitations placed upon coastal state rights recognized in this paragraph. The most important limitations from point of view of distant water fishing state are: a. That measures taken by the coastal state may “not prevent other states from fishing for that part, if any, of the allowable catch (of the stock subject to the coastal state’s measures) traditionally taken by them”; (paragraph D.3) (any distant water state can compete for the total catch of all such states) and

b. That the part of the allowable catch reserved by the coastal state’s measures cannot be “more than can be justified” by the economic interest upon which the measures are based (paragraph D.2)—i.e. the coastal state cannot reserve a greater portion of “a particular stock of fish” than that portion whose harvest has “substantial importance for the economy” of the coastal state or a region of the coastal state. It should also be pointed out that under paragraph D.3.1 the coastal state has the burden of establishing that its measures are “based on appropriate scientific findings.” END FYI

4. CA-9870 requested U.S. Mission NATO to brief all members of NAC concerning Articles I and II. Because of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia this briefing was not given. Detailed discussions have not been held in any NATO capitals; nor were they held with the Japanese either in Washington or Tokyo prior to December meeting. The British, Canadians, and Australians have been informed in Washington of the most recent Soviet talks and have been given copies of Articles I, II, and III. Our records reveal that in addition to these three only Reykjavik was advised of the first two articles. Further discussions with the U.K., Australia and Canada are being arranged with embassies in Washington. We held discussions January 15 with Sir Kenneth Bailey of Australia, at their request; they will respond further shortly. Detailed talks were held at the Department with Mr. Elliot of British Embassy and Henry Darwin of U.K.U.N. January 16. These talks will be reported in a separate memo of conversation, Canadian Embassy has informed us they will have detailed comments shortly.

5. Articles I and II are highly satisfactory to the U.S. Government, Article III was negotiated ad referendum. We desire to press ahead as soon as possible to determine the general acceptability of this package as the basis for a successful conference held to adopt these articles. We would hope such a conference could be held not later than early 1970. To this end we may wish to secure action by the General Assembly at its 24th session next year; this would require submission of an agenda item not later than July 1969.

6. Before conveying our acceptance of Article III to the Soviets, however, and before proceeding with a general canvass on the basis of Articles I, II, and III, we desire to consult with the host governments of action addressees of this airgram to determine whether they would find this package an acceptable basis for a conference. FYI Several of our Allies will view this matter (particularly Article III) as extremely important. We want to ensure that we clearly understand the significance of the Articles to our Allies, and we wish to take their views into account in reaching decisions on proceeding with a Law of the Sea Conference. We do not wish to give them the impression that Article Ill, or other Articles for that matter, are faits accompli. On the other hand, we do wish to convey our impression that the current draft Articles hold promise for agreement in this important area and that this promise might be jeopardized by a fisheries article more protective of distant water fishing interests. In striking this delicate balance, addressees may find the history of the talks in CA-9870 helpful. END FYI.

7. Action addressees, at an appropriately high level, should give copies of Articles I, II, and III to appropriate, high level, host government foreign office officials; brief them on the basis of materials herein and in CA-9870; and request their early comments on these articles and a projected law of the sea conference to be held for the purpose of adopting them. We will supply additional information, as requested and as necessary, prior to these consultations. Detailed questions, or other questions not answered by these materials, should be referred to Washington for answer. As appropriate, in the discretion of embassies, foreign officials can be invited to come to Washington to discuss this matter. It would be desirable to have responses in Washington as soon as possible, and no later than the end of February.

FOR USNATO - You should advise NAC of approaches being made in capitals per paragraph 7 and take opportunity give NATO Dels draft Articles I, II and III and to provide them now with background on historical development of draft Articles as set forth above and in CA-9870. You should advise NAC that December 1968 round of expert-level talks with Soviets had originally been scheduled for September, but was cancelled by US after Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia. The talks were resumed in December at Soviet initiative and produced tentative agreement on draft Articles I and II as well as ad referendum agreement on Article III as cited above. You should point out that Articles I and II are of security interest to Alliance and that we are discussing them bilaterally in context approach made in NATO capitals concerning all three articles. You should explain that the three articles must be discussed as a package and that fisheries matter more suitable for discussion by appropriate experts in capitals. FYI We desire to avoid, discussion of different parts of the package in different forums because too many time consuming, and possibly confusing, lines of communication would thereby be established. END FYI

FOR TOKYO: We briefly discussed these articles with Japanese Embassy January 17. Copy of memo given them is enclosed for Embassy’s background.

FOR LONDON: Department has already commenced discussions with British. Embassy should inform FONOFF we undertaking to brief NAC and hold consultations at addressee capitals.

Rogers

Enclosure

CONVENTION ON THE BREADTH OF THE TERRITORIAL SEA

Article I

A) Each state shall have the right, subject to the provisions of Article II, to establish the breadth of its territorial sea within limits of no more than 12 nautical miles, measured in accordance with the provisions of the 1958 Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone.

B) In instances where the breadth of the territorial sea of a state is less than 12 nautical miles, such state may establish a fisheries zone contiguous to its territorial sea provided, however, that the total. breadth of the territorial sea and fisheries zone shall not exceed 12 nautical miles. Such state may exercise within such a zone the same rights in respect to fisheries as it has in its territorial sea.

Article II

A) In order to safeguard more fully freedom of passage through straits used for international navigation between one part of the high seas and another, part of the high seas or the territorial sea of a foreign state, the territorial sea in such straits shall be delimited in such a way as always to provide a corridor of high seas suitable for transit by all ships and aircraft. In the case of straits where particular channels of navigation are customarily employed by ships in transit, the high seas corridor, so far as ships are concerned, shell include such channels.

B) The provisions of this Article shall not affect the legal status of particular straits the passage through which is regulated by existing international agreements specifically relating to those straits.

NEW YORK December 20, 1968

ARTICLE III

A. All questions concerning fishery problems in any area of the high seas. adjacent to the territorial sea or fishery zone of a coastal state should be resolved between that state and other interested states by means of negotiations, taking into account the interests of the coastal fishery and the distant water fishery. In the event that such negotiations do not lead to agreement within six months, the coastal state may adopt measures as provided in paragraphs B, C and D below.

B. A coastal state may, with a view to the maintenance of the productivity of the living resources of the sea, adopt unilateral measures of conservation with respect to any stock of fish or other living marine resources in any area of the high seas adjacent to its terrirorial sea or fishery zone. Those measures shall be valid with respect to all states only if the following requirements are fulfilled: 1. There is a need for urgent application of conservation measures in the light of the existing knowledge of the fishery;

2. The measures adopted are based on appropriate scientific findings; and

3. Such measures do not discriminate in form or in fact against foreign fishermen.

C. In cases where a coastal state undertakes substantial investment for the reproduction of a stock of fish it may adopt measures to reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of this stock. These measures shall be valid with respect to all states only if the following requirements are fulfilled: 1. The measures adopted are based on appropriate scientific findings;

2. The part of the allowable catch reserved is not more than can be justified by the investment referred to above;

3. Such measures do not prevent other states from fishing for that part, if any, of the allowable catch traditionally taken by them; and

4. Such measures do not discriminate in form or in fact between foreign fishermen.

D. In cases where the harvest of a particular stock of fish has substantial importance for the economy of a coastal state, or a region thereof, such state may adopt measures to reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of this stock in the zone of activity of coastal fishing vessels of such a size and character that they cannot be relocated to other areas of the high seas and are based exclusively in ports along the coast of this state. These measures shall be valid with respect to all states only if the following requirements are fulfilled: 1. The measures adopted are based on appropriate scientific findings;

2. The part of the allowable catch reserved is not more than can be justified by the economic interest referred to above;

3. Such measures do not prevent other states from fishing for that part, if any, of the allowable catch traditionally taken by them; and

4. Such measures do not discriminate in form or in fact between foreign fishermen.

Subject to requirements (1) and (4) above, a coastal state may institute catch limitations in the vicinity of and adjacent to its territorial sea or fishery zone for a stock of fish having substantial importance for the economy of the coastal state, or a region thereof, if such limitations are necessary to give effect to that state’s rights under this paragraph.

E. All states may fish, on an equal basis, for that part of the allowable catch of the stock not reserved to the coastal state under paragraphs C and D above as well as for other stocks of living Marina resources, taking due account of the necessity for maintaining the catches at a maximum sustainable level.

F. Any dispute which may arise between states under this article shall, at the request of any of the parties, be submitted to a special Commission of five members, unless the parties agree to seek a solution by another method of peaceful settlement. as provided for in Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. The commission shall proceed in accord with the following provisions: 1. The members of the commission, one of whom shall be designated as chairman, shall be named by agreement between the states in dispute within three months of the request for settlement in accordance with the provisions of this article. Failing agreement they shall, upon the request of any state party, be named by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, within a further three-month period, in consultation with the states in dispute and with the President of the International Court of Justice and the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, from amongst well-qualified persons being nationals of states not involved in the dispute and specializing in legal, administrative or scientific questions relating to fisheries, depending upon the nature of the dispute to be settled. Any vacancy arising after the original appointment shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the initial selection.

2. Any state party to proceedings under these articles shall have the right to name one of its nationals to the special commission, with the right to participate fully in the proceedings on the same footing as a member of the commission but without the right to vote or to take part in the writing of the commission’s decision.

3. The commission shall determine its own procedure, assuring each party to the proceedings a full opportunity to be heard and to present its case. It shall also determine how the costs and expenses shall be divided between the parties to the dispute, failing agreement by the parties on this matter.

4. The special commission shall apply the criteria listed in paragraphs B, C and D, as relevant, to disputes arising under this article.

5. The special commission may decide that pending its award the measures in dispute shall not be applied.

6. The special commission shall render its decision, which shall be binding upon the parties, within a period of five months from the time it is appointed unless it decides, in case of necessity, to extend the time limit for a period not exceeding three months.

[6. The special commission shall submit to the parties its findings of fact and recommendations regarding the validity of measures adopted pursuant to this article within a period of five months from the time it is appointed unless it decides, in case of necessity, to extend the time for a period not exceeding three months.]

7. The special commission shall, in reaching its decisions [findings of fact and recommendations], adhere to these articles and to any special agreements between the disputing parties regarding settlement of the dispute.

8. Decisions of the commission shall be by majority vote.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Carter on January 17; cleared by McKernan, Springsteen, EA/J, Interior, and Defense; and approved by Meeker. Sent to Ankara, Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, London, Luxembourg, Madrid, Oslo, Paris, Reykjavik, Rome, Tokyo, and USNATO. Repeated to Canberra, Moscow, Ottawa, and USUN. The first two articles of the enclosed convention, negotiated ad referendum by U.S. and Soviet representatives in July 1968, are undated. The third article is dated December 20, 1968. No drafting information appears on the draft convention. The memorandum of discussion with the Japanese Embassy was not found attached.

334. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Belman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 334. Memorandum From the Deputy Legal Adviser (Belman) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, March 18, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea: NATO Consultation - ACTION MEMORANDUM

BACKGROUND:

In the summer of 1967 the Soviet Union approached the United States, among other countries, soliciting views on the possibility of a new Law of the Sea Conference to establish general acceptance of a 12-mile territorial sea limit. We responded that our position on 12 miles would depend upon whether we could assure adequate protection of the right of passage through and overflight of international straits. We also stated we would participate in expert talks on this subject.

Bilateral talks held in July 1968 produced ad referendum agreement to draft articles which (1) establish a maximum of 12 miles for territorial sea and exclusive fishing jurisdiction claims and (2) provide for a right of passage through and overflight of international straits. The talks considered but did not produce agreement on a fisheries article. Further talks were scheduled for September, but were cancelled following the invasion of Czechoslovakia, and finally held in December 1968 pursuant to the Soviets’ request. These talks produced agreement ad referendum on a fisheries article which provides limited carefully defined preferential rights for the coastal state beyond the 12-mile limit. It has been our view consistently that some preferential fishing rights for coastal states would be necessary in order to secure a sufficient majority to adopt Articles I and II. The Soviets accepted this view only at the December talks. The three articles are attached at Tab A. At Tab B is a more detailed explanation of the Soviet talks and the three articles.

Since December two developments have occurred: First, we determined not to respond to the Soviets concerning the acceptability of Article III or go on with a broad canvass of countries until consultations could be held with our European allies, and a small number other maritime nations, to determine their views on whether Articles I, II and III would constitute a satisfactory basis for a new Law of the Sea Conference. We have since given a briefing in the NAC and initiated bilateral consultations in capitals. (At Tab C are the airgrams containing instructions for such consultations.) Second, in January the Soviets suggested various amendments to Article III. Those suggestions and our response are at Tab D.

To date, only about one-half of the countries consulted have indicated their views on Articles I, II and III. With minor suggestions regarding technical aspects of Article II, all responses are agreeable to Articles I and II. Norway and Australia have indicated tentative agreement to Article III. Iceland and Canada have indicated that Article III does not provide sufficient preferential rights for coastal states. The U.K. has stated that Article III goes much too far in granting preferential rights to coastal states. Italy has stated that she agrees with the U.K.: addition of fisheries to territorial sea issues “complicated the latter beyond redemption.” Other countries have indicated concern about Article III but suggest that they could probably accept it if all three articles receive wide agreement.

Further Consultations:

In the relatively near future we must decide how to respond to the Soviet Union concerning Article III and what further steps we should take in preparation for a new Law of the Sea Conference. News of U.S.-Soviet agreement on law of the sea matters is beginning to spread. We should begin a worldwide canvass on the basis of these three articles within the near future if we are to retain the option of holding a conference in 1970. Before taking any further steps, however, we believe that it is necessary to complete our consultations with our European allies. In view of the shortness of time, the apparent divergence of opinion among our allies, and their present familiarity with Articles I, II and III, I believe such consultations should be held on a multilateral basis by experts. To this end, we hope to arrange for consultations in the NAC as soon as practicable. Ambassador Cleveland has advised that the week of April 14 would be the earliest convenient time for such consultations.

DOD has expressed a preference for consultations in capitals by a team of experts from Washington. Logistical considerations dictate against this course; and DOD has agreed to accept NAC consultations provided they are held in the latter part of March. While we probably cannot meet this condition entirely, I believe consultation in the week of April 14 may be acceptable to DOD.

S/FW does not concur with the proposal as outlined above. Therefore, they have not cleared the draft telegram. It is their opinion that we should: 1. Take immediate steps to obtain a definitive response from the USSR;

2. Commence a worldwide canvass immediately on the basis of the articles as they are now written, and

3. Carry out our talks with our European allies as part of the worldwide canvass on a bilateral basis, as preferred by DOD, rather than through the NAC forum.

Recommendation:

You approve further multilateral consultations in the NAC with experts from NATO capitals.

MAR 20 1969

Approve [Signature]

Disapprove

Notation by Ambassador Johnson reads as follows: “Suggest we consider whether we should not make Simultaneous approaches to other selected countries such as Japan and some ARA State. UAJohnson”

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OA Files: Lot 72 D 505, Box 2, Law of the Sea NATO. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted in L/SPA by Carter and Belman; cleared by McKernan and Springsteen; and approved by U. Alexis Johnson on March 20. Johnson added the following handwritten suggestion below his initials: “Suggest we consider whether we should not make simultaneous approaches to other selected countries such as Japan and some ARA state.” Tab A is published as the enclosure to Document 333. Attached but not published at Tab B was an unsigned and undated report, which recounted the results of talks between U.S. and Soviet experts and surveyed the current status of international opinion on the limits of territorial waters, free passage through straits, and fisheries. Tab C is published as Document 333. Attached but not published at Tab D was an unsigned and undated memorandum, which listed amendments to the draft article III on fisheries proposed by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. response to the Soviet proposals. Attached but not published at Tab E was a March 11 information memorandum from McKernan to Meeker that indicated that S/FW believed consultations through NATO channels would steer the fisheries negotiations away from provisions acceptable to developing countries, therefore making widespread agreement impossible.

335. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (De Palma) to Secretary of State Rogers 335. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (De Palma) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, April 2, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Status of Deep Seabed Problem in UN.

The Standing UN Committee on the Exploration and Use of the Deep Seabed completed its first substantive meeting on March 28. It will meet again in August to frame recommendations for the 1969 General Assembly. David Popper, our spokesman for the Committee, believes the following are the main problems ahead.

The Committee does most of its work in two Subcommittees, one on Legal Matters and one on Economic and Technical Matters. In both Subcommittees, at this stage, the bulk of the activity is designed to present and clarify issues and to educate the 42 Committee members as to the potentialities and limitations of the utilization of the deep seabed.

It is apparent from the March sessions that the tempo of UN work on the problem is accelerating, and that we will have to advance the clarification of our own views correspondingly.

We must therefore anticipate early discussion within the U.S. Government, and consultations with other leading countries on the Seabeds Committee, on the following range of subjects: 1. Legal Principles. The prospects looks fairly bright for broad agreement on some general legal principals with respect to the utilization of the seabeds, covering such matters as the existence of an area beyond national jurisdiction, reservation of this area for peaceful purposes (as we interpret the term), stipulation that the area be used in the common interest, etc. The adoption of a brief set of general principles could be the principal accomplishment of the General Assembly in the seabeds field for this year. It would not restrict any of our ongoing activities.

2. Limit of National Jurisdiction. At the March meeting, Ambassador Pardo of Malta, initiator of the UN Seabeds item, projected this issue to the forefront, though the Committee is as yet far from ready to take action on it. This ties in with our concern to obtain agreement on a moratorium on national claims to progressively greater areas of the deep sea bottom. Pending some agreement on an international legal regime for the seabed and some agreement on the legal limit of the Continental Shelf. If our current efforts to establish the principle of a moratorium within the U.S. Government are successful, we will want to press the idea at the August meeting and in the General Assembly.

3. International Regime or Machinery. In the March meetings, underdeveloped countries belonging to the Committee sought to move ahead with plans for international machinery designed to ensure that the bulk of the profits from exploitation of the sea bottom outside national jurisdiction should be used for their benefit. The arrangements these states contemplate reflect unrealistic expectations of vast revenue quickly attainable, and ignore the financial incentives and legal guarantees which will be required if we are gradually to master this environment. Since the Soviet Union and our Western allies will join with us in applying the brakes to this conception, we expect a successful delaying operation to take place. At the same time, we will have to begin to consider the type of arrangements under which, some day, our industry could begin to exploit sea bottom resources outside whatever limit of national jurisdiction we may assert. This subject will be featured in the August Committee session.

4. Arms Control. We believe we can continue to support general language limiting use of the seabed to peaceful purposes, under our interpretation—based on a similar situation as regards outer space—to the effect that this permits any military activities not specifically prohibited by treaty. We mean to continue to center sea bottom arms control treaty negotiations in the Geneva EMDC, and not in the Seabed Committee.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted in IO by Deputy Assistant Secretary David H. Popper. Copies were sent to U, J, and C. Published from an uninitialed copy.

336. Letter From Secretary of the Interior Hickel to Secretary of State Rogers 336. Letter From Secretary of the Interior Hickel to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, April 15, 1969.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

I am informed that during the last days of the past Administration, a decision was made concerning strategy to be employed by the United States in connection with a joint U.S.-Soviet effort to convene a third world conference on law of the sea, which decision has substantial and, in my judgment, unnecessarily adverse implications for major segments of the fishing industry of the United States. I am told that there was a difference in viewpoint between the Department of Interior on one hand and the Departments of State and Defense on the other regarding the weight that should be given to domestic fishery interests in formulating strategy.

It appears that the Departments of State and Defense concluded that defense interests dictated that the United States should join with the Soviet Union in seeking world agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea with right of passage through international straits preserved, and that fishery questions should be taken into account only to the extent that they would affect the feasibility of a successful conference. It was the view of these Departments that U.S. fishery interests should not be allowed to influence in any way the achievement of defense objectives, and that the only question to be considered in connection with fisheries was, “Can a third conference succeed without dealing with the fishery issue?”.

It was the position of the representatives of this Department that while defense interests, of course, outweigh fishery interests, the situation is not likely to be such as to require that the latter be completely ignored. This Department’s representatives argued that a third law of the sea conference offers the potential of finding solutions to international legal problems relating to jurisdiction over fisheries which have plagued U.S. fisheries in recent years. They argued that it was probable that this potential could be realized without interfering unduly with the achievement of defense objectives. They argued finally that it would be politically unrealistic to consider a third world conference which would ignore fishery problems, in view of the frequently expressed desire of a large part of the domestic fishing industry for a solution to their problems with foreign fishing interests which could be found only in a broad conference.

To resolve this difference in views, the Under Secretaries of the three Departments met on December 12, 1968, at which time the then Under Secretary of State, Mr. Katzenbach, decided the issue in favor of the Departments of State and Defense. Since then, I am informed, decisions on strategy have ignored domestic fishery interests.

It is my view that Mr. Katzenbach’s decision should be reexamined. The progress which has been made in negotiations with the Soviets to date, in my opinion, presents an opportunity to develop a jurisdictional compromise acceptable to our own domestic fisheries as well as the world community. However, if this opportunity is to be capitalized upon, domestic fishery interests cannot be sacrificed in ent Yety to the interests of the other Departments. Indeed, the situation as it is described to me seems unlikely to present us with an “all or nothing” choice.

In these circumstances and in view of the momentum developing for a new world conference, I would urge that you arrange for an immediate inter-Departmental review of the question of the consideration to be given domestic fishery interests in determining U.S. positions for such a conference. Pending such a review, I would hope that no action would be taken which would be prejudicial to a decision. I have in mind specifically forthcoming consultations in the NATO Advisory Council, scheduled for later this month.

Sincerely yours,

Walter Hickel
Secretary of the Interior

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential.

337. Memorandum From the Acting Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Belman) to Secretary of State Rogers 337. Memorandum From the Acting Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Belman) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, April 21, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Attached letter to Secretary Hickel re: Law of the Sea Proposals - ACTION MEMORANDUM

Secretary Hickel has written (Tab B) concerning discussions we have had with the Soviets regarding the law of the sea. These talks were begun at the initiative of the USSR, who desired to explore the possibility of convening an international conference to establish definitively a 12-mile limit for territorial sea claims. We have told the Soviets that we are agreeable to such a conference if we can be assured that suitable provision will be made for passage through international straits. We have also told them that we did not believe such an agreement would be acceptable to a large number of states unless it included some provision giving special fishery rights to coastal states. Our discussions have produced a draft agreement that is acceptable to us and probably to the Soviets. Mr. Meeker is heading a delegation that is discussing the draft with our NATO allies in Brussels this week.

Secretary Hickel’s letter seems to be the product of those in the Interior Department who believe that the fisheries article should be pressed not as a matter of negotiating tactics to assure the success of the law of the sea conference, but rather as an objective of U.S. national policy on its own merits. This approach would represent a shift of position from what we told the Soviets and others were our objectives. The matter was discussed by Under Secretary Katzenbach in December at the meeting to which Secretary Hickel refers. Under Secretary Black of Interior attended that meeting. At that time it was agreed that the fisheries article should be one put forward for tactical reasons and, in the event the Soviets refused to accept it, we would give it up. Secretary Hickel now seeks a review of that decision. However, I do not believe that the issue is one we need to face at this time, since the Soviets are likely to accept the fisheries article for the purpose of initiating our canvass of other countries.

Secretary Hickel also implies that decisions regarding the draft agreement and how we should handle it have been made without participation of the Department of Interior. This is not the case; Interior has been involved at every step of the way.

Finally, Secretary Hickel suggests that the NATO consultations could prejudice the fisheries issue. Since we intend only to explain our position in Brussels, we do not believe that any such prejudice could arise.

A letter has been prepared (Tab A) making the above points to Secretary Hickel.

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached letter.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S and initialed by Walsh. Drafted by Belman and concurred in by McKernan and by Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary Malcolm Toon (EUR). David S. Black was Under Secretary of the Interior from 1967-69. For Tab A, see Document 339. For Tab B, see Document 336.

338. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 338. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hillenbrand) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, April 23, 1969.

SUBJECT:Law of the Sea: Recent Canadian Announcement on Baselines and Fisheries Closing Lines - ACTION MEMORANDUM

On April 5 the Canadian Government announced that it will shortly establish further headland to headland baselines defining Canada’s internal waters, territorial sea, and exclusive fishing zones on both east and west coasts. At the same time the Canadian Government proposes to amend the legislation under which baselines are drawn to permit the drawing of “fisheries closing lines,” enclosing exclusive fishing zones without affecting the limits of Canada’s internal meters or territorial sea. Embassy Ottawa was only given a few hours advance notice of this announcement.

BACKGROUND

Since 1964 when Canada passed legislation authorizing the Government to draw straight baselines from headland to headland closing off parts of the high seas as internal Canadian waters, we have been trying to make clear to the Canadian Government that we could not accept such action on its part certain broad areas of the high seas. The Department of Defense has taken the position that implementation of the 1964 Canadian baseline statute “would create serious security problems for the Untied States.” (A copy of a letter dated January 13, 1969, from DOD to then Under Secretary Rostow setting forth this position is attached at Tab A.)

A first list of geographical coordinates for baselines was issued in 1967, establishing straight baselines for the coast of Labrador and the south and east coasts of Newfoundland. At the time of this action we gave Canadian Ambassador Ritchie a note dated November 1, 1967 (attached at Tab B) stating that we considered the Canadian action to be without legal justification and that it was the view of the U.S. that the baselines were, in important and substantial respect, contrary to established principles of the international law of the sea. We also informed Ambassador Ritchie that the U.S. did not recognize the validity of the purported lines and reserved all rights of the United States and its nationals in the waters in question.

Last fall in response to statements in Parliament by the Canadian Minister of Fisheries regarding additional baselines, we called in Canadian Counselor Burwash on November 4 and told her that we wished to make it crystal clear that the U.S. position on baselines set forth in the note given to Ambassador Ritchie on November 1, 1967 had not changed. We also told Miss Burwash that the U.S. continued to consider baselines contrary to established principles of the international law of the sea and, for this reason, the United States hoped Canada would not draw additional baseIines suggested by its Minister of Fisheries. In addition we told Miss Burwash that if, despite the U.S. position, Canada did decide to draw additional baselines, we hoped we would be consulted in advance of any such decision and given an opportunity to comment on them well before their announcement.

April 5 Announcement

The Canadian announcement on April 5 (attached at Tab C) states that further baselines will now be drawn on the east coast of Novia Scotia and along the west coasts of Vancouver Islands and the Queen Charlotte Islands. In making this announcement the Canadian Minister of Fisheries emphasized important exceptions, saying: “I am thinking particularly of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. In this case, where it may not be desirable to close off all of the Gulf as internal waters, we can still make it an exclusive fishing zone.” (The text of the statement is attached at Tab D.) This would be done by amending Canadian baselines legislation to provide for fished closing lines enclosing exclusive fishing zones. Canada would then negotiate the phasing out of “traditional fishing practices” of other countries within the waters enclosed.

The Canadian announcement on April 5 contained coordinates or other specific data for baselines or fisheries closing lines. While legislation for fisheries closing lines will require parliamentary action, the Canadian Minister of Fisheries has indicated that he intends to move rapidly with respect to the establishment of baselines, particularly along the east coast of Novia Scotia. This can be done by order in council and requires no new legislation. The Canadian Minister of External Affairs has told Embassy Ottawa that the baselines to be drawn pursuant to the April 5 announcement will be in “non-controversial” areas and will be virtually identical with baselines which have already been discussed with the United States.

Multilateral Aspects

Canada is not a signatory to the Geneva law of the sea convention.

We have negotiated with the Soviets an ad referendum multilateral draft Convention of the Territorial Sea (Tab B), containing compromise provisions with respect to preferential fishing rights of coastal states on the high seas beyond 12 miles. The Soviets wish to convene as soon as possible an international conference on the law of the sea. Both Canada and the United States have taken the position that progress in resolving the territorial sea issue is likely to depend on working out a generally acceptable agreement on fishing rights for adoption at the conference proposed by the Soviets. Both governments have been reluctant to agree to the Soviet initiative, therefore, until draft provisions for an agreement on coastal fishing rights can be worked out and gain widespread acceptance, believing that failure to do so would doom the conference itself. The United States is also concerned that such a failure could, in turn, lead to further extension of claims over territorial seas.

We also recognize the urgency of working out a multilateral agreement on coastal fishing rights to stop the unilateral extension of such rights.

The fishing provisions of the ad referendum multilateral draft convention we have worked out with the Soviets are strongly opposed by Canada as not giving coastal states enough fishing preference. Several distant water states, such as Great Britain, have opposed them for opposite reasons. We hope the provisions will gain more widespread acceptance among our allies as a result of consultation at the end of the month in NATO. We are not sure whether the April 5 Canadian announcement will help or hinder our efforts in this regard.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you call in Canadian Ambassador Ritchie as soon as possible and give him the attached note (Tab F) on the Canadian Government’s April announcement

APPROVE

DISAPPROVE

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted by John C. Griffith, Office of Canadian Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs on April 22 and cleared by Springsteen, EUR/CAN, and S/FW, and in draft by Belman. Johnson apparently approved the recommendation. The approval line is marked in an unknown hand as follows: “4/25/69, 12:00 noon.” Tabs A, B, C, and D were not found. For Tab E, see Document 333. Tab F, April 23, was a draft note from Rogers to Canadian Ambassador Ritchie expressing disappointment that the Canadian Government notified Washington only a few hours before the public announcement and registering the hope that U.S. officials would have the opportunity to consult and comment upon any proposed legislation the before it was submitted to the Canadian Parliament

339. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Interior Hickel 339. Letter From Secretary of State Rogers to Secretary of the Interior Hickel1

Washington, April 28, 1969.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

Thank you for your letter of April 15 regarding our current efforts to develop international agreement on some important aspects of law of the seas. You expressed special concern with the interests of United States fisheries and hope that they not be prejudiced by the international efforts now underway.

I agree with the comments you make in your letter relating the need to accommodate the interests of United States fisheries whenever possible in reaching an international agreement. I also agree with you that defense interests outweigh fishery interests, if it comes to a conflict between the two. However, we hope that our efforts can be successful without this conflict arising.

I would like to comment on two specific points you raised. You state that after the meeting of December 12, 1968 in Under Secretary Katzenbach’s office, “decisions on strategy have ignored domestic fishery interests.” I should be concerned if such were the case; however, I understand that responsible officers in your Department have been brought into all our activities in this area since December 12, including our meetings with the Soviets which produced the fisheries article in our present set of draft articles.

You urge that we have an inter-departmental review of the consideration to be given domestic fisheries interests in determining the United States positions on this problem and express concern that the consultations this week in the North Atlantic Council not prejudice this review. After these consultations, we hope to begin a worldwide canvass as soon as possible to determine whether a law of the sea conference can be held successfully. We, of course, would be happy to review with you and the other interested agencies all the aspects of this matter. I believe that this review would not be prejudiced by the upcoming NATO discussions and, after talking with our European Allies, we may be in a better position to consider the issue you are particularly concerned with.

Sincerely,

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Belman on April 21.

340. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Aldrich) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 340. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Aldrich) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, May 29, 1969.

SUBJECT:Seabeds—Principles ACTION MEMORANDUM

With one exception, the Department of Interior has agreed to our draft statement of seabed principles. They have proposed language, which you have seen, that substantially alters the principle concerning a boundary for the area beyond national jurisdiction. Since June 1968 the United States has called for an “internationally agreed” precise boundary. The Interior language substitutes a call for precise definition of an “internationally accepted” boundary. Interior also refuses to accept our proposal for a moratorium on boundary claims.

I understand that, upon the advice of Mr. Pollack of SCI, you have agreed to the substitute language proposed by Interior.

The purpose of this memorandum is to request that, for the reasons given below, you reverse this decision.

DISCUSSION:

1. If the United States proposes the Interior language, without making a concommitant moratorium proposal, the option of eventual agreement to a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction will in a very short time disappear. This will be true regardless of whether the United States in fact exercises jurisdiction beyond its geologic shelf. Other nations, apparently at the behest of U.S. oil companies, are currently granting large seabed concessions to private oil companies. Often these concessions include areas which extend to the deep ocean floor. If such exercises of jurisdiction are not objected to by any State they will be, in Interior’s proposed language, “internationally accepted.” It was by this procedure that the Truman Proclamation of 1945 came to be “accented” as international law.

At Tab A is a memorandum which explains more fully the reasons why the United States should propose a moratorium.

2. The National Petroleum Council and several nations who favor a broad boundary of coastal State jurisdiction have consistently maintained that the boundary should be established by interpretation of the Geneva Convention, rather than by new agreement. Proposal by the United States of the position favored by Interior would generally be understood as acceptance of this “interpretation” position and a reversal of the position favoring an “agreed” boundary, which we have consistently maintained to date.

3. In addition to the above view, the NPC strongly asserts that under the Convention coastal States now have exclusive rights over the entire submerged continental terrace—i.e., to the deep ocean floor. U.S. acceptance of the Interior language may well be understood as acceptance of this part of the NPC position as well. The practical result would probably be that we shall lose the option of ever establishing a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction, either by new agreement or through interpretation of the Geneva Convention.

4. Quite apart from the above arguments, if we agree that our goal is the definition of a precise boundary, there are a number of reasons why it should be sought through agreement, rather than by interpretation of the Geneva Convention: the most obvious is that an interpretation of the highly ambiguous language of the Convention can more readily be abandoned by new governments in other countries than could a new agreement employing clearer language.

5. I would point out that our language does not prevent us from deciding at some point to seek to establish a boundary by interpretation if a new agreement cannot be obtained. Therefore, it does not prejudice Interior’s position, but Interior’s language prejudices our position.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you decide that the United States should continue to seek an agreed boundary to the continental shelf and a moratorium on national claims.

Disapprove

Tab A

SEABEDS MORATORIUM - BACKGROUND AND CONSIDERATIONS

SUMMARY:

For the past several months there have been persistent but unsuccessful attempts to reach agreement within the United-States Government on a moratorium proposal that will protect important options regarding the eventual location of an agreed boundary of coastal State jurisdiction over seabed area. If this Government does not propose a moratorium for boundary claims we run a serious risk that, as a practical matter, within the fairly near future the option of establishing a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction will be lost. This memorandum reviews the factors relevant to a moratorium proposal and points out courses of action available to obtain resolution of this issue.

BACKGROUND:

Since late 1967 this Government and the international community have been engaged in active consideration of the seabeds item introduced by Ambassador Pardo of Malta. Most efforts to date have been directed toward accumulation of basic facts and adoption of a set of principles to guide future efforts. The two ultimate, and closely interrelated, issues are: a) What is, or should be, the boundary of coastal State jurisdiction; and

b) What regime should be applicable in the area beyond the limits of coastal State jurisdiction?

Existing international law and agreements do not provide a clear answer, or a satisfactory basis for arriving at a clear and broadly accepted answer, to either of these questions. There is no doubt that under the 1958 Continental Shelf Convention all coastal nations (with the possible exception of those possessing extensive shallow offshore areas extending several hundred miles) have exclusive jurisdiction over seabed resources to a depth of 200 meters. In the recent North Sea cases the ICJ indicated that customary international law allows a coastal State to exercise such jurisdiction over its geologic continental shelf. (The geologic shelf normally ends at about 200 meters, but shelves as shallow as 50 meters and as deep as 550 meters are not unknown.) There is doubt as to the right of a coastal State to extend its exclusive jurisdiction beyond the edge of the shelf and as to the sufficiency of existing law to facilitate exploitation of the area beyond.

In June 1968 in the Ad Hoc Seabeds Committee, the U.S. proposed, and has often reaffirmed, a set of principles that calls for agreed solutions to both issues and sets forth guidelines to be followed in seeking agreement. Paragraph 3 reflects our desire to allow seabed activities to continue at ever-increasing depths without destroying the practical possibility of reaching agreement on a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction should this result prove to be in our interest: “Taking into account the Geneva Convention of 1958 on the Continental Shelf, there shall be established, as soon as practicable, an internationally agreed precise boundary for the deep ocean floor — the seabed and subsoil beyond that over which coastal States may exercise sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration and exploitation of its natural resources; exploitation of the natural resources of the ocean floor that occurs prior to establishment of the boundary shall be understood not to prejudice its location, regardless of whether the coastal State considers the exploitation to have occurred on its ‘continental shelf’.”

Since December 1968 the State Department has been seeking authority to propose in the Seabeds Committee that all nations should refrain from making boundary claims until efforts could be made to reach international agreement on the boundary and regime issues. Such a moratorium proposal would effectively protect the possibility of agreement to a narrow zone and prevent a race to establish paper claims to vast seabed areas while such efforts are undertaken. The following relevant views have emerged: 1. The Oil Industry objected to principle 3, above, and opposes any moratorium proposal. In July, 1968 the National Petroleum Council (NPC), announced its conclusion that the United Sates, and other nations, now “have exclusive jurisdiction over the natural resources of the continental land mass seaward generally to where the submerged portion of that land mass meets the abyssal ocean floor” (i.e., we now have a broad zone of jurisdiction to a depth of at least 2,500 meters). The Council recommended that the U.S. forthwith “declare its full rights…as described above…” NPC representatives explain that these positions, which are still maintained, are not offered for the purpose of furthering the Oil Industry’s interests, but only to further the national interests in protecting the “American mineral estate.”

2. Spokesmen for the hard minerals industry are not as unified as the oil men. Several reject the NPC view as to the extent of present jurisdiction and favor rapid adoption of a boundary and regime that will facilitate exploitation of the area beyond national jurisdiction. They would probably support a moratorium proposal.

3. The Department of Defense has consistently maintained that our national security interests require that we favor a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction (200 meters, or at the most 550 meters). See letters from Deputy Secretaries Nitze and Packard at Tabs A and B. However, DOD. spokesmen have stated that under an undesirable regime (i.e. UNGA control) they might prefer a broad zone of national jurisdiction. DOD favors an effective moratorium proposal.

4. The Departments of Interior and Commerce have stated their preference for a broad zone of national jurisdiction; they have opposed every moratorium proposal made by State. However, they say they are not opposed to the principle of a moratorium, and that they do not accept the NPC view that coastal State jurisdiction now extends to the deep ocean floor. On Tuesday, May 20, State and Interior representatives met to lay the groundwork for the meeting of State and Interior Undersecretaries May 22.

5. At the international level, Ambassador Pardo has proposed that a “minimum” area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction be defined as that area beyond 200 meters and 200 miles. This proposal has received little support to date but it will be debated at the August meeting of the Seabeds Committee. Its adoption, we believe, would effectively preclude eventual agreement to a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction.

DISCUSSION:

In considering the importance of obtaining authority to propose a moratorium on boundary claims it is necessary to assess the probable results of our failure to make such a proposal, the result of making the proposal, and the effect of such results upon our interests. It is then necessary to consider the details of an acceptable moratorium.

FAILURE TO PROPOSE A MORATORIUM:

If we fail to make a moratorium proposal we can reasonably expect that other nations will continue to grant offshore exploration and exploitation permits covering seabed areas at great distances from shore, substantially beyond the geologic continental shelf and down to the abyssal ocean floor. These countries will be disinclined to agree later to a boundary landward of areas covered by the permits unless a moratorium proposal is adopted, or at least made, particularly if their permittees (U.S. oil companies) demand that they not do so. Unless we protest such permits, or the enabling legislation which authorizes them, we can expect that other States, the Oil Industry and possibly other agencies of the U.S.

Government will argue that “State practice” has established that coastal State jurisdiction extends to the abyssal floor (i.e. to approximately 2500 meters). In short, the passage of time is strongly, against preserving the possibility of later agreeing to a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction. The evidence of a trend toward a broad zone of coastal State jurisdiction is rapidly mounting: a) Sudan and Saudi Arabia have each recently asserted jurisdiction over the floor of the Red Sea, which is about 7000 feet deep and 200 miles wide.

b) Iceland has recently adopted legislation stating that its continental shelf “reaches … as far from the country’s shore as it proves possible to exploit its wealth.”

c) Apparently several countries, particularly in Southeast Asia and at the behest of U.S. companies, are issuing permits which cover very large seabed areas, including areas that extend to the abyssal ocean floor. An example is provided by a request from Gulf Oil to the Republic of China for a large concession north of Taiwan. (We have received this information from Gulf on a confidential basis.)

d) The NPC has noted in its report that 29 countries have granted offshore concessions for areas deeper than 200 meters. NPC spokesmen have recently stressed that international law is evolving through State practice in this regard. (On this point it is important to bear in mind that all such concessions, including those granted by the U.S., include shallow areas as well as deep areas and that the concessions are sought primarily because of the shallow areas. However, this fact does not completely destroy the point that such concessions may constitute an exercise of sovereign rights over the deep areas as well.)

PROPOSAL OF A MORATORIUM.

If the United States makes a moratorium proposal and acts in accord with it, both in its leasing policy and in its relations with other countries, we probably can protect the possibility of an internationally agreed narrow zone of national jurisdiction and prevent a race to grab seabed areas while efforts are made to reach agreement on the boundary and regime issues. Clearly this is true if the UNGA adopts the proposal; it is probably true, for reasons given below, even if the proposal is not accepted by all, or even a majority, of the members of the Seabed Committee. Most offshore exploitation is conducted by U.S. companies—because they have the knowhow and capital and because of advantages offered by United States tax law. However, because of U.S. tax law, a U.S. company probably will not exploit an area leased from a foreign country unless the U.S. recognizes that country’s right to lease the area concerned. The possibility that the United States Government will eventually decide that coastal States do not have jurisdiction beyond a certain point will discourage exploitation beyond that point unless there is general agreement—along the lines of our moratorium proposal—that such exploitation can occur and should be protected even after a boundary is drawn landward of it.

Our Interests

At the working level all concerned agencies of the Executive Branch have agreed the U.S. has at least the following interests which will be affected by the eventual solutions for the seabed boundary and regime issues: a) Foreign Policy. Bilateral and multilateral disputes over boundaries, claims to distant seabed areas, expropriations of foreign investments, etc., should be avoided; if they arise, they should be resolved by a compulsory dispute settlement procedure. Seabeds solutions should also encourage international cooperation, hopefully providing useful precedent for other matters of clear international concern.

b) Access to Resources. The U.S. and its nationals should have access, on reasonable terms and conditions, over the long run to the maximum quantity of all economically recoverable resources—known and presently unknown—of the submerged areas of the world.

c) Access to Seabed for Other Uses. The U.S. also has a great interest—largely for national defense and scientific investigation—in protecting our right to use seabed areas off other nations’ coasts, as well as our own, for purposes, consistent with international law and agreement, other than natural resource exploration or exploitation.

d) Use of the Superjacent Water Column and Air Space. For commercial and national defense reasons we have a great interest in assuring our continued right to exercise the freedoms of the high seas in all waters and air space presently subject to the regime of the high seas.

The U.S. has no immediate or near term requirements for resources known or suspected to exist beyond the geologic shelf.

The U.S. Government has not decided what boundary/regime combination would best serve the interests listed above. In June 1968, it decided that internationally agreed solutions were preferable to solutions resulting from unilateral actions by coastal states. In January, 1969 it decided that all options should be kept open while further studies were undertaken to determine the most desirable boundary/regime combination. There is general agreement within the government that the boundary and regime issues are too closely interrelated to be separated—i.e. if a desirable regime can be agreed upon we would perhaps favor a narrow zone of national jurisdiction, but if an acceptable regime cannot be negotiated we would perhaps favor a broad zone of national jurisdiction.

As more and more nations assert control over seabed areas in deeper and deeper water far from their shores, it is clear that we will effectively lose the option of agreeing to any boundary/regime combination which contains a narrow zone of national jurisdiction unless we take some positive action to protect this option.

Two courses of action are available: we can seek international agreement, or an understanding, that there will be a moratorium upon seabed boundary claims pending an effort to arrive at agreed solutions; or (separately or in conjunction with the former alternative) we can unilaterally protest all actions which might effectively diminish the available options. Whether or not the second course is adopted it is important now to proceed vigorously to pursue the first if it is to be adopted. A prompt decision on this issue is necessary so that we can undertake any necessary consultations prior to August.

Terms of a Moratorium.

In early January, 1969 there was general agreement within the Executive Branch that the U.S. should propose and seek support for a moratorium on boundary claims. There was, however, disagreement over whether the proposal should state that the moratorium applied only to claims beyond a depth of 200 meters. State and Defense favored inclusion of this figure; Interior and Commerce opposed it on the ground that it would tend to prejudice location of the boundary in favor of 200 meters.

During the March, 1969 meeting of the Seabeds Committee an intensive but unsuccessful effort was made within the United States Government to reach agreement on a proposal which did not contain a reference to 200 meters. State and Defense supported a proposal covering all boundary claims, including those based on the 1958 Convention; Interior and Commerce supported a proposal covering only “further” claims.

This difference is substantial. Under the proposal which State has most recently recommended to Interior claims based on an interpretation of the Convention would not be prejudiced, but they would be held in abeyance until an effort could be made to negotiate an agreed boundary. Under the proposal most recently made by Interior a coastal State can, through increasing technological capability of its lessees, extend its jurisdiction under the Convention to the abyssal ocean floor. Under the NPC view the U.S. presently has rights to that point. The Convention and its history are sufficiently ambiguous to allow other nations to support the moratorium favored by Interior and, Commerce and then (perhaps upon urging by U.S. companies seeking large mineral concessions) to espouse the Interior or NPC interpretation of the Convention. If this were to happen the possibility of eventual agreement to a narrow zone of coastal State jurisdiction would be greatly diminished.

Other differences are much less important. It should be possible to overcome them if agreement can be reached, or other resolution reached on the more important issue separating the various Departments. The area of agreement is large.

Hopefully agreement to a moratorium proposal can be reached at the Thursday meeting. If agreement is not reached, there should be discussion of the procedure to follow in order to resolve the issue of what, if any, moratorium proposal the USG should make. The most promising possibility is that the issue should be referred to the NSC for prompt decision.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, General Files on NSC Matters, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, NSC/Misc. Seabed. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Carter, who also drafted the undated “Seabeds Moratorium-Background and Considerations.” Copies were sent to Richardson, Samuels, Pollack, and Popper. Johnson disapproved the recommendation on June 2.

341. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 341. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Imminent potential conflict between law of sea treaty, seabeds treaty, and fishing-rights dispute with Peru

I. CONFLICTING INTERESTS

Within the next week or two the U.S. faces a potential conflict between its interests in (1) a new law of the sea treaty, (2) a treaty for peaceful uses of the seabeds, and (3) a resolution of the fishing-rights crisis with Peru.

If the first question is not resolved before the second and the third questions, it will be in jeopardy. Prior resolution of the first two questions in a manner consistent with each other would complicate, but not necessarily preclude, resolution of the third.

Unless the President makes a judgment on priorities among these interests and the tactics for translating his judgment into policies, the chances are that (1) the Peruvian question will be resolved in a way that will probably preclude, but certainly cripple, successful negotiations on a law of the sea treaty, that (2) the present U.S. position in the UN favoring an internationally agreed boundary as soon as possible for the continental shelf—a position that preserves the option for a narrow boundary which DOD requires for national security reasons—will be jeopardized by inter-agency haggling while UN talks are in progress, and that (3) any vacillation on the present U.S. position will encourage unilateral claims to superjacent waters which will conflict with the law of the sea treaty.

II. LAW OF SEAS AND THE PERUVIAN CRISIS

The more important and urgent conflict is between the law of the seas treaty and the resolution of the fishing-rights dispute with Peru.

The Stakes

At stake in achieving a new law of the sea treaty is the orderly worldwide use of the seas for commercial as well, as military purposes. This orderly use is already eroded and will be further threatened in the next few years by (a) proliferation of expanding and conflicting claims to boundaries for the territorial sea and/or continental shelves, and by (b) multiplication of constraints and conflicting claims concerning navigation of international straits. These threats to orderly use of the seas impinge upon America’s military mobility in the world, its commercial interests, and its general interest in an international environment congenial to a maritime power with global interests. We have now progressed far toward achieving agreement with the Soviet Union on an international law of the sea treaty, and we have also gone far toward gaining a consensus of support among our allies on this treaty. We are at a critical stage today because in 1958 the Geneva Conference on the Law of the Sea, while accomplishing much, failed to set definite limits either to the territorial sea or the continental shelf.

The proposed treaty

Article One of the proposed treaty establishes a twelve-mile limit to Territorial seas. Article Two sets forth rules for free navigation through and over international straits. Article Three formulates a complicated system of economic preferences for determining the territorial extent of fishing rights. There is general agreement that acceptance of Article One and Two is contingent upon acceptance of Article Three. The major reason is that without Article Three there is no inducement for a great many states who have already established their claims to a twelve-mile limit to accept the treaty.

Articles One and Two are important because: (a) the U.S. never physically contests claims to twelve miles, although it files paper protests, and

(b) if twelve miles becomes the internationally accepted de facto limit, 116 international straits (of which a dozen are very important) will be overlapped by territorial sea. Therefore, (i) warships will be subject to the right of innocent passage. Some nations regard carriage of nuclear weapons and even nuclear powered vessels as non-innocent. Some regard destination (viz. Israel) as non-innocent. (ii) Moreover, aircraft have no right of innocent passage in international law; so overflight of these 116 straits would be by permission of the subjacent state. (Access to the Mediterranean could foreseeably depend on Spain’s permission if land routes were denied to us.)

The treaty’s relationship to the Peruvian crisis

The conflict between this treaty and our relations with Peru arises because presently proposed resolutions of the Peruvian fishing-rights dispute will almost surely prevent acceptance of Article Three. Article Three does not go far enough to satisfy Peru’s appetite; and if we go farther, other nations will follow Peru’s path rather than the treaty path. If we modify the treaty to suit Peru, we will lose the support of our allies and the Soviet Union.

In the absence of a resolution of this dispute, we face an accentuated crisis in our relations with Peru. Peru claims territorial sovereignty out to 200 miles from its coast and has seized our tuna fishing boats within this limit. In response to these seizures the U.S. is under great domestic pressure to apply sanctions to Peru which may lead Peru to break diplomatic relations and to take other punitive measures possibly against U.S. nationals.

To avoid this further deterioration of relations, the Department of State intends to send a representative to a fisheries conference between the U.S. Peru, Ecuador, and Chile to negotiate a modus vivendi that would satisfy Peru and American tuna fishers. But any such modus vivendi would entail de facto acceptance of Peru’s 200-mile claim. No disclaimers stating that a deal governing fishing rights beyond the 12-mile limit were made without prejudice to the juridical status of the seas to which it applied would obviate the fact that by negotiating the terms for use of these seas we had conceded that they were not part of the high seas. In any case, as mentioned above, any terms that would satisfy Peru would far exceed the latitude of usage permitted in Article Three of the proposed worldwide treaty. Consequently, potential signatories of the law of the sea treaty, faced with U.S. concessions to Peru on terms more generous than those of Article Three would have every reason not to accept Article Three. And this would doom the treaty.

III. LAW OF THE SEAS AND THE SEABEDS TREATY

The issue

We have begun preliminary discussions in the UN looking toward a treaty governing the status of the deep seabeds. One of the key questions is where the continental shelf ends and the deep seabeds begin. American oil interests want a broad definition of the shelf. The Department of the Interior takes virtually the same position. The Department of Defense, having in mind military security interests, wants a restricted definition. The resolution of this issue will affect more than our commercial opportunities and military security. It will also affect the law of the sea treaty and the matters with which it proposes to deal.

The existing law

According to the Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf, which was ratified by the U.S. and 27 other states, the shelf extends throughout an area that ends where the water is 200 meters deep; but it may be extended by coastal states as far as the “superjacent waters admit of the exploitation of the natural resources of the … area.” The Convention limits a coastal state’s sovereign and exclusive rights on the shelf to exploiting its natural resources and specifies that these rights do not affect the status of superjacent waters as high seas.

The consequences

This flexible definition, however, poses problems for industry by creating uncertainty for capital investment and poses problems for national defense by permitting foreign states to extend their sovereign rights to great distances. As a result, rights for exploitation tend to lead to claims of total sovereignty including sovereignty over superjacent waters.

Claims of total sovereignty, even if restricted to the exploitable area of the shelf, lead to the exclusion of foreign military activities in that area. According to DOD such exclusions would apply to SOSUS devices for detecting and tracing submarines, which for technical reasons are most effective when placed on continental slope area within a boundary of 550 meters depth.

Claims of sovereignty over superjacent waters have already occurred due to great pressure from fishing interests in several countries including the U.S. to claim exclusive fishing rights in the waters above the exploitable area of the shelf. It is also significant that Chile, Ecuador, and Peru based their 200-mile territorial sea claims on the Truman Proclamation of 1945, which unilaterally declared jurisdiction over the natural resources of the shelf. But not only does the present broad and ambiguous definition of the continental shelf lead to the extension of claims for exclusive fishing rights and total sovereignty in the waters above; the proliferating claims to expanded areas of fishing rights lead to claims to exclusive rights and sovereignty on the shelf below.

The relation of seabeds to law of the sea

Clearly, then, the various claims to rights and sovereignty over the continental shelf are integrally related to the uses of the sea that would be regulated by the three articles of the proposed law of the sea treaty. The proposed treaty, if negotiated to a successful conclusion, would prevent some of the difficulties concerning use of the seas that arise from extensions of claims on the continental shelf, since the pressure to extend the legal regime of the shelf to the superjacent waters would. abate. But if ratification of a seabeds treaty were to precede ratification of the law of the sea. treaty, and if this seabeds treaty contained a broad definition of the ccntinental shelf, it would indirectly conflict with the law of the seas treaty.

The U.S. positions

The Department of State, in formal and informal discussions in the UN on a seabeds treaty has advanced a set of “principles, “including the following: “There should be established, as soon as practicable, and taking into account relevant international law, an internationally agreed precise boundary for this area.” The Department of Interior, however, has refused to accept this principle and would substitute for the last phrase the following: “an internationally accepted boundary for this area should be precisely defined.” The effect of the Department of Interior’s wording would be to set off a wave of extensive boundary claims by states, which would preclude international agreement on narrower boundaries. Indeed, such claims are likely to occur anyway unless there is an international moratorium on boundary claims—a proposal which DOD has twice (in letters from Nitze and Packard on 6 January 1969 and 6 March 1969, respectively) urged the Department of State to include in its principles but which the Department has not answered.

It is not clear what position the Department of State plans to take when informal consultations begin at the UN on June 16. Apparently, they are not going to endorse the term “agreed” until either the Department of Interior or. DOD is declared the winner.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The juxtaposition of these two prospective treaties and the Peruvian crisis portends important policy decisions (or lack of decisions) which will affect America’s interests in the long run as well as in the short run. The President will not have an opportunity to affect these decisions if the related issues are not presented to him and the NSC for deliberation.

Rather than attempt to spell out all the options with pros and cons at this late date, I suggest that the following policy conclusions would follow if my facts and priorities are correct.

1. The Department of State should include in its principles concerning the seabeds treaty the proposal of an international moratorium on boundary claims.

2. The President should ascertain whether the Department of State intends to use the original language of its principle with the word “agreed.” If not, a decision should be reached on the differences on this wording between DOD, the Department of State, and the Department of the Interior.

3. Measures for the moment should be taken at the White House level to coordinate American policies and actions on the seabeds treaty with policies and actions on the law of the sea treaty, particularly with a mind to preventing a broad definition of the continental shelf from being accepted before successful negotiation of a new law of the sea treaty.

4. Before the U.S. representative in the fisheries conference takes a position on a modus vivendi with Peru, it should be ascertained whether this position would jeopardize acceptance of Article Three of the law of the sea treaty.

If so, the President might decide that this government should go ahead with the resolution of the fisheries dispute anyway and try to mitigate the impact of the resolution on the law of the sea treaty.

In view of the improbability of our being successful in mitigating the impact, however, we must know our options if the law of the sea treaty negotiations fails because of Peru or indeed for other reasons. Perhaps the only way we could then protect the three mile territorial sea position which entitles us to go through straits more than six miles wide freely would be to be ready at all times to ignore other countries’ claims, thereby forestalling the growth of international (customary) law in the direction of acceptance of twelve-mile and greater limits. In essence this would involve the show or use of force on a continuing basis to assure unimpeded sea and air mobility against friend and foe alike.

On the other hand, the President might decide that we should tell the Peruvians that we attach great importance to Article Three of the law of the sea treaty; that we wish they would find Article Three to their interest too, while recognizing that they may not; that we shall therefore not jeopardize the law of the seas treaty by the way we settle the fisheries dispute; but that we are prepared either to arrange a modus vivendi consistent with that treaty before it is a worldwide agreement or to try to accommodate Peruvian and American interests in an arrangement after successful negotiation of the treaty.

5. If we tell the Peruvians about our negotiations on the law of the sea treaty, we should tell the Russians and our allies about our problems with the Peruvians. If we intend to make a deal with Peru that may be interpreted as conflicting with Article Three, we should prepare the Russians and our allies for the bad news.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you should explain to the President the situation described in this memorandum and recommend that this Government, in order to protect itself against conflicting positions on the law of the sea treaty, the seabeds treaty, and the Peruvian fishing-rights dispute, should initiate a study of the policy options for guiding its negotiations and decisions on these three questions.

Approve HK

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970 (2 of 2). Secret. Kissinger initialed his approval of the recommendation and wrote on the final page, “do brief memo to Pres + NSSM for study.” An attached June 19 note from Haig to Osgood reads, “Henry has read you memorandum and asked that you coordinate with Pete Vaky and Mort Halperin in the preparation of a brief memorandum for the President, forwarding an NSSM for the President’s approval, which will initiate the necessary study.”

342. Circular Telegram 103620 From the Department of State to All American Republic PostsZ 342. Circular Telegram 103620 From the Department of State to All American Republic PostsZ1

Washington, June 24, 1969, 2054Z.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea

1. By Presidential decree of May 16, 1969, Uruguay has extended its territorial sea to 12 miles, its contiguous zone from 12 to 18 miles, and its exclusive fisheries zone to waters superjacent to its continental shelf (the Government of Uruguay presently considers its continental shelf to end at 200 meters but it could expand under the “exploitability” criterion of Article 1 of the Continental Shelf Convention. The 200 meter figure produces an exclusive fisheries zone of from approximately 90 to 120 miles from shore). There is presently pending in Colombia legislation that would extend the territorial sea to 200 miles. Brazil has recently extended its territorial sea to 12 miles and, from time to time, has also considered whether to join other LA countries in asserting territorial seas or exclusive fishing rights out to 200 miles (the US does not recognize territorial sea claims in excess of 3 miles or claims to fisheries zones in excess of 12 miles). FonMin Valdes of Chile recently told Ambassador Korry that all LA coastal nations with exception of Venezuela were adopting 200 miles (without specifying between territorial sea and fisheries jurisdiction) and that Colombia would do so very soon. We view the prospect of further LA assertions of territorial seas or exclusive fisheries zones along the lines of the recent GOU claims with great concern. This concern stems not only from our traditional views about the law of the sea, but also from our belief that great harm to the efforts discussed below could flow from a new round of Latin American claims. On the plus side however we note that, in addition to Venezuela, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Mexico, Trinidad and Brazil have ratified the Geneva Conventions.

2. FYI. NOFORN. Since July 1968 the United States has been engaged in talks with the Soviet Union looking toward a Third Law of the Sea Conference. We have reached agreement in large measure with the Soviets on three draft articles which provide in essence as follows: a) There shall be a maximum of 12 miles for territorial sea and exclusive fisheries zone claims.

b) There shall be a right of free passage through and overflight of all international straits.

c) Coastal States shall have certain preferential fishing rights beyond 12 miles; these preferences depend upon investments made by the coastal State in increasing a stock of fish or upon the economic importance to the coastal State, or a region thereof, of the continued catch by its small coastal fishing vessels of a portion of a stock of fish.

We have discussed these articles with our European allies, Spain, Japan and Australia. In addition, the articles have been given to New Zealand, Sweden and the Philippines. We expect shortly to engage in further discussions with the Soviets to reach final agreement on detailed texts for the articles. As soon as such agreement is reached we intend to undertake with the Soviets a coordinated canvass, covering most nations of the world, to ascertain whether these articles can provide the basis for a successful Law of the Sea Conference. Unified opposition from the Latin Americans would go far to defeat a new conference. We do not expect support from those countries presently claiming 200 miles territorial sea or exclusive fisheries zone. We do, however, want to preserve the opportunity to obtain their support, if possible, and the support of other LA countries which have traditionally taken a position regarding law of the sea issues much closer to our own. We anticipate beginning our canvass in Latin America as soon as possible (perhaps by the end of July). Most countries will be approached through Embassies. We may, however, send experts to hold discussions with key countries.

3. FYI. NOFORN. One further complication arises from the GOU decree in that the claimed exclusive fisheries zone is linked to the continental shelf. Under the Continental Shelf Convention coastal States have exclusive jurisdiction only over the “natural resources” of the seabed; while this includes some living resources it does not include animals that swim. Other nations around the world with strong local fishing interests, for example, Canada and Iceland have long, considered establishment of exclusive fisheries zones above their continental shelves. If a trend develops for coastal States to assert such fisheries zones, it may be impossible to keep separate the law of sea discussions discussed in paragraph 2 above and the seabed discussions which are presently going on in the United Nations Seabed Committee. With all issues being discussed in one forum, we believe our chances of getting acceptable resolutions of all issues important to the U.S. will be greatly reduced. In addition to the arguments we normally make as to why exclusive fishing zones beyond 12 miles are contrary to international law, GOU’s claim can be attacked on the theory that it is directly contrary to Article 3 of the Continental Shelf Convention, which states that the rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf do not affect the legal status of the superjacent waters as high seas, because this article together with Article II of the High Seas Convention clearly recognizes that other nations are to retain their right to fish the superjacent waters. END FYI NOFORN.

4. FOR MONTEVIDEO. Embassy requested to deliver note in paragraph 7 below to GOU at high level and to express deep US disappointment over GOU Decree of May 16 and sincere hope that decision will not lead to difficulties with GOU similar to those US has experienced with west coast LA countries.

5. FOR RIO: Embassy requested to deliver note in paragraph 8 below to GOB.

6. Other posts should not initiate Law of Sea discussions with host governments but are requested to report any activities indicating movement toward adoption new Law of Sea positions or indicating attitudes towards issues discussed in paragraphs 2 and 3. If Law of Sea questions are raised by host government posts authorized to inform them of fact and content of US protests to GOU and GOB. If question raised concerning fact or content Law of Sea matters described paras 2 and 3, these should be referred to Department.

7. FOR MONTEVIDEO. (NOTE to be delivered to GOU).

“The United States Embassy has the honor to refer to Presidential Decree of May 16, 1969, reported in Press Release No. 662/69, which asserts a claim by the Government of Uruguay to a territorial sea of twelve miles, a six-mile contiguous zone which begins at the outer limit of the territorial sea, and a zone of exclusive fisheries jurisdiction extending from the outer limit of such territorial sea to the outer limit of the continental shelf of Uruguay.

It is the understanding of the Government of the United States that the Government of Uruguay presently claims as its continental shelf the submarine areas adjacent to its coast to a depth of 200 meters, that it does not now claim any area as continental shelf beyond that point, and that such 200 meter line is considerably farther than 12 miles from the coast of Uruguay.

The Government of the United States wishes to inform the Government of Uruguay that, for the reasons given below, it does not recognize the territorial sea claim, the contiguous zone claim or the exclusive fisheries zone claim contained in the May 16, 1969 Uruguayan Presidential Decree.

It is the position of the United States that under international law there is no justification for unilateral action extending territorial sea claims beyond 3 nautical miles. As the International Court of Justice stated in the Anglo-Norwegian Fisheries case, the status of the seas adjacent to a nation’s coast cannot be dependent upon the will of the coastal State as expressed in its municipal law since the validity of that status with regard to other States depends upon international law. And, as that Court recently stressed in the North Sea cases while discussing the issue whether Article 6 of the Continental Shelf Convention had become a part of customary international law, “an indispensable requirement” for a proposition to become a part of customary international law “would be that… State practice, including that of States whose interests are specially affected, should have been both extensive and virtually uniform in the sense of the provision involved—and should moreover have occurred in such a way as to show a general recognition that a rule of law or legal obligation is involved.” (See paragraphs 73 and 74 of the opinion of the Court.) Since a substantial number of major maritime nations claim and recognize only three-mile territorial seas, it is clear that no nation is required by international law to recognize territorial sea claims in excess of three nautical miles.

Regarding the Government of Uruguay’s claim of a contiguous zone of six miles beyond the claimed territorial sea of twelve miles, the Government of the United States wishes to emphasize that, as recognized in Article 24.2 of the 1958 Geneva Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, which expresses customary international law in this regard, ‘the contiguous zone may not extend beyond twelve miles from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured’.

With respect to the Decree’s assertion of exclusive fisheries jurisdiction over the waters superjacent to the Uruguayan continental shelf, the United States considers that there is no sound basis in international law for the extension of the exclusive fisheries jurisdiction of a coastal State beyond twelve nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. It is particularly inappropriate for a coastal State to claim an exclusive fisheries zone that is coterminous with the continental shelf because, as recognized in Article 3 of the 1958 Convention on the Continental Shelf, ‘the rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf do not affect the legal status of the superjacent waters as high seas…’ As recognized in Article 2 of the 1958 Convention on the High Seas, freedom of fishing is one of the traditional freedoms of the high seas.

The Government of the United States is pleased to note that paragraph III of the Preamble to the Decree of May 16, 1969 states, with regard to the claimed exclusive fisheries zone, that ‘these rights obviously do not affect and cannot affect free navigation in these waters.’ The United States trusts that the Government of Uruguay shares its view that freedom of navigation is vital to the security of the hemisphere and to the continued use of the worlds’ oceans to facilitate commerce and trade.

The Government of the United States appreciates the legitimate interests of Uruguay and other coastal States in their coastal fisheries. However, the Government of the United States believes that these interests should be recognized by international agreements which also recognize the legitimate interests of other States who may be engaged in distant water fisheries beyond twelve miles from the coastal State, and that these interests cannot lawfully be furthered by unilateral declarations of rights beyond this twelve-mile zone.

Accordingly, the Government of the United States reserves its rights and the rights of its nationals in the areas of the high seas embraced by the Uruguayan claims set forth in the Decree of May 16, 1969.”

8. FOR RIO: (NOTE to be delivered to GOB)

“The United States Embassy has the honor to refer to Decree Law No. 533 of April 25, 1969, which asserts a claim by the Government of Brazil to a territorial sea of twelve nautical miles.

The Government of the United States wishes to inform the Government of Brazil that, for the reasons given below, it does not recognize the territorial sea claim contained in the April 25, 1969 Decree Law.

It is the position of the United States that under international law there is no justification for unilateral action extending territorial sea claims beyond three nautical miles. As the International Court of Justice stated in the Anglo-Norwegian Fisheries case, the status of the seas adjacent to a nation’s coast cannot be dependent upon the will of the coastal State as expressed in its municipal law since the validity of that status with regard to other States depends upon international law. And, as that Court recently stressed in the North Sea cases while discussing the issue whether Article 6 of the Continental Shelf Convention had become a part of customary international law, ‘an indispensable requirement’ for a proposition to become a part of customary international law ‘would be that … State practice, including that of States whose interests are specially affected, should have been both extensive and virtually uniform in the sense of the provision involved;—and should moreover have occurred in such a way as to show a general recognition that a rule of law or legal obligation is involved.’ (See paragraphs 73 and 74 of the opinion of the Court.) Since a substantial number of major maritime nations claim and recognize only three-mile territorial seas, it is clear that no nation is required by international law to recognize territorial sea claims in excess of three nautical miles.

Accordingly, the Government of the United States reserves its rights and the rights of its nationals in the areas of the high seas beyond three nautical miles from the coast of Brazil.”

ROGERS

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Carter on June 23; cleared in S/FW, ARA, L/ARA, ARA/APU, ARA/BR, the Departments of Defense and Interior; and approved by Assistant Legal Adviser for Economic Affairs Richard A. Frank. Edward M. Korry was the U.S. Ambassador to Chile. Gabriel Valdes Subercaseaux was the Chilean Foreign Minister.

343. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 343. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 1, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea

Several important related problems are now being worked on in the Executive Branch without, in my opinion, adequate agreement or understanding at the highest levels of the order of priority which these subjects should be accorded.

The problems are the following: (1) U.S./Soviet preparations for attempting to convene a worldwide law of the sea conference to fix the limit of territorial seas at 12 miles and insure free passage through straits by ships and aircraft;

(2) A dispute with Peru ostensibly over fishing but against the background of a 17-year old, 200-mile territorial sea claim;

(3) U.N. discussions on an eventual treaty governing the use of the seabeds — more particularly the question of where to locate the boundary between the deep seabeds and the continental shelf;

(4) Negotiations in the ENDC in Geneva on a seabed arms control Agreement which would involve fixing a limit similar to a territorial sea boundary;

(5) U.S. domestic pressures to expand U.S. jurisdiction over the continental shelf (the oil industry) and to expand U.S. jurisdiction over the sea (the fishing industry).

DOD views and State Department views at present do not coincide on how ultimately the Peruvian fisheries matter should be handled since DOD does not want anything done which would be prejudicial to our worldwide law of the sea efforts with the Soviet Union.

Moreover, an agreed U.S. position on the continental shelf boundary is now being compromised in the U. N. because the State Department has not endorsed a previously introduced U.S. proposal or taken the lead on it, to wit, that there be international agreement on a precise boundary for the continental shelf. Many nations are now on the verge of unilaterally declaring wide continental shelves. U.S. failure to propose a moratorium on new claims and to endorse and sell its previously introduced position on the need for international agreement may precipitate dozens of new claims in the next several months. The prospect of unilateral claims is anathema for DOD since it was our own 1945 Truman Proclamation on the Continental Shelf which has brought about the present dangerously chaotic situation for traditional freedoms of the seas.

Action in any of these areas affects the other areas. It is, therefore, urgent that the National Security Council address and decide law of the sea priorities. Accordingly, I would appreciate it if a NSSM was prepared on an expedited basis.

If you concur, my staff and yours can be in touch with a view to drafting appropriate questions to be studied.

Melvin Laird

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

344. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 344. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 7, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Secretary of Defense Laird’s request for a NSSM on the law of the sea treaty and related issues (Tab C)

Secretary of Defense Laird has requested the preparation of a NSSM “on an expedited basis” in order to determine the Government’s priorities concerning the law of the sea treaty and (1) resolution of the Peruvian fishing-rights dispute, (2) UN discussions on the definition of the continental shelf in a seabeds treaty, and (3) negotiations in the ENDC on a seabeds arms control agreement.

In responding to the Secretary’s request you should bear in mind a difference of urgency and status among these several issues. All of them, however, could be dealt with more appropriately in the Under Secretaries Committee than in a NSSM.

1. Peru, Ecuador, and Chile have confidentially agreed with the U.S. to submit the fishing-rights dispute to a conference to take place in about three weeks. Meanwhile, the interdepartmental group charged with preparing for the conference will be formulating the U.S. negotiating position. It will be essential during this period to see that our negotiating position is coordinated with our policies toward the law of the sea treaty; that, in the event of a conflict between the two, U.S. policies should reflect a deliberate judgment about priorities that is acceptable to DOD as well as to the Departments of State and Interior; and that if the departments cannot agree upon policies and priorities the matter should be referred to a higher level for resolution. For assuring the attainment of these objectives, the Under Secretaries Committee is an appropriate forum, considering the operational stage of the Peruvian issue and the nature of the task of coordination.

2. Coordination of U.S. policies on the law of the sea treaty and a definition of the boundary between the deep seabeds and the continental shelf will require, first, a determination of American policy toward the latter. Evidently, existing procedures have not been able to resolve policy differences between Defense, Interior, and State on this question. The policy issue, however, is not so complicated or profound as to require a NSSM. Rather, the Under Secretaries Committee would be appropriate to determine the American position in the UN on a definition of the continental shelf, taking into account the possible conflicts between the definition and the U.S. position on the law of the sea treaty.

3. The possible conflict between the U.S. position on a seabeds arms control agreement and the law of the sea treaty is more tactical than substantive. It arises from the prospect that the U.S. may concede a 12-mile limit to the seabed arms control zone instead of the present 3-mile limit. This would undermine the U.S. position in favor of a 3-mile limit to territorial seas, which is our bargaining lever for attaining a suitable agreement on narrow straits in the law of the sea treaty. Since there are no substantive policy differences on these questions, the coordination of our negotiating positions should be handled by the Under Secretaries Committee.

* * * *

In order to implement these recommended actions I have attached a memorandum from you to Secretary of Defense Laird (Tab A) and a memorandum from you to Under Secretary of State Richardson (Tab B) requesting reference of these issues to the Under Secretaries Committee.

I have coordinated this recommendation with Vaky, Halperin, Sonnenfeldt, and Lynn.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the attached memoranda to Laird and Richardson.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. For the final signed versions of Tab A and Tab B, see Documents 349 and 347. Tab C is published as Document 343.

345. Memorandum of Conversation 345. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 7, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Seabed Principles

PARTICIPANTS:

Senator Henry M. Jackson;

Jerry T. Verkler, Staff Director Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs;

Warren Nutter, Assistant Secretary of Defense;

Russell E. Train, Under Secretary of Interior;

Boyd Gibbons, Special Assistant to Mr. Train;

U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary for Political Affairs;

Herman Pollack, Director, International Scientific and Technological Affairs

Approximately three weeks ago Under Secretary Johnson requested a meeting with Senator Jackson following the oral insistence of Under Secretary Train that the Department of Interior would have to reserve its entire position on seabed principles pending consultation with the Senator. The meeting took place this morning in Senator Jackson’s office.

Almost at the outset of the conversation Senator Jackson asserted that under the Geneva Convention, there is no definition of a boundary and concurred in Under Secretary Johnson’s statement that there is a need to draw a line. Under Secretary Train observed that until the character of the regime beyond the line was clearer, we need to go slow on the location of the boundary. Senator Jackson at that point repeated an earlier statement about the very great complexity of the problem. He went on to say that the process of coming up with answers would be a long one and initiated the suggestion that an international moratorium was needed on boundary claims. All of the Executive Agency participants agreed on the necessity for a moratorium.

Under Secretary Johnson said that one of the pending questions within the Executive Branch was whether to seek a definition of a boundary by international agreement or by unilateral actions and stated the general preference of the State Department for the international agreement. Senator Jackson said that he looked forward to seeing the definition in the form of a treaty which would come before the Senate.

Under Secretary Train said that the oil industry wanted us to move slowly, maintain the present status quo, and avoid commitment to a boundary line at this time. Senator Jackson stated that he had not yet consulted the economic interests involved but had asked Charlie Jackson to provide him with some information on the industry points of view. (He described Charlie Jackson as a former Senate staff member.) Senator Jackson went on to suggest that he establish a subcommittee which might hold executive session hearings to obtain the view points of the interested executive agencies and of industry. In response to his question as to the urgency of the subject, Mr. Nutter spoke about the current discussions with the Soviets on territorial seas and straits, the pending discussions with the Peruvians, and the ENDC seabed discussions in Geneva. Mr. Pollack described the increasing difficulty of our position at the UN where the Seabeds Committee was currently conducting “informal” discussions on seabed principles. He made clear that there was on the table for discussion the U.S. June 28, 1968 Principles, Rio sets A and B, and 3 or 4 other sets of principles introduced by participants in the informal discussions.

Under Secretary Train stated that there was no disagreement on the need for principles, but that the Interior Department wanted to be very sure that the words used in formulating the principles would not give away anything we might later wish to retain. He cited as an example the proposed change in the word “arrangement” to “regime.” Regime connoted institutions, whereas arrangements was a broader and looser term. He also referred to the question as to whether the boundary should be “agreed” or “accepted.”

Senator Jackson alluded again to the proposal to establish a subcommittee to hear the views of the several Executive Departments. Mr. Pollack stated that he thought it would be unfortunate if the subcommittee’s time was taken up with hearing explanations with the differences between “arrangements” and “regime.” Under Secretary Johnson suggested that State, Defense, Interior and other Executive Departments continue to work on the principles and moratorium language. Once that had been worked out, a meeting with the subcommittee would be most useful. He went on to suggest that it would be helpful if the several interested committees—Interior, Commerce, Armed Services, and Foreign Relations—could agree to combined consultations or hearings. Senator Jackson said that he would look into that possibility.

Under Secretary Train said that the Interior Department was preparing a memorandum to be sent to State listing the words which were troubling them and seeking clarification as to their precise meaning. He hoped to show this memorandum on Thursday to Secretary Hickel who would be returning to his office on that day, but hoped to be able to make it available to the State Department even before that time. Under Secretary Train made it clear that he could not commit Secretary Hickel’s position on the principles. Senator Jackson said that he thought that the Departments ought to proceed with their efforts to get together on the language of the principles. Under Secretary Train asked if Senator Jackson was saying that the State Department should not go forward with the discussions in the UN and its guidance to the U.S. delegation. The Senator responded that he was sure that the State Department would have to do what was necessary.

Mr. Pollack said that it would be necessary for the U.S. delegation to proceed in the “informal” discussion on the basis of the June 28 Principles. Under Secretary Train wanted to know if it would be necessary to do this this week. Mr. Pollack said that he would want to talk to those who were following the discussions more closely in New York, but that from his knowledge of that, it would appear to be necessary to do this by the end of this week or the first of next. Under Secretary Train asked what our position would be if Secretary Hickel were to conclude later this week that the present administration of the Interior Department could not concur in the language of the June 28 Principles. Mr. Pollack then proposed that the delegation be instructed to state that the United States had under consideration clarifying changes in the language of the principles and that it be authorized to discuss the substance of the principles without continuing commitment to the exact language of the June 28 Principles. The Interior Department was assured that it would have an opportunity to clear this instruction.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-5. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Pollack and approved in J. The conversation was held in Jackson’s office. For the seabed principles proposed by the United States at the UN Ad Hoc Committee to Study the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor Beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction, see UN Document A/AC.135/25 (June 28, 1968).

346. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 346. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 9, 1969.

Subject:

Law of the Sea

I do not share the view expressed in Secretary Laird’s memorandum of July 1 to you that it would be useful at this time to have the National Security Council attempt to reach decisions on the “order of priority” to be accorded some of the various questions in which we are now engaged in negotiations involving in varying degrees the law of the sea. In addition to the subjects mentioned in Secretary Laird’ s memorandum, there are now additional questions such as those involving the Canadian claims, jurisdictional boundaries in the Red Sea, etc., and there will undoubtedly be others in the future. My own view is that it is not practical nor should we seek to establish “priorities” between these various subjects, but we should deal with each on its own merits with a proper regard for their relationship to each other.

With respect to the specific items mentioned by Secretary Laird, our efforts to see whether or not sufficient measure of agreement can be reached to make it worthwhile to seek a worldwide law-of-the-sea conference, which would discourage unilateral claims and promote our objective of maximum freedom of navigation for our naval and merchant ships and aircraft, have been and will continue to be the subject of full interdepartmental consultation and agreement.

The fishing conference with the west coast South American states is scheduled to open July 30. As you know, we certainly have no intention of changing our position with respect to the claims of those states regarding territorial waters or fisheries jurisdiction, but rather intend to work out a modus vivendi which will give better protection to our fishing interests and remove a source of irritation and friction in our relations with these states. Our positions in that conference will, of course, be fully coordinated with the other departments and agencies, including Defense.

With respect to the seabeds question being considered in the United Nations, there has been in existence since February, 1968, a committee (CIPME)* , now chaired by Alexis Johnson, which has been very actively working on attempting to reconcile the many conflicting American private, Government and Congressional interests involved in this complex subject. Looking toward obtaining the information required for what will ultimately have to be a Presidential decision on this question, the Committee has authorized nine research projects most of which are now under way within the Government and one under a contract being nego- tiated with Brookings Institution. In the meantime, the only questions involved are the next steps to be taken in the United Nations to preserve our freedom of action pending decision on our ultimate position. These steps present troublesome questions which continue under discussion within the framework of the Committee. However, I am not aware of any differences between State and Defense on this matter. Rather, it is my impression that both Departments are in agreement and the difficulties that have arisen have been primarily with the Department of Interior. Vigorous efforts are being made to resolve these differences without the necessity of bringing them to the President for decision. In the meanwhile, the State Department has most emphatically not “compromised” in the U.N. “an agreed U.S. position on the continental shelf boundary.”

The negotiation in the ENDC in Geneva on a seabed arms control agreement has already been the subject of two NSC meetings, and as the situation develops in Geneva the NSC mechansim will, of course, be fully utilized in determining our positions on this important disarmament question.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

* Committee on International Policy in Marine Environment

347. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Laird 347. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of Defense Laird1

Washington, July 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea

Attached is a copy of the memorandum I sent Secretary Rogers with regard to your request for an NSSM on the Law of the Sea Treaty and related issues.

I believe that the advanced operational stage of these issues and the urgency of coordinating our negotiating positions upon them make the Under Secretaries Committee the most effective vehicle for accomplishing the objectives we seek. If the Committee should fail to satisfy the views of DOD, State, and Interior, these matters could then, of course, be referred to higher levels.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. The attachment is published as Document 348.

348. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers 348. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, July 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea and Related Subjects

I agree with the view you expressed in your memorandum of July 9 that the NSC need not at this time consider the order of priority to be given to our positions on the various issues involved in this complicated subject.

I also believe, however, that there are several problems raised by Secretary Laird’s memorandum of July 1 which warrant consideration of these issues together at a high level.

-- There are potential conflicts between the US position on the law of the sea treaty and US policies on resolution of the fishing rights dispute, a definition of the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds, and the prospective seabeds arms control agreement.

--There are differences between DOD, State, and Interior on the existence or likelihood of such conflicts and differences on how to resolve them.

--In the event that such conflicts exist or arise and cannot be resolved in a manner satisfactory to DOD, State, and Interior, judgments should be made about the relative importance, or priority, of obtaining one international agreement or the other.

Therefore, I have suggested to Elliot Richardson that the Under Secretaries Committee review these problems as soon as possible, so that there is an opportunity to resolve these issues at that level.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential.

349. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary of State (Richardson) 349. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to the Under Secretary of State (Richardson)1

Washington, July 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Review by the Under Secretaries Committee of the coordination of U.S. policy on the law of the sea treaty with U.S. policies on (a) a resolution of the Peruvian fishing rights dispute, (b) a definition of the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds, and (c) a seabeds arms control agreement.

I believe that there is a need to coordinate as soon as possible the U.S. position on the law of the sea treaty with U.S. policies on three other prospective agreements, and I therefore suggest that the Under Secretaries Committee review this matter.

I. Peruvian fishing rights dispute.

The U.S., Peru, Ecuador and Chile will meet July 30 in a quadripartite fisheries conference. It is therefore urgent that the U.S. negotiating position be formulated as soon as possible, and coordinated with our policies toward the law of the sea treaty. In the event there is a conflict between the two which can not be reconciled among the departments, the matter should be referred to a higher level for resolution.

To these ends I suggest that the Under Secretaries Committee: 1. Determine whether the proposed negotiating position of the U.S. at the quadripartite conference on fishing rights will (a) sanction the juridical claims of Peru, Ecuador, and Chile to a territorial sea boundary beyond 12 miles, and/or

(b) conflict with Article 3 of the law of the sea treaty in such a way as to jeopardize passage of this treaty.

2. If either or both of these consequences seem likely, (a) determine whether the U.S., through its negotiating position and other policies, can reconcile resolution of the fishing-rights dispute with the law of the sea treaty, or

(b) refer to higher authority for guidance on whether to give priority to one objective or the other.

II. Definition of the Continental Shelf.

The Under Secretaries Committee should determine the position of the U.S. in UN discussions of the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds and, at the same time, reconcile this position with the U.S. position on the law of the sea treaty. If such reconciliation is unfeasible, it should refer the issues to a higher level for resolution.

III. Seabeds arms control agreement.

A possible conflict between the U.S. position on a seabeds arms control agreement and the law of the sea treaty would arise if the U.S. were to concede a 12-mile limit to the seabed arms control zone instead of the present position in favor of a 3-mile limit, since this would undermine our 3-mile bargaining position for attaining a suitable agreement on narrow straits in the law of the sea treaty.

The Under Secretaries Committee should see that the U.S. negotiating positions on these two agreements are coordinated so as to avoid jeopardizing one or the other agreement.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Secret.

350. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 350. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, July 22, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Progress report of the law of the sea treaty and related issues

In a memorandum to Richardson dated July 12 you suggested that the Under Secretaries Committee review coordination of U.S. policy on the law of the sea treaty with U.S. policies on (a) a resolution of the Peruvian fishing rights dispute, (b) a definition of the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds, and (c) a seabeds arms control agreement. This memorandum is to bring you up to date on these matters.

A. Peruvian Fisheries Dispute

The most complicated and urgent set of issues related to the law of the sea treaty arise with respect to the forthcoming quadripartite negotiations with the CEP countries (Chile, Ecuador, Peru) on fisheries. According to those interested primarily in the law of the sea treaty, as opposed to those interested primarily in fishing rights or good relations with Latin America, your memorandum to Richardson is solely responsible for the fact that the ad hoc committee charged with formulating the U.S. negotiating position has made a genuine effort not to jeopardize the chance of achieving a law of the sea treaty, since the chairman of the committee (Assistant Secretary of State for Wildlife and Fisheries) and the representative of the Under Secretary of State sitting as an observer have been determined to keep the issue out of the Under Secretaries Committee.

The remaining points in disagreement have now been submitted to a drafting committee, which will probably succeed in formulating positions acceptable to the committee as a whole. If not, the DOD representative will probably request or threaten to request referral of the matter to the Under Secretaries Committee. But since the negotiating delegation leaves for Buenos Aires on July 28, it is questionable whether the Committee can be assembled.

B. Definition of the Continental Shelf

No less important or urgent but somewhat less complicated is the relationship of the present UN discussions on a definition of the continental shelf to the law of the sea treaty.

Here three issues confront the U.S. representatives in these discussions: 1. Should the U.S. reaffirm its previous position in favor of an internationally agreed boundary in order to hold open the option of reaching a narrow definition of the continental shelf?

2. Should the U.S. propose a moratorium on shelf claims in order to hold open the option of an international agreement on the boundary?

3. Should the U.S. bilaterally protest or contest such claims when they go beyond the present Geneva Convention and our interpretation of that Convention?

So far, because of disagreements on these questions between DOD, Interior, and State (but principally the first two agencies), the U.S. has. taken no position on any of these issues. Meanwhile, other nations are rapidly stating claims to the seabeds which will preclude an international agreement consistent with DOD’s view of U.S. military interests or the State Department’s view of our general interest in the orderly use of the sea and seabeds. Senator Pell recently strongly criticized the State Department for not protesting these claims.

DOD is now “so engrossed in the Peruvian fishing-rights crisis that it is unlikely to get these issues before the Under Secretaries Committee.

C. Seabed Arms Control Agreement

The Under Secretaries Committee was asked to review this matter because of DOD’s fear that our agreement to a 12-mile instead of a 3-mile exclusion boundary in the arms control agreement would undermine the U.S. bargaining lever for obtaining agreement to the provision for use of narrow straits in the prospective law of the sea treaty. It is now apparent that some of those equally concerned with obtaining a law of the sea treaty differ with this estimate. They contend that by publicly and explicitly confining the 12-mile zone to arms control provisions the U.S. could avoid the implication that it had conceded a 12-mile zone so far as the law of the sea treaty is concerned. Moreover, they point out that such a concession could quickly gain our arms control agreement, whereas we shall not know whether a law of the sea treaty is obtainable until 1971.

At present, these conflicting positions are in deadlock.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Sent for information. Published from an uninitialed copy.

351. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) 351. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig)1

Washington, July 23, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the sea, etc.

In extension of my remarks and my memo yesterday: 1. The differences between DOD and State on the fisheries conference, although they arise from differences of priority, now take the form of seemingly fine and esoteric points of language concerning U.S. negotiating positions at the CEP conference. In the final analysis they must be resolved by skilled draftsmen willing to reach a compromise. The chances are, this morning, about 85% that McKernan’s ad hoc committee can agree to a positions paper.

2. It is doubtful that the Under Secretaries Committee can facilitate the process of agreement at this stage of the game. The delegation leaves for Buenos Aires on July 28.

3. Nevertheless, the HAK memo to Richardson has proved to be a great incentive toward compromise. All members of McKernan’s committee prefer to resolve their differences in committee rather than at a higher level. All interpret the memo to mean that the formulation of negotiating positions should go to the Under Secretaries Committee only if there arise conflicts involving differences of priority that cannot be resolved in the ad hoc committee.

4. Although the delegation will leave with agreed language, the interpretation of that language in the give-and-take of the conference will inevitably raise again differences of view within the delegation.

5. Since the surveillance of the Under Secretaries Committee will at that time no longer exist, and since McKernan will be authorized to sign an agreement without the concurrence of the President or HAK, there is a real prospect that the vicissitudes of bargaining in Buenos Aires and/or compromises among the principals in Washington (who are unfamiliar with the intricacies of the issues between a law of the sea treaty and a fisheries agreement) will produce a treaty that HAK and his staff have not seen let alone approved in terms of the criteria of HAK’s memo.

6. To guard against this possibility the easiest and most proper solution would seem to lie in my suggested memo from HAK to the Acting Executive Secretary of State.

The delegation’s knowledge that HAK will get a chance to see the treaty before it is signed by McKernan will inert the same beneficent effect toward constructive compromise within our delegation that the prospect of review by the Under Secretaries Committee has exerted upon the drafting of the U.S. negotiating positions. It would greatly reduce the prospect that disagreements in Buenos Aires would have to be referred back to Washington.

If nonetheless, by some unlikely chance, HAK found himself in the position of disagreeing with State on the wisdom of McKernan’s signing the treaty, he would be in a position to call the Under Secretaries Committee to resolve the difference.

The request that HAK see any agreement before it is signed seems perfectly proper and not unusual. After all, the President has a right to qualify his delegation responsibility for signing agreements. Moreover, the request is consistent with the spirit and intention of HAK’s memo to Richardson and can be regarded as a practical implementation of that memo in the absence of any meeting of the Under Secretaries Committee on the fisheries dispute.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Confidential. Published from an uninitialed copy.

352. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) 352. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Senior Military Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig)1

Washington, July 24, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the sea, etc.

The ad hoc committee for the CEP conference succeeded in covering up its differences sufficiently to get an agreed negotiating position. Nonetheless, the delegation members from State and DOD who are mostly interested in the law of the sea treaty fear that all the suppressed issues will arise again in Buenos Aires, where they will be outmaneuvered or their relatively uninformed principals in Washington will make crucial and unwise concessions leading to McKernan’s signature of an agreement. They are sure that McKernan is determined to keep HAK out of the act and that he has every procedural right to do so under the instrumentality authorizing him to sign an agreement. Consequently, they would like to make signature of the treaty contingent upon HAK’s concurrence in some form.

I have told them that the Under Secretaries Committee will be monitoring the conference but that it is up to them to see that unresolvable differences get reviewed by the Committee rather than bargained away, and that HAK cannot be put in the position of asking, in effect, for a veto power over McKernan or Richardson.

Nevertheless, I agree with you that it would be highly improper for McKernan to sign an agreement (even if it has the formal concurrence of all the agencies specified in Circular 175’s authorization) without letting HAK see it first. Therefore, I have written the attached letter. It is equally important I think, to get a similar informal assurance from the Executive Secretary of State.

Attachment
Letter From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Fisheries and Wildlife (McKernan)

Washington, July 24, 1969

Dear Don:

I appreciated the opportunity to sit as an observer of the deliberations of your committee to prepare our position for the fisheries conference with the CEP countries. Let me express my admiration for the skill, tact, and fairness with which you conducted these deliberations in the face of some substantial underlying differences of approach advocated by strong minds. I hope that you will be as successful in forging a constructive agreement with the CEP representatives.

Of course, your committee cannot and should not try to tie down every point in advance; so a number of controversial issues among our delegation members may be reopened during the give-and-take of the conference. This represents a problem for the uninitiated in Washington who are trying to comprehend the subtleties of the basic issues. Henry Kissinger wants me to be cognizant of the negotiations in Buenos Aires so that I can alert him to issues that may raise the question of priority between the law of the sea treaty and resolution of the fisheries problem. Hopefully, such issues can be resolved satisfactorily in Buenos Aires, since no one wants to throw these intricate matters into the Under Secretaries Committee. In any event, I assume that Kissinger, as a member of the Under Secretaries Committee and in accordance with his memorandum of July 12 to Richardson, will have the opportunity to examine any agreement before it is signed. I shall keep my eye out for that contingency but not hold my breath.

My best wishes to you.

Cordially,

Robert E. Osgood

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. After the penultimate sentence, Osgood inserted a handwritten note that read: “But I shall not send it. Instead, I have communicated its message to McKernan on the telephone. He assured me that HAK would have an opportunity to see the agreement before it is signed. He also assured me that he would keep me informed, through a special secretariat in his office, of the conference developments.” A handwritten notation by Osgood on the attached letter reads: “Not sent. Communicated telephonically.” Department of State Circular 175, December 13, 1955, outlined procedures for the negotiation and signature of treaties and other international agreements. See Arthur W. Rovine, Digest of United States Practice in International Law 1974, (Washington: U.S. Department of State, 1975), pp. 199-215.

353. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Members of the Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment 353. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Members of the Committee on International Policy in the Marine Environment1

Washington, August 11, 1969.

FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE:

There is attached for your records a copy of a Draft Resolution on seabed principles which our Delegation to the UN Seabeds Committee has been authorized to use in discussions with other delegations and to draw upon and/or table in the UN Seabeds Committee at a time deemed by our Delegation to be most advantageous, and a copy of an Executive Branch Understanding on Boundary Principle, i.e., paragraph 3.a. of the Draft Resolution.

Agreement on the Executive Branch Understanding was arrived at by discussions between the Department of State and the Departments of Defense, Interior and Commerce following discussions earlier this year in CIPME meetings.

U. Alexis Johnson
Chairman

Attachment 1

August 9, 1969

DRAFT RESOLUTION INCLUDING LEGAL PRINCIPLES ON THE SEABED

The General Assembly: 1. Declares that there is an area of the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas, which is beyond the limits of national jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as “this area”);

2. Declares further that in the exploration and use of this area states should be guided by the following principles: a. Exploration and use of this area shall be carried on for the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geographical location of states, taking into account the special needs of the developing countries;

b. This area shall be free for exploration and use by all states on a basis of equality and in accordance with international law;

c. No part of this area shall be subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means;

d. This area shall be reserved exclusively for peaceful purposes; and

e. Activities in this area shall: (i) be conducted in accordance with international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and in the interest of maintaining international peace and security and promoting international cooperation, scientific knowledge, and economic development; and

(ii) avoid unjustifiable interference with the exercise of the freedoms of the high seas by other states and their nationals, or with the conservation of the living resources of the seas, or any interference with fundamental scientific research carried out with the intention of open publication.

3. Recommends to the Seabeds Committee for guidance with respect to the delineation of this area: a. There should be established, as soon as practicable, and taking into account relevant international law, an internationally agreed precise boundary for this area; and

b. Exploitation or other use of any portion of the seabed and the ocean floor prior to establishment of the boundary shall not prejudice its eventual location.

4. Further recommends to the Seabed Committee for guidance concerning a legal regime for this area: a. There should be established, as soon as practicable, an internationally agreed regime governing exploitation of this area;

b. The regime should provide due protection for the integrity of investments in exploitation of this area undertaken prior to establishment of its boundary;

c. The regime should include provisions for: (i) the orderly development of resources in a manner reflecting the interest of the international community in the development of these resources;

(ii) conditions conducive to the making of investments necessary for the exploration and exploitation of this area;

(iii) dedication as feasible and practicable of a portion of the value of the resources recovered from this area to international community purposes; and

(iv) accommodation among commercial and other uses of the deep ocean floor and marine environment.

Attachment 2

Executive Branch Understanding on Boundary Principle

“3.a. There should be established, as soon as practicable, and taking into account relevant international law, an internationally agreed precise boundary for this area;”

The following numbered paragraphs reflect the understanding of the signatory agencies as to the intent and purpose of the above boundary principle. These understandings will not be released outside the Executive Branch, but may be utilized as a framework or as guidelines within which future U.S. positions could be developed if such becomes necessary or appropriate. The exposition and explanation of these Principles to members of the UN Seabeds Committee, Congressional committees, etc., will be consistent with these understandings.

(1) The Principle does call for the definition of a precise boundary;

(2) The Principle is intended to support the U.S. objective of maintaining the full range of options with respect to the location of the boundary and the process by which the location will be defined. With respect to location these options are understood to include coastal state jurisdiction over seabed resources in a wide zone extending perhaps as far as the landward portion of the continental rise, or to a fixed distance; a narrow zone extending to a 200 meter isobath or perhaps slightly beyond, or to a fixed distance; or to a narrow zone combined with a transitional zone. With respect to the process by which the boundary would be defined these options are understood to include (1) a formal international agreement such as a protocol or amendment to the Convention on the Continental Shelf or a new Treaty; or (2) interpretation, such as might be achieved by parallel uniform ex parte declarations by the coastal states parties to the Continental Shelf Convention and such additional states as care to join them; or (3) such other options as may subsequently be agreed to by the Executive Branch.

It is further understood that the adoption by the General Assembly of this Principle would be without prejudice to the location of the limit of national jurisdiction, the validity of past claims or the rights of states to assert boundaries for their continental shelves under international law if the efforts to achieve a precise boundary by acceptable international agreement prove unsuccessful within a reasonable period of time.

During the time a precise definition of a boundary is being sought under this Principle the United States, while not wishing to inhibit further exploration and exploitation of the natural resources of the seabed, will neither recognize nor accept as binding upon itself or its nationals assertions of national jurisdiction to the seabeds which appear prejudicial to maintaining the full range of options referred to above. The United States will appropriately so notify countries making such assertions.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, General Files on NSC Matters, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, NSC/Misc.-Seabed. Limited Official Use;Noforn. A copy was sent to Christopher Phillips at USUN.

354. Circular Airgram CA-4850 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts 354. Circular Airgram CA-4850 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1

Washington, August 29, 1969, 1313

SUBJECT:

24th United Nations General Assembly

REF:

(A) CA 10681, September 6, 1968;

(B) CA 4110, July 22, 1969

The twenty-fourth Regular session of the Unlfed Nations General Assembly is scheduled to convene in New York this year on Tuesday, September 16. As usual, a large number of Foreign Ministers and some heads of state are expected to attend the opening and the early days of the session devoted to General Debate. Guidance on reporting planned attendance by high-ranking officials is contained in Ref. B.

As in the past, action addressee posts are requested informally to exchange views on the forthcoming UN General Assembly with foreign ministry officials before the departure of host government’s UN delegation. The purpose of these discussions is to make known, and where appropriate to request host government support for, the US position on the major issues and to determine positions and likely initiatives of the host government. (USUN should be included as an info addressee on all reports in response to this airgram.) This airgram deals with political and legal issues. A separate message will cover economic, social and budgetary questions. Supplementary guidance and instructions on specific issues will be provided in subsequent messages as necessary.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to seabeds.]

5. SEABEDS

The General Assembly will receive the Report of the 42-member Seabeds Committee created by the 23rd General Assembly. The Assembly will review the work of the Committee, including its effort to reach agreement on principles governing the exploration and exploitation of the deep seabed in the area beyond national jurisdiction and the views within the Seabeds Committee on the nature of an international regime for this area. The Assembly will also discuss efforts toward international cooperation in oceanographic research and safeguards against marine pollution.

We continue to urge agreement on a set of principles which would generally follow the substance of those we first presented in the Ad Hoc Seabeds Committee in New York in June 1968 and those we supported at the Ad Hoc Committee meeting in Rio in August 1968.

In the Assembly we plan to point out the need for establishment of an internationally agreed precise boundary for the area beyond national jurisdiction and to make clear that in the meantime exploitation should continue. We also plan to describe our view that some kind of international machinery as a part of an international regime for the deep seabeds might be desirable, including the possibility of an international registry operating on the basis of agreed criteria.

We recognize that the major issues which underlie discussions of the seabeds, including particularly the location of the boundary and the nature of the international regime, will not be solved overnight, but we believe it is important that these issues be resolved by international agreement as soon as possible. We want to keep the Seabeds Committee as the central point of focus for substantive debate and to avoid a situation where the Assembly might itself attempt to work out substantive agreements on the ground that the Committee had been unable to cope with its task. The Seabeds Committee has already developed a considerable degree of expertise and is the forum best suited for serious discussions on-seabeds.

[Omitted here is material unrelated to seabeds.]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, UNGA-3. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by the IO/UNP staff and approved by Greene. The published section of the enclosure is enclosure 5 and is classified as Limited Official Use. Sent to all posts except the following to which it was repeated for information: Algiers, Bern, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, Khartoum, Moscow, Prague, Saigon, Seoul, Sofia, Warsaw, USINT Cairo, USUN, USOECD Paris, US NATO, the mission at Geneva, and USEC Brussels. The remainder of the airgram, which deals with General Assembly issues unrelated to Law of the Sea negotiations, is not published.

355. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 355. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, September 3, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Relationship between Seabed Disarmament and U.S.-Soviet Law of Sea Project

The United States and U.S.S.R. are engaged in a cooperative effort to hold a new Law of the Sea Conference to establish a maximum of 12 miles for territorial sea and exclusive fishing zone claims, provide a right of free passage through and overflight of international straits, and provide for certain preferential fishing rights for coastal States beyond 12 miles. The entire world knows of this effort; we have given draft articles to approximately 30 countries; the Soviets also have begun to canvass other countries.

I believe that acceptance now of a 12-mile band for the seabed arms control treaty would not prejudice either our chances of obtaining broad international agreement to the U.S.-U.S.S.R. law of the sea articles or our position that we need not recognize territorial sea claims exceeding 3 miles. I also believe our refusal to accept a 12-mile band in the arms control context could produce undesirable consequences for the broader law of the sea project. My reasons are as follows: a) All other maritime nations who claim 3-mile territorial seas (e.g. U.K., Japan, France, Germany) are willing to accept 12 miles in the arms control area; as their interests are similar to ours, our refusal to accept 12 miles will be considered as unreasonable or as a subterfuge to scuttle an arms control agreement.

b) Our legal argument, recently supported by the International Court of Justice, is that customary international law does not sanction territorial sea claims in excess of 3 miles as long as the States most concerned do not accept such a rule. As we have already accepted a 12-mile fisheries zone and a 12-mile contiguous zone, acceptance of a 12-mile zone of exemption from the, arms control treaty will not weaken our legal position on the territorial sea if we and the other concerned maritime nations reaffirm this position.

c) The 3-mile figure for the arms control treaty cannot be negotiated. Nations that have publicly called for a seabed arms control agreement probably will not be encouraged to support our law of the sea articles if they conclude we require such support as the price for the arms control agreement. Their concerns are as much political as they are practical.

d) An open dispute with the Soviets in the arms control contest involves some risk to our continued cooperation in the Law of the Sea effort.

e) We are engaged in several oceans-related activities which we want to keep separate — seabed boundary and regime issues, seabed arms control, the law of the sea articles, settlement of our problems with Chile, Ecuador and Peru, and adoption of procedures to facilitate research. Their combination in one big conference would dissipate our bargaining strengths. We will better be able to keep these matters separate if we make steady progress in each forum.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OA Files: Lot 73 D 391, Box 9, Law of the Sea USG Position. Confidential. Drafted by Carter.

356. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 356. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 12, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Continental shelf boundary

The U.S. Government still lacks a united position in negotiations at the UN to define the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds. As I have explained in previous memoranda (Tab A), a compromise on wording between the Department of State and the Department of Interior fails to satisfy the Department of Defense. DOD insists that holding open the option of a narrow boundary or indeed of any “internationally agreed” boundary that can stop a rash of unilateral claims depends on reaching an agreement by treaty. State and Interior have agreed in an executive understanding that a treaty is just one of several ways—including unilateral ex parte declarations—to achieve an internationally agreed boundary. This difference is apparent at the UN, where the absence of a definite American position is leading to endless and fruitless discussions while unilateral claims proliferate.

The difference within the Government on this seemingly legalistic yet quite substantive question is bound to receive increased publicity if it is not soon resolved. According to your memorandum of July 12 (Tab B), the difference should be resolved by the Under Secretaries Committee.

In testimony on July 30 before Senator Pell’s Subcommittee on Ocean Space, of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the divergent positions of State and DOD were explicitly put on record by Alexis Johnson and Warren Nutter. That testimony, with some strong statements of criticism by Senator Pell, will soon be released.

Several other Congressional hearings will soon be dealing with this and other issues relating to ocean resources. On September 23 and 24, for example, joint hearings before the Subcommittee on Commerce will be held. The prospect is either that these hearings will once more reveal the USG at odds with itself or that they will indicate that the State-Interior position is the USG’s position.

In addition to this unresolved difference on the international procedure for defining the continental shelf boundary, there is another unresolved difference that the Under Secretaries Committee is supposed to resolve: DOD insists upon the necessity of the U.S. supporting a moratorium on unilateral claims; State and Interior have not agreed to this.

Probably DOD will be requesting a meeting of the Under Secretaries Committee. Their representative has made it clear that he would prefer you to request such a meeting. I suppose, however, that you do not want to be in that position; hence, this is an information rather than an action memorandum.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it. For Tab A, see Documents 350, 351, and 352. For Tab B, see Document 349. Senator Claiborne Pell (D-Rhode Island) was chair of the Oceans and Space Subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

357. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 357. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, October 13, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea - INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

We have begun a worldwide canvass to determine whether a successful Law of the Sea Conference can be held in the near future to adopt articles along the lines of the U.S. - Soviet draft Articles on Law of the Sea (Tab A). In addition to the NATO countries, Japan, Spain, and several Latin American countries with whom we had earlier held discussions, we will canvass an additional 58 countries in all regions. Most countries will be approached through our Embassies; however, 7 countries in Africa will also be visited by State, DOD and Interior experts from Washington during the first half of November, and 9 or 10 countries in East and South Asia will be visited by another team of experts after the first of the year.

Each country canvassed is being given a comprehensive aide memoire explaining our reasons for favoring a Law of the Sea Conference and the history of our activities in this regard to date and is being asked several specific questions about their position on a Conference (Tab B). After the canvass is completed we hope to be in a position to determine whether a successful Law of the Sea Conference can be called in the near future and what the most appropriate time for such a Conference will be. We anticipate the canvass will reveal the necessity of making drafting changes in the Articles in consultation with our NATO allies and the Soviet Union.

ATTACHMENT A

Aide Memoire

In the summer of 1967, the Soviet Union approached the United States as well as a large number of other countries soliciting views on the possibility of a new international conference on the law of the sea to achieve widespread agreement to a 12-mile limit for the territorial sea and exclusive fisheries zone. The United States responded at that time that its position would be influenced by whether the Soviet Union and others would be prepared to support provisions providing free passage through and over international straits; and we stated that for a successful conference we thought it would be necessary to provide for accommodation of special fishing interests of coastal states beyond 12 miles.

The United States consulted bilaterally with a number of countries regarding the Soviet approach. Most nations consulted agreed with the desirability of seeking to put a stop at 12 miles to claims of exclusive coastal jurisdiction and the importance in this connection of assuring free passage through and over international straits. A number of countries also agreed that, in order to secure world-wide support for treaty of this sort, some recognition of the special interests of the coastal States in fisheries beyond 12 miles was necessary.

Consultations between United States and Soviet experts in the latter half of 1968 resulted in the draft Articles herewith delivered to the Government of ________. The Government of the United States is conducting a canvass of many nations to learn whether Articles along the lines of these three draft Articles can be adopted at a new Law of the Sea Conference.

During discussions leading to these draft Articles the United States had the following considerations in mind: A. There are basically three reasons why there should be a new Law of the Sea Conference in the near future: all countries have a general foreign policy interest in avoiding dissension and possible conflicts that could arise from unilateral assertions of jurisdiction over ocean space in the absence of agreed limits for coastal State jurisdiction; many have security and general commercial interests in assuring free passage through and overflight of international straits, which would be subject to the limitation of “innocent passage” if overlapped by territorial seas; and they also have a general interest in assuring that resources of the oceans are utilized in a rational manner that accommodates the interests of coastal States and distant water States.

B. Existing treaty law does not expressly specify clear maximum limits for the permissible breadth of territorial sea and fisheries jurisdiction claims. So far as State practice regarding the breadth of the territorial sea is concerned, approximately 30 States claim 3-mile territorial seas, over 20 claim varying distances from 4 up to 10, approximately 40 States claim 12, and at least 8 states claim a larger distance. Approximately 65 nations claim exclusive fisheries jurisdiction of 12 miles; at least 10 countries claim in excess of that amount; and 24 claim less. The trend since 1958 has been in the direction of more extensive unilateral claims. It seems clear that 12 miles represents the last opportunity for reaching international agreement to a clearly specified limit for territorial sea and exclusive fisheries zone claims. Viewed in practice or in principle the alternative to such agreement, of ever-increasing unilateral claims during an era when expanding technology results in increasing use of the oceans, involves serious consequences for all uses of the high seas and creates the potential for serious conflict.

C. The importance of assuring free passage through straits in connection with an agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea is based in large part on the fact that a change in recognition of the permissible breadth of the territorial sea from 3 to 12 miles would result in approximately 116 straits, many of which are very important to international navigation, being overlapped entirely by territorial waters. As a result coastal State sovereignty would be subject only to the right of “innocent” passage.

Article 16 of the Territorial Sea Convention, which provides that innocent passage may not be suspended through straits used for international navigation between one part of the high seas and another part of the high seas or the territorial sea of a foreign State, recognizes no right of overflight.

Moreover there is no assurance that the coastal State, which is in the position of initially making the judgment whether a ship’s passage is “innocent,” will not make an arbitrary judgment.

As the 1967 war in the Middle East demonstrated, closure of an important strait on the basis of an arbitrary judgment can have the most serious consequences. All nations, particularly those dependent upon shipping and those with fleets too small to justify special agreements for passage through important straits, have a great interest in assuring free navigation through and over straits. As we contemplate the future, technological changes affecting the design and power plant even of commercial vessels may give rise to questions regarding the right of innocent passage; as an example, there could be questions about the right of an atomic powered commercial submarine to navigate submerged in territorial waters. Further dissension can be avoided and navigational rights preserved in the future if the international community can now agree to provisions securing a right of free passage through and over international straits.

D. Unilateral assertions of broad fishing jurisdiction do not provide a framework within which much needed resources of the oceans will be rationally utilized for the purpose of feeding the world’s population. The United States has been of the opinion that it will not be possible to achieve a broadly supported treaty on the basis of Articles I and II unless some recognition is made in the treaty of the special interests of the coastal States in fisheries beyond 12 miles. The views of the United States in this regard are influenced by the desirability of providing for an accommodation of the interests of both coastal fishing States and distant water fishing States. Such an accommodation should, in our view, ensure the protection of both coastal and distant water fishing interests, permit questions regarding fishing rights beyond 12 miles to be resolved without complicating reference to the extent of national territory or jurisdiction, and greatly reduce the internal pressures in many States for extension of jurisdiction to the practical exclusion of foreign fleets. The U.S. fishing industry is composed of both coastal State fishing interests and distant water fishing interests. Article III represents an attempt to reconcile these different interests in the area beyond 12 miles from the coastal State. The draft Articles would not alter or affect existing bilateral or multilateral fisheries agreements.

In the course of discussions between United States experts and experts from other countries we have found much support for efforts to convene a conference to define clearly the maximum permissible limits for unilateral assertions of coastal State jurisdiction, protect navigation through and over straits, and generally add stability to the law of the sea. We have found general acceptance of a limit of 12 miles in Article I if accompanied by an acceptable Article II. We have also found general acceptance of the concept of free transit through and overflight of straits, but not of that language of Article II which provides for a “corridor of high seas.” Several experts sought express assurance that existing bilateral and multilateral fisheries agreements effective within the 12-mile zone would not be affected by the articles.

The fisheries article, Article III, has been the source of some difficulty in interpretation and some disagreement regarding the necessity or desirability of dealing with this issue at a Law of the Sea Conference to be held in the near future. The following points are intended to clarify the meaning of this draft article: a) Paragraph A establishes the principle that high seas fishery problems between coastal and distant water fishing States should be resolved by negotiation, but that if agreement is not reached within six months a coastal State can apply unilaterally the measures provided for in paragraphs B, C, and D.

b) Paragraph B provides that the costal State may apply conservation measures in certain circumstances. The provision restates Article 7 of the 1958 Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas.

c) Paragraph C provides that a coastal State may adopt measures to reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of a particular stock of fish if it has undertaken substantial investment for the reproduction of this stock (e.g. through the establishment of hatcheries). The part of the allowable catch reserved must not be more than can be justified by the investment and must not prevent other States from fishing for their traditional catch of the stock (e.g. if an investment in reproduction of a stock of fish increases the allowable catch by 20% the coastal State could reserve this 20% to itself). (“Allowable catch” refers to the part of a particular stock of fish that, on the basis of the evidence available, can be caught in any particular year while maintaining the maximum sustainable yield of the stock for future years.)

d) Paragraph D provides that a coastal State may reserve to itself a part of the allowable catch of a particular stock of fish where harvest of that stock has substantial importance to the economy of the coastal State or a region thereof. All measures adopted by the coastal state to this end, other than catch limitations, will be effective only in the zone of activity of small coastal fishing vessels that are based exclusively in ports of the coastal State and are of such a size and character that they cannot be relocated to other areas of the high seas (e.g. they cannot engage in distant water fishing). In recognition of the fact that the stock of fish involved may move out beyond this zone at certain times of the year, and there be subject to being caught by distant water fishing vessels, the coastal state may enforce catch limitations beyond this zone if necessary to assure that the small coastal State fishing vessels can continue to catch the reserved portion of the stock of fish within the zone; however, these catch limitations must also be applicable to other vessels of the coastal State (i.e. large vessels located in other areas of the coastal State) as well as to foreign vessels.

Particular note is made of the important criteria contained in paragraph D designed to achieve a harmonious balance of economic interests. Paragraph D 3 provides that measures taken by the coastal State may “not prevent other States from fishing for that part, if any, of the allowable catch (of the stock subject to the coastal State’s measures) traditionally taken by them”. There would be no discrimination among distant water States with regard to the opportunity to fish for the part of the allowable catch traditionally taken by all distant water States. In addition, the part of the allowable catch reserved by the coastal State’s measures cannot be “more than can be justified” by the economic interest upon which the measures are based (paragraph D 2)—i.e. the coastal State cannot reserve a greater portion of “a particular stock of fish” than that portion whose harvest has “substantial importance for the economy” of the coastal State or a region of the coastal State. These provisions would establish the principle that unilateral coastal State actions can be undertaken to protect the real economic interests of the coastal State but cannot be undertaken without reference to the interests of other States.

e) All coastal State measures adopted pursuant to paragraphs B, C, and D must satisfy the specific criteria referred to in the numbered subparagraphs of these respective paragraphs in order to be effective against third States. If there is a dispute as to whether these criteria are met, it is to be resolved pursuant to paragraph F, referred to below.

f) Paragraph E makes it clear that beyond the 12-mile limit established by Article I all States may fish on an equal basis for all stocks of fish, or other living marine resources, not subject to coastal State regulations under paragraphs B, C, or D and may also fish for that portion of a regulated stock of fish not reserved to the coastal State under paragraphs C and D.

g) Paragraph F provides for compulsory and binding dispute settlement. Almost all experts consulted strongly support such a provision in a fisheries article.

In recognition of the problems that some experts have raised in connection with the “corridor of high seas “ language in Article II and in response to the view that existing or future bilateral and multilateral fisheries agreements should expressly be recognized as valid between the parties, the United States has given favorable consideration to amending Article II and adopting a new final clause as follows: a) Article II would read in full as follows: “In straits used for international navigation between one part of the high seas and another part of the high seas or the territorial sea of a foreign State, all ships and aircraft in transit shall enjoy the same freedom of navigation and overflight, for the purpose of transit through and over such straits, as they have on the high seas. Coastal States may designate corridors suitable for transit by all ships and aircraft through and over such straits. In the case of straits where particular channels of navigation are customarily employed by ships in transit, the corridors, so far as ships are concerned, shall include such channels.”

b) A new final clause would read in full as follows: “The provisions of this Convention shall not affect Conventions or other international agreements already in force specifically relating to particular straits or fisheries.”

The United States is conducting a canvass to determine whether the international community believes that a Law of the Sea Conference should and can be held to adopt articles along the lines of draft Articles I, II and III. We would not favor a conference unless there is reason to believe it will be successful. It has been our position that if such a conference is held it should be held without opening the 1958 Geneva Conventions on the Law of the Sea for amendment. If the responses to this canvass are favorable, we would hope that a conference could be convened as soon as practicable.

In this regard, the Government of the United States would appreciate receiving the general views of the Government of _________________ concerning these draft articles and the position expressed in this aide memoire and views of the Government of __________________ concerning the following specific questions: 1. Should a new Law of the Sea Conference be held to adopt articles along the lines of the three draft articles?

2. Could the Conference be limited to these items?

3. Should a Conference be held to adopt articles along the lines of Articles I and II, with the question of fisheries beyond 12 miles being deferred to a subsequent Conference?

4. Could a Conference limited to Articles I and II be successful?

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D113, Box 7, NSC/MISC/Law of the Sea. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Carter on October 9. Copies were sent to U, J, C, AF, EA, EUR, NEA, ARA, IO, H, E, and S/FW. For the text of the draft articles attached, see Document 333.

358. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Greene) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 358. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Greene) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, November 10, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Subjects in the Field of Seabeds oil which we will be working over the next six months - INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

I have listed below subjects on which we will need to take action in the field of seabeds over the next six months.

1. Position on Boundary: We are now engaged in attempting to arrive at a Departmental position. If possible, we should try to be in a position to give the general line of our thinking to Senator Metcalf’s Committee on November 19, as well as the Department’s answers to questions raised by Senator Jackson in his letter of July 1969. We should aim at getting our full Departmental position in shape no later than December in order to be ready for a meeting of the USC on this subject in January.

In preparation for the January meeting we will have to formulate an issues paper and a briefing paper for you and Under Secretary Richardson.

When we are closer to having a government-wide boundary position, we will develop a scenario for handling consultations on the Hill and with industry. We will also wish to develop a scenario for obtaining international acceptance of our new position.

2. Studies: We should reach agreement with other agencies on nature and scope of studies to be performed, as well as their financing.

3. We should design an ADP system for storage and retrieval of information on offshore activities and positions of all other countries including their views on the principal issues.

4. Machinery: We will develop further our position regarding machinery applicable to the area of the seabeds beyond national jurisdiction.

5. International Decade of Ocean Exploration: We will prepare for the March session of the Seabed Committee a statement regarding our plans and proposals regarding the International Decade of Ocean Exploration.

6. Principles: We are planning to review our principles in light of the debates in Committee I and consider how best to obtain agreement on these principles at the March session of the Seabeds Committee, building on the synthesis already formulated by the Seabeds Committee at its August session.

7. Pollution: We anticipate discussion of pollution at the March meeting. We will formulate a position regarding international ground rules to improve the quality of the marine environment. We must also be prepared to answer criticisms regarding blow-outs, etc. and be prepared to discuss in detail US safeguards against pollution, and any new proposals we can make promoting international cooperation in the control of marine pollution.

8. Law of the Sea: We must consider results of the Law of Sea canvass and determine whether we should call for a Law of the Sea conference in the near future and whether this should also deal with the shelf.

9. Marine Preserves: We will review our own proposals on international marine preserves, reconsider objections which have been raised, and determine whether we wish to urge further these preserves at the March 1970 meeting of the Seabeds Committee.

10. NOAA : We will review findings of the Ash Committee, when published, in formulating State Department position regarding organization within the USG in dealing with ocean space issues.

11. International Organization in the Ocean Area: We will study further how best to organize the international community in terms of handling problems of the ocean and seabeds.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Limited Official Use. Sent for information. Drafted by McIntyre and cleared by Stevenson, McKernan, Pollack, and in E. Published from an uninitialed copy.

359. Memorandum From F. Allen Harris, Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser to Selected Bureaus of the Department of State 359. Memorandum From F. Allen Harris, Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser to Selected Bureaus of the Department of State1

Washington, December 2, 1969.

SUBJECT:

State Seabed Paper

For your use and the use of your principals, I am attaching the seabed boundary paper Mr. Stevenson sent today to Under Secretary Train, Deputy Under Secretary Peacock, Assistant Secretary Nutter and Mr. Marchling.

Mr. Stevenson plans to meet personally with each of these officials in the near future to discuss our proposal.

F. Allen Harris
Special Assistant to the Legal Adviser

Attachment.

State Department Proposal for a United States Government Position on Location of Seabed Boundaries

The Problem

The absence of a U.S. Government policy on the location of the boundary of the continental shelf increasingly jeopardizes the national interest, both domestically and internationally. Refinement of our principles and policies with respect to other aspects of exploration and exploitation of the mineral resources of the seabeds and constructive leadership are impeded by the lack of a position with respect to the boundary. We believe it is timely, essential, and possible to remove this disability, and this paper proposes a policy that would do so.

Discussion

It has been informally agreed, in response to Dr. Kissinger’s memorandum of July 12, 1969, that the NSC Under Secretaries Committee consider what the position of the U.S. Government should be on the location of the boundary and the related matter of how the boundary is to be defined by the international community.

Domestically, the pressures for reaching a decision soon on the location of the boundary are strong. Senators Jackson, Pell, and Metcalf have each asked State specific questions concerning the location of the boundary.

Internationally, the absence of a decision within the Government on the location of the boundary makes it increasingly difficult for us to influence the development of discussion and possible events. Ambassador Pardo of Malta has, for example, suggested that seabed boundary negotiations begin at 200 miles. While it is agreed within the U.S. Government that this figure is excessive and unacceptable, our own inability to state where the boundary should be handicaps us. We have sought to dissuade various countries, including the United Kingdom, from unilaterally extending their national jurisdiction, but these countries naturally want to know where we think the boundary ought to lie.

We believe that while our policy of keeping options open served a useful purpose at one time, we have now reached the point where we should obtain an early decision within the U.S. Government on the location of the boundary and the authority to present this position publicly in ways best calculated to gain widespread international acceptance.

We appreciate the national security interest in a narrow boundary and the national resources development interest in a wide boundary. We believe that these various interests of the U.S. Government can be accommodated, as well as certain international community interests, by utilizing a variation of the intermediate zone concept first suggested by the Commission on Marine Science, Engineering and Resources.

Within the intermediate zone as proposed by the Commission only the coastal nation or its licensees, which might or might not be its nationals, would be allowed to explore or exploit the area. In all other respects exploration and exploitation of the intermediate zone would be governed by the international regime for the area of the deep sea. This would include an obligation to pay an agreed small portion of the value of the production for international community purposes, as well as to agree internationally to pollution control measures and other similar international standards, and the application of an international registry machinery.

This proposal has been criticized as in effect subjecting the exploitation of the resources of the intermediate zone to two administrations—that of the coastal state in the first instance and an international regime as well.

The variation of this proposal which we propose would more adequately insure the coastal states’ jurisdiction over the natural resources of the intermediate zone by eliminating any international administration or machinery from the intermediate zone and providing in effect that the exploration and exploitation of the resources of the inter-mediate zone would be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction and administration of the coastal state subject to the obligation of the coastal state to pay an agreed small royalty payment to a designated international agency for international development purposes and to enforce certain international standards.

The intermediate zone proposal of the Marine Commission is based on the legal theory that the source of authority for granting exclusive authority to the coastal state for the exploitation of the mineral resources in the intermediate zone is the international regime itself. We do not accept the Commission approach because we consider that the recognition of coastal state authority with respect to exclusive jurisdiction over resources is a preferable basis to receiving that authority from an international regime which has not yet been formulated even conceptually. We feel it is possible to build international elements (royalties and international standards) into our proposal which would provide assurance that the national and international interests of the United States would be adequately protected.

The National Petroleum Council has taken the view that under the Continental Shelf Convention the United States now has exclusive jurisdiction over the natural resources of the submerged continental mass seaward to where the submerged portion of that mass meets the abyssal ocean floor and that the United States should declare its rights accordingly. The National Petroleum Council position fails to give sufficient attention to the problem of protecting the right of all states to conduct other legitimate activities, including scientific research and military activities in the area of the intermediate zone.

We have also not accepted Senator Pell’s proposal that the outer boundary of the continental shelf is limited to the 550 meter isobath or to a distance of 50 miles from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured, whichever results in a greater area for the coastal state. We believe it is unrealistic to limit the preferential right of coastal states to seabed resources off their coasts to this narrow boundary.

Proposal

We propose the following statement of what the U.S. Government position should be on the location of the boundary of the continental shelf, to be incorporated in a new international treaty. Attached is an analysis we have prepared of the major elements of this proposal: 1. The coastal State has sovereign rights in respect of the seabed’s natural resources up to a depth of 200 meters from the coast.

2. With respect to the seabed area beyond a water depth of 200 meters and to the seaward edge of the geologic continental rise* (herein referred to as the “intermediate zone”), the coastal State does not have any sovereign rights in respect of the seabed’s mineral resources or for any other purpose but has jurisdiction to authorize exploration and exploitation pursuant to its own laws and regulations (including those governing licensing fees, taxes, and royalties) subject to agreed international standards as follows: a. These jurisdictional rights of the coastal State do not affect the rights of other States to conduct activities other than exploration and exploitation of mineral resources in the seabed and subsoil of the intermediate zone (including the right to conduct military activities). The coastal State has no jurisdiction over such other activities.

b. The right to conduct scientific research in the intermediate zone free of control by the coastal State will be protected. “Exploration” will be defined so as to assure freedom for legitimate scientific research.

c) All uses of the intermediate zone, including exploration and exploitation, must be exercised with reasonable regard to the interests of other users of the seabed and the superjacent waters in their exercise of the freedom of the high seas. The treaty will specify certain standards which the coastal State must observe and enforce regarding exploration and exploitation of the mineral resources of the intermediate zone. These standards include safeguards against pollution and hazards to navigation, avoidance of interference with fisheries and other uses of the ocean, and notice of the nature, location, and duration of activity it authorizes.

d) Every coastal State will be obligated to pay an agreed small portion of the value of all mineral production from the intermediate zone into an existing fund for international development purposes. For example, the treaty might provide an option for the payment to be made to the IBRD/IDA or the UNDP. The treaty would fix the percentage of the value of the production, the means of computing the amount, and related procedures.

e) In order to protect the international community’s interest in revenue from the intermediate zone, the coastal State would undertake not to revoke exploitation concessions prior to termination except for failure to comply with the conditions on which such concessions have been granted, and not to take the equipment of licensees except in connection with justifiable revocation on termination of licenses and on payment of adequate compensation. A provision would be included for obligatory reference of disputes to the International Court of Justice or the IBRD’s International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes.

3. The exploration and exploitation of the resources of the seabed beyond the intermediate zone will be governed by an international regime. The nature of the international regime which we seek is set forth in Circular Airgram 4439 (Tab B).

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, D/LOS Files: Lot 75 D 243, 1968 Seabeds. Confidential. The memorandum was sent to Staff Assistant John D. Stempel (U), Staff Assistant Richard W. Baker (J), Staff Assistant David Biltchick (S/PC), McIntyre, Deputy Director George Dolgin (SCI/SE), Adviser Clarence W. Nichols (E/ORF), William L. Sullivan (S/FW), and Deputy Director William J. Trainor (INR/XR). The attached analysis of the major proposals was not found. Tab B is attached but not published.

* In areas where no rise exists, to the edge of the continental margin.

360. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 360. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 2, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Continental Shelf Boundary

Secretary Laird’s letter to Secretary of Interior Hickel (Tab A) asks him to delay issuance of leases for exploitation of the continental shelf which extend beyond the limits of current exploitation. The letter has not yet been answered. A related issue has arisen from the failure of interested agencies to agree on what the U.S. position should be at the U.N. with respect to a moratorium on seabeds exploitation claims. DOD expects to call an Under Secretaries Committee to resolve these questions.

Background of This Issue. In response to Secretary Laird’s request for a NSSM on several related law of the sea problems on which Defense has differences with Interior and to a lesser extent State, you issued a memorandum to Under Secretary of State Richardson last July suggesting that the Under Secretaries Committee resolve these differences and specifically that it determine what the U.S. Government’s position should be in UN discussions concerning the extent of national jurisdiction and exploitative rights on the continental shelf and the adjacent deep sea beds.

The differences between Defense (which wants a narrow definition of the shelf and determination of the definition by international agreement) on the one hand, and Interior and State on the other, have never been resolved; nor has there been an Under Secretaries Committee meeting on this question. Defense now anticipates State’s cooperation in calling such a meeting in January. But defense fears that, before then, Interior may have precluded agreement on its position by unilaterally issuing leases for mining in waters far beyond acceptable limits Secretary Laird’s letter is intended prevent this eventuality. I do not know whether it will succeed. If not, the only way to prevent a major bureaucratic hassle and keep open the issue of how and where the continental shelf boundary is determined will be to take it before the Under Secretaries Committee.

A Related Issue. One of Defense’s major positions on the continental shelf boundary question is that, pending an international agreement to define the boundary, there should be an international moratorium on claims (by leases or other means). According to your July memorandum this issue, too, should be determined by the Under Secretaries Committee. Recently, in the UN Seabeds Committee, Uruguay has proposed a resolution that would be equivalent to such a moratorium. Therefore, Defense requested State to instruct USUN to vote in favor of this resolution. But Interior objected and State instructed USUN to vote against it (without consulting Defense). If the US votes in the UN General Assembly against a moratorium proposal substantially similar to the one Defense wants the US to support and introduce, the Under Secretaries Committee would be unlikely to retain the option of approving the DOD position.

For reasons unrelated to this interdepartmental dispute, the UN vote on this resolution has been delayed. An interim USG position has been agreed upon in a meeting chaired by IO in State: the US delegate to the UN has been instructed to abstain. But this will not solve the differences in this Government on the moratorium. Therefore, DOD plans to take the issue to the Under Secretaries Committee.

Under Secretaries Committee. Occasioned by these two disputes, the Under Secretaries Committee would deal with three questions: 1. Where should the boundary between the continental shelf and the deep seabeds beyond national jurisdiction be drawn?

2. How should this boundary be determined? (By international convention or protocol, unilateral U.S. statement, or parallel unilateral statements by a number of countries?)

3. Pending a decision on these two questions, should there be an international moratorium on further claims and further exploitation of the continental shelf which extends beyond the limits of current exploitation?

Further Analysis. The continental shelf issue is terribly complicated. It is closely related to the prospective law of the seas treaty. To help you understand the issue, I have attached at Tab B a brief explanation that was part of an earlier memorandum to you in June. Since that time many verbal formulas have been argued and a few accepted in the Government, but the three issues to be dealt with in the anticipated Under Secretaries Committee remain essentially unresolved.

Action. Secretary Laird invited you to a briefing on the continental shelf question. Bob Behr went and will write you a memorandum on the subject. However, I believe that you will still need a briefing in order to prepare yourself adequately for an Under Secretaries Committee. I think I can arrange a special briefing for you here (not at the Pentagon) if you will designate a time. This briefing would also give you the kind of information you need if you should decide to take any action on these issues prior to an Under Secretaries Committee meeting.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you designate a one-hour period to receive an expert briefing on the continental shelf issue.

Approve HK

Disapprove

See me

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Confidential. Kissinger initialed his approval. Attached at Tab A was a letter from Laird to Hickel, November 13, in which Laird expressed concern that granting certain offshore seabed exploitation leases by the Interior Department might jeopardize U.S. security interests. Tab B is published as section III of Document 341. Next to the statement in paragraph 2 that the differences between the Defense, Interior, and State Departments had not been resolved, Kissinger wrote, “Why?” Also in the third paragraph, after the sentence, “I do not know whether it will succeed” Kissinger wrote in the margin, “We should issue order that this can’t be done pending undersecretaries meeting. Put on agenda of next meeting with Richardson.” Concerning Behr’s forthcoming memorandum Kissinger wrote, “Succinct, I hope.” In the recommendation, Kissinger crossed out “one-hour” and wrote “1/2.” Next to his initials Kissinger wrote, “Have-1/2 hour.” Below Kissinger’s approval, written in a different hand, is an indication that the briefing was tentatively scheduled for December 23 at 3:00pm.

361. Memorandum From Robert Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 361. Memorandum From Robert Behr of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 5, 1969.

SUBJECT:

Law of Seas Briefing

On 28 November 1969 I attended a briefing on the Law of the Seas, which was presented to Secretary Laird by Leigh Ratiner of the OSD General Counsel’s Staff. Also present were General Wheeler, Admiral Moorer and Warren Nutter.

The briefing consisted of a forty-five minute lecture (well-received) by Ratiner. The Continental Shelf issue was the focal point, with seabeds disarmament and other law of the seas matters (seabeds resources, rights of innocent passage, etc.) receiving lesser emphasis. Although the briefing was an extremely lucid explication of the whole problem, it was also, as one would expect, hortatory. Secretary Laird was being educated so that he can defend the long-standing DOD position which opposes significant seaward extension of the sovereign rights of coastal states.

The primary reasons behind the DOD position are: a. Reluctance to further restrict geographical area in which U.S. vessels and aircraft can operate freely.

b. Fear that extension of sovereign rights to limits of Continental Shelf will jeopardize the U.S. submarine detection program (which requires that sensing elements be placed under water on the Continental Shelves of other nations).

c. Possibility that strategic passages such as the Straits of Malacca and Gibraltar may be closed to U.S. ships and aircraft.

DOD hopes to force early consideration of Law of the Seas issues within the NSC machinery—in package form and by the Under Secretaries Committee. In the interim, they are exerting pressure on State and Interior to avoid commitments which could prejudice final resolution of these issues.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. Kissinger wrote at the top of the page: “Let’s get it before the Under Secretaries committee.” J. B. Parker wrote below Kissinger’s note: “Col. Behr is taking follow up action.” Both notes were written on December 11.

362. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 362. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Washington, December 15, 1969.

Subject:

Preparations for New Law of the Sea Conference — ACTION MEMORANDUM

Problem

Despite United States opposition, Committee I of the U.N. General Assembly has overwhelmingly approved a resolution which calls upon the Secretary General to inquire of member States whether a new Law of the Sea Conference should be held. While the resolution originally addressed the seabeds question alone, its language now includes the question of a conference which would review all aspects of the Law of the Sea and all four Geneva Law of the Sea Conventions. The resolution is attached at Tab A. As you know, the United States and the Soviet Union have been circulating a draft set of articles (Tab B) to fix the breadth of the territorial sea, establish freedom of transit through and over international straits, and provide limited preferential fishing rights for coastal States on the high seas. While it has been our position that we would not support a conference on these items unless there were reasonable chances of success, the GA resolution raises serious doubts as to whether we could any longer prevent a new Law of the Sea Conference, and increases the pressure to expand the agenda of the Conference beyond the subjects of the U.S.-Soviet draft articles. It is our view that such an expanded agenda would seriously reduce the possibility of agreement on any subject, could result in revisions of the existing law of the sea regarding resources and military uses which would be detrimental to our interests, and would at best increase the “Price” which would be demanded from the maritime powers in order to maintain a relatively narrow territorial sea.

DISCUSSION

It appears that the best alternative we have is to move quickly towards a conference with an agenda limited to the breadth of the territorial sea, straits, and fisheries, along the lines of the U.S.-Soviet draft articles. This would involve an early high level announcement of our intention to recommend that a law of the sea conference be convened in early 1971 to deal with these issues. We would presumably seek a resolution calling such a conference at the start of the 25th General Assembly next fall.

We, as well as the Soviets, have circulated the draft articles to a substantial number of States, and have requested comments. A team of experts has just completed consultations with France and eight African Governments on the articles. The results were mixed, although there appears to be a wide measure of support for a 12-mile territorial sea, some support for freedom of transit and overflight of straits (although this is tempered by concern over the Middle East problem), and a considerable number of complaints about the strict criteria which the coastal State must satisfy to obtain preferential fishing rights on the high seas beyond 12 miles. It is by no means clear that the current package could muster a necessary two-thirds majority at a new law of the sea conference. Furthermore, in view of our failure in the UNGA to prevent passage of the resolution regarding a new law of the sea conference with a broad agenda, it will be difficult to muster the necessary support for convening a conference with a limited agenda.

We must also recognize that our posture in the U.N. Seabeds Committee will affect our ability to obtain a conference agenda limited to the subjects of the U.S.-Soviet draft articles. To the extent that other countries suspect this limited agenda conference is a power play to avoid settlement of the seabeds issue and set the stage for a big power grab of the seabeds, our objectives will be prejudiced. Consequently, we should be prepared to state detailed substantive positions on the boundary and regime at the March Seabeds Committee meeting in order to demonstrate that the U.S. is wiling to move ahead as quickly as possible on seabeds issues as well, and has made the assessment in good faith that separate treatment of territorial sea and seabeds issues is desirable for maximum progress on both issues.

Under the circumstances it appears that nothing less than a well organized and vigorous United States effort will suffice if we are to have a reasonable chance of success. Such an effort will require the organization of specialized personnel within the Department and among the agencies concerned, In addition, we have noted that the governments we were consulting directly in Africa were generally taking a sympathetic position regarding a limited agenda conference while their permanent representatives at the U.N. were following India’s lead toward exactly the opposite result. It appears that continuing personal contact with interested officials within a large number of governments who can be expected to attend a conference of plenipotentiaries is essential to our objectives. We have already proposed a meeting with Soviet experts to discuss the new situation brought about by the passage of the U.N. resolution. A few months ago we informed various Asian governments that a U.S. team of experts would be visiting to discuss the draft law of the sea article after the first of the year. There will undoubtedly be an increased need for consultations with our NATO allies in Brussels or selected capitals. All of these factors point to a substantial increase in activity in the near future.

I propose to handle the increased tempo of events leading to a conference in 1971 in the following manner: 1. I would establish within L an office specifically concerned with coordinating the conference effort, with 2 attorneys assigned initially. (If possible I would like to arrange for a Foreign Service Officer with legal training to fill one of these positions on a temporary basis without charge against L’s personnel ceiling.) I would request S/FW, 10, and the regional bureaus each to designate one person to work with this office. Such individuals, could be expected to continue their regular duties for the present, but devote increasing time and attention to the law of the sea conference as it approaches.

2. I would propose to establish an interagency group at the working level to coordinate our effort and enable us to respond quickly and in a unified manner to the increasing number of questions and problems we can expect. The Departments of Defense and Interior would be asked to contribute to this interagency working group, whose work would be guided by the special office I propose to establish within L.

3. It is my intention to submit a proposal for funding these operations. The expenses involved (apart from the salary of the FSO temporarily assigned to L, if this proves practicable) will basically relate to travel. I cannot emphasize too strongly my belief that unless we are prepared to send properly qualified personnel to various places, our chances for success will be diminished. It is of course my hope that we can utilize our Embassy personnel as much as possible, but I must point out that the subject is an extremely complex one which requires specialized expertise. In this regard, the arguments for a limited agenda conference, and for excluding the seabeds item, are quite sophisticated.

4. Our experience during the African canvass revealed a wide variety of interest in the subject and appreciation of its importance within our Embassies. I would hope in the near future that the Secretary could inform our Ambassadors of the important U.S. interests which are involved.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

I propose that Ambassador McKernan, Mr. Greene and I meet with you to discuss the following recommendations:

1. That you approve the establishment within L of an office to coordinate the Department’s law of the sea activities, including the personnel designated by S/FW, IO and the regional bureaus.

[Approve DEC 24 1969]

2. That you approve the establishment of an interagency working group to coordinate U.S. Government law of the sea effort.

[Approve DEC 24 1969]

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for action. A copy was sent to Pollack. Drafted by Oxman and concurred in by McKernan and Greene. Johnson initialed his approval of both recommendations on December 24. Tab A, the final version of the resolution as adopted by the General Assembly, is UN Document 2574A (XXIV), December 15, 1969. Tab B is Document 333.

363. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 363. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 20, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Under Secretaries Committee on Continental Shelf

On January 29 the Under Secretaries Committee is scheduled to meet in order to reach an agreed USG position on the definition of the continental shelf and related questions.

The following discussion, based on the analytical briefs written by State, Defense, and Interior, describes the existing legal regime for the continental shelf and its deficiencies, the issues before the Committee, the U.S. interests upon which these issues are said to impinge, the positions of the departments, and the pros and cons of these positions.

Existing Law

The 1958 Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf, ratified by the U.S. and 38 other states, defines the continental shelf as extending outward from the territorial sea to a line where the water is 200 meters deep plus an area as far as the “superjacent waters admit of the exploitation of the natural resources.” On the shelf, so defined, a coastal state has sovereign and exclusive rights to exploit natural resources, but the Convention specifies that these rights do not affect the high seas status of superjacent waters.

Deficiencies of Existing Law

The adequacy of this Convention is called into question by several factors: (a) the provision concerning the area of seabeds that can be exploited is ambiguous, and the maximum allowable area of coastal state rights is disputed;

(b) the rapidly advancing technology of seabeds exploitation greatly expands the application of this provision and threatens to lead to proliferating unilateral claims;

(c) in practice, the extension of exploitation rights beyond the 550-meter isobath will lead to the exclusion of SOSUS listening devices even if exploitation rights do not become claims to total sovereignty;

(d) with the whole water column (from the subsoil of the seabeds to the surface) coming to be considered as an ecological unit and with the need to control superjacent waters in order to protect jurisdictional claims to the seabed, the expansion of exploitation rights on the seabeds tends to lead to claims of exclusive control in the water column;

(e) the extension of water column exploitation tends to lead to claims of sovereignty in the same area and in the superjacent air space, and both kinds of claims jeopardize the achievement of a proposed law of the sea treaty for the orderly use of seas, narrow straits, and air corridors;

(f) many states, including coastal states, have not signed the Seabeds Convention and may therefore use it as a jumping off point for their own claims.

Issues Before the Under Secretaries Committee

1. What definition of the legal width of the continental shelf under national jurisdiction of coastal states should we seek? Narrow: Out to the 200 meter or, at most, 560-meter isobath (depth from surface to shelf) ? Or wide: to the seaward portion of the continental rise? Or some kind of intermediate zone?

2. By what procedure should the definition of the continental shelf be reached: Formal international agreement or unilateral declarations which eventually become customary international law?

3. Pending international determination of the definition of the continental shelf, should we seek a moratorium on further unilateral claims and exploitation beyond the limits stated in the Geneva Convention of 1958 (200 meters isobath) or some other, limit?

Why These Issues Arise Now

For two years the UN Seabeds Committee has been trying to formulate a new seabeds convention. DOD and Interior have not been able to agree on the terms of such a convention or even if there should be a new convention. The Commerce Department has generally sided with Interior. The State Department has taken a middle ground that in some respects satisfies Interior but not DOD. Consequently, this Government has lacked a position (except abstention) that it can take on the continental shelf issues before the UN Seabeds Committee. This makes it difficult for the U.S. to dissuade the UK, Canada, and other states from unilaterally extending their national jurisdiction. Our silence is awkward and may precipitate unilateral claims.

Recently, the need to reach a unified USG position became more acute because: (a) Uruguay proposed a resolution equivalent to a moratorium (favored by DOD) in the Seabeds Committee and the U.S. could only abstain; (b) Secretary Laird, fearing a rash of unilateral American claims far out on the shelf, asked Secretary Hickel to delay issuance of leases for exploitation of the continental shelf beyond the limits of current exploitation; (c) Senators Jackson, Pell, Metcalf have asked State specific questions concerning the location of the boundary, but have received no reply.

U.S. Interests

The United States has a number of interests that are said to be affected by the definition of the continental shelf.

1. Military: DOD claims that a boundary beyond the 550-meter isobath or unilateral claims to any part of the seabeds would, in practice, exclude the placement of SOSUS, threaten the exclusion of submarines, and jeopardize achievement of a law of the sea treaty, which is needed to assure rights of passage by warships, merchant ships, and military airplanes.

2. Commercial exploitation and scientific exploration: Interior and Commerce stress the importance of maximum U.S. access to the rich natural resources (oil, mineral, and fish) of the ocean column beyond the 200-meter isobath. These departments and other groups stress our national interest in gaining maximum sovereign rights of scientific exploration. Others argue, however, that, given the proliferation of unilateral claims by states, our commercial opportunities on the shelves adjacent to foreign states are likely to be greater if they depend on an international regime over the area beyond a narrow boundary than if they depend on bargaining with foreign states for leases and risking expropriation of U.S. national enterprises abroad.

3. Scientific research: Government agencies and scientific institutions are finding it increasingly difficult to obtain the consent of coastal states to conduct scientific research on their continental shelves, largely because of suspicion that scientific research may be tantamount to scientific exploration for commercial purposes. The scientific community inside and outside the Government believes that our national interest requires that coastal states be limited to the narrowest possible area of control over scientific research.

4. Avoidance of national disputes: The expansion of commercial exploitation of the seabeds may lead, through the proliferation of unilateral “ocean grabs, “ to nasty international disputes which the United States, as the principal oceans user, will find difficult to avoid. The fisheries dispute with the CEP countries in Latin America may be a forerunner.

The Department of State is particularly conscious of the unfavorable political consequences that might follow from such disputes. DOD stresses that they can be avoided only by an international agreement.

5. Preserving good relations with the LDCs: The coastal LDCs regard the oceans as a promising area of exploitation from which they do not want to be excluded. At the same time, they feel that this promise is threatened by the most advanced technological and maritime states and by the legal regime for the oceans which represents the interests of these maritime states. Hence, without knowing exactly how their interests would be affected by different legal regimes, the LDCs are inclined to define their rights broadly against more restricted legal regimes that seem to serve the special interests of the U.S. and other major maritime powers. Accordingly, a number of Latin American states have claimed territorial waters out to 200 miles. (It should be noted, however, that the developed states do not lag in making water column claims—witness Canada’s claims to Arctic waters enclosed within a line around archipelagoes and to shelf resources out to the abyssal ocean floor, in spite of the more limited rights accorded coastal states under the Continental Shelf Convention. It should also be noted, that U.S. companies are getting LDCs to make broad exploitation leases to them and that the American petroleum industry is foremost in pushing for a wide shelf, while the fishing industry pushes for wider and more exclusive fishing zones.)

Therefore, some argue that unless we formulate and conduct our oceans policies with attention to the sensitivities and interests of the LDCs, we are in danger of getting into a rich-poor contest with the LDCs over the exploitation of ocean resources; and that, in any case, we cannot induce enough LDCs to accept the restrictions of national exploitation rights that are necessary for the orderly use of the oceans unless we can show them that such a legal regime is attentive to their interests (i.e., go along with their desire to be bribed).

6. Rational and equitable utilization of deep seabed and ocean resources for economic development and other purposes: One can argue that the U.S. has a general interest in seeing that the resources of the ocean are used for the benefit of mankind, including the poorer countries, rather than merely for the few countries that can exploit them. It can be argued that the beneficiaries of these resources should include the inland as well as the coastal states. The operational consequence of this interest is the establishment of some sort of international regime to regulate exploitation and distribute a fair proportion of the commercial benefits to developing countries.

Department Positions (The initiator of the controversy is Defense. The chief antagonist is Interior. State aspires to be the arbiter.)

A. Defense

Position

1. We should seek a narrow boundary, preferably out to a 200-meter isobath but in no event greater than a 550-meter isobath or 50-mile boundary.

2. This boundary should be determined by formal international agreement.

3. We should support the UN resolution (passed by an overwhelming vote in UNGA) calling for a moratorium on seabed exploitation beyond the limit of national jurisdiction until a formal international agreement is reached.

4. We should propose an international regime for the area beyond the continental shelf boundary which would assure substantial economic benefits for the LDCs.

Rationale

1. A narrow boundary is essential for SOSUS emplacement.

Argumentation: (a) Interior concedes that military requirements make the right to emplace SOSUS at the 550-meter isobath or closer to shore essential. Defense’s point, however, is that areas beyond 550 meters are crucial for SOSUS emplacement. Interior contends that sovereign rights to explore and exploit resources in this area would not interfere with such military uses, since the Geneva Convention limits sovereign rights to the exploitation of resources. Defense argues that, although this is technically correct, it is unrealistic to suppose that nations will permit foreign military use of areas in which they have sovereign exploitation rights.

(b) Interior argues that the way to prevent erosion of U.S. freedom to deploy military devices on the continental shelf is to take a tough stand on our legal rights under the Convention. Defense replies that, although this is theoretically an option, in practice the U.S. has not and will not assert its rights (especially where military devices are concerned) and contest foreign restriction of them at the cost of acrimonious disputes. Furthermore, the Convention is not so universal or unambiguous as to be a strong reed to rely on. The only way to stop the steady erosion of these rights by unilateral action, Defense argues, is to establish a new international agreement and precise boundary.

(c) State proposes that the right to conduct military activities beyond the 200-meter isobath be explicitly protected by treaty. Defense believes that no such right is saleable.

(d) Interior believes that “it is possible and perhaps likely” that “in a relatively few years” the state of the military art will permit listening devices to function in water depths much greater than 550 meters. Defense says that the need for placing hydrophone arrays in the areas Interior would place under coastal state jurisdiction is increasing, that substitute systems have failed, and that “for the foreseeable future SOSUS will be the mainstay of U.S. anti-submarine warfare operations.”

2. A wide shelf would lead to attempts by coastal states to claim as territorial sea those waters, now recognized as high seas, above the continental shelf, thereby preventing achievement of a law of the sea treaty to protect rights of free navigation and flight.

Argumentation: (a) Interior contends that the Geneva Convention provides no basis for expanding territorial sea claims and that the way to protect freedom of navigation is through a law of the sea treaty, whereas an attempt to gain a new international agreement on the continental shelf would lead to a conference to consider anew all law of the sea questions in a context that could well result in a treaty inimical to defense and resource interests alike. Defense takes the position that, regardless of the Geneva Convention, there is an historically demonstrable tendency, backed by a certain logic, for claims of exploitation rights on the continental shelf to lead to claims of exploitation rights in the whole water column and for these claims, in turn, to lead to claims of total sovereignty; and that before a law of the sea treaty can be obtained, unilateral claims will have made it unnegotiable. Defense agrees that there is a danger of an omnibus oceans conference; accordingly, in agreement with State and Interior, it supports current efforts to get Soviet cooperation in pushing for a conference confined to a law of the sea treaty on the breadth of the territorial sea and free passage through and over straits as soon as possible. The USSR has just agreed to this.

(b) Defense argues further that a wide shelf would lead coastal states without important mineral deposits on their continental shelves (or without continental shelves) to feel justified in claiming exclusive access to superjacent waters following the example of the CEP countries, which, lacking continental shelves, claimed 200-mile territorial water zones after President Truman proclaimed sovereign exploitation rights on the continental shelf.

(c) Defense contends that even if a territorial sea limit were defined prior to a continental shelf boundary, coastal states would increasingly prohibit military activities on the shelf on the grounds that they interfere with exploration and exploitation.

3. In order to gain the assent of the necessary number of LDCs to a new Convention defining a narrow boundary, as well as for the sake of general principles of equity, we should establish an international regime to assure substantial economic benefits to the LDCs from exploitation beyond a narrow boundary.

Argumentation: (a) Interior argues that this would give away valuable resources to an inefficient and as yet undefined international regime weighted against U.S. interests. Defense responds that the U.S. will have more control over deep sea resources in an international regime established by treaty than in bilateral dealings with coastal states.

(b) State agrees that concessions to the interests of the LDCs are necessary to gain their adherence to a new Convention but believes that the best way to make these concessions is not to turn over regulation of exploitation to an international body but rather to provide that a proportion of profits in a broad area of national exploitation should be paid to an international community fund. Defense holds that this will not work (see discussion of State’s proposal below).

4. A formal international agreement is the only way to prevent the proliferation of unilateral claims to the continental shelf defined broadly and stop the erosion of rights on the high seas.

Argumentation:

State is inclined to agree that a new international treaty is needed; but Interior claims that the outcome of a treaty might not be so favorable as relying on international acceptance of unilateral ex parte declarations over time. It argues that the attempt to get a new Seabeds Convention could result in a treaty as unfavorable to our military as to our resources interests. Defense does not agree.

5. Without a moratorium on claims beyond national jurisdiction, pending an international agreement, the very prospect of an agreement will accelerate the pace of unilateral claims so as to jeopardize a favorable agreement.

Argumentation:

Defense considers a moratorium very important; but neither Interior nor State proposes a moratorium, and Interior would probably oppose one. State would not oppose a moratorium on exploitation but did oppose the UNGA resolution recommending a moratorium on claims and exploitation.

B. Interior

Position 1. The 1958 Geneva Convention provides an adequate basis for protecting this nation’s sovereign rights in exploiting the continental shelf resources throughout the continental shelf, slope, and rise.

2. If a new convention is to be negotiated, it should define the boundary of national jurisdiction for exploitation and exploration to correspond with the entire shelf, slope, and rise.

3. In developing a deep seabeds regime (beyond national jurisdiction, on the ocean floor) we should proceed cautiously and await further study and technological experience rather than commit ourselves to an international regime.

Rationale

1. The Geneva Convention of 1958, as an existing international agreement is preferable to having to depend on some sort of international regime for access to resources on our continental shelf and foreign shelves.

2. Agreement to a narrow shelf would be irrevocable for all time. Having abandoned our claims to the resources of a wide shelf, we could not later reassert them.

Argumentation:

Defense’s arguments against this rationale have been covered above. In addition, they argue that it is not lawful under the convention to extend the coastal states’ jurisdiction to include the slope and rise. With less insistence, State also considers the present legal regime inadequate. It adopts the principle of international benefit from, though not administration of, seabed resources beyond the 200-meter isobath and proposes an international regime for exploration and exploitation beyond the continental shelf. It also believes that Interior’s position does not give adequate protection to the interests of other states in the zone of national jurisdiction.

C. State

Position

1. We should seek an international agreement that would establish national jurisdiction over seabed resources to a depth of 200 meters.

2. There should be an international zone beyond this boundary to the seaward edge of the geologic continental rise or to where the continental margin ends if no rise exists (approximately 2500-3200 meters).

In this zone: (a) the coastal state should have jurisdictional rights to exploration and exploitation but not to the exclusion of the rights of other states to conduct other kinds of activities, including military activities;

(b) the right of scientific “exploration” will be defined so as to assure freedom for legitimate scientific research;

(c) standards, including safeguards against pollution and hazards to navigation, are to be enforced by coastal states;

(d) every coastal state will be obligated to pay an agreed small portion of the value of all mineral production into an international community fund;

(e) coastal states would agree to certain guarantees against expropriating concessions they had granted and would accept international arbitration in cases of expropriation;

3. The exploration and exploitation of the resources of the seabed beyond the intermediate zone would be governed by an international regime (the precise nature of which is under study).

Rationale

1. Giving the coastal state exclusive jurisdiction over resources in the intermediate zone would provide a sounder, basis for protecting our commercial interests than international administration and machinery.

Argumentation:

(a) Defense contends that, as time goes on, our commercial interests off foreign shores will be better protected by international administration than by bilateral deals with ambitious and nationalistic coastal states, and that jurisdictional claims on the seabeds will lead to claims to the superjacent waters. State does not deal with this argument but seems to share Interior’s skepticism about international. administration. Interior will approve the exclusive jurisdiction feature and may accept an international payoff as a much less obnoxious alternative to international administration.

(b) Defense claims that proposal of an intermediate zone would be a clear indication to the rest of the world that the U.S. seeks a wide continental shelf and would encourage other countries to follow suit. State claims that the explicit protection of the rights of other states in the international zone and the restriction of national-authority in the zone to “jurisdiction” rather than “sovereign rights” will guard against this tendency. Defense regards this alteration in terminology as a futile cosmetic device.

2. U.S. military, scientific and commercial interests will be protected by the specific limitations on national jurisdiction in the intermediate zone.

Argumentation:

Defense claims that neither freedom of military activities or of scientific research in a jurisdictional zone is practically negotiable; therefore, in a conference these provisions would be discarded, leaving only a wide continental shelf. Interior probably will not object to this provision. As a fall-back position in a conference Defense might possibly accept an intermediate zone with these restrictions as a last minute compromise in order to foreclose more dangerous terms, but it would add a clear guarantee of freedom of the seas in superjacent waters.

3. The agreement of coastal states to pay a small royalty to a designated international agency for development purposes will serve our international interests and be an inducement to LDCs to sign a treaty.

Argumentation:

Defense agrees that international payoffs are better than no concession to the LDCs but holds that international administration is essential to check the proliferation of unilateral claims. Interior will be indifferent to this provision but will greatly prefer it to international administration.

Decisive Questions

From an international standpoint one can argue that the United States, as the major maritime power setting an example for others, ought to be concerned about the rational and orderly use of ocean resources for the greatest benefit of mankind, including the poorer nations. From a national standpoint, too, it can be argued that we have an interest in preventing disputes over resources by other nations as well as disputes to which we are a party.

From a narrower, hard-nosed national point of view, however, the critical considerations are these: (a) If we were not concerned about the adverse effects of commercial activities on the continental shelf on our military activities (listening devices and free navigation), we would not be greatly concerned about unilateral extensions of national jurisdiction and sovereign rights except as they impeded our access to the resources off other nations’ coasts.

(b) If we were not interested in the maximum rights of exploitation off our own coasts, we would be less concerned about defining the legitimate area of sovereign rights and national jurisdiction narrowly.

Therefore, the core of the argument in the Government is between those most concerned about military security and those most concerned about commercial exploitation.

The larger interests of the international community come into the argument for three reasons: (a) as support of the arguments for a narrow boundary; (b) as a concession to the LDCs in order to induce them to accept a new agreement; (c) as a response to our feelings of international obligation and enlightened self-interest in the orderly use of the world’s resources with a minimum of international friction.

In deciding on what position, if any, this Government ought to take in the UN Seabeds Committee, much depends on how one weights these three kinds of interests. But our decision should also depend on the answers to some critical questions of factual judgment that are in controversy: 1. Is there, in fact, a strong tendency for national jurisdiction over resources on the continental shelf to lead to similar claims of jurisdiction in superjacent waters, and for claims of exploitation rights to lead to claims of total sovereignty?

2. In order to stop this alleged process is the effective assertion of our rights to free navigation and seabed military activities a politically feasible or prudent alternative to seeking an international agreement?

3. In the long run will our exploitation of shelf resources be conducted under more favorable circumstances if national jurisdiction is defined broadly or narrowly?

4. Is the attempt to gain a new international agreement for the seabeds likely to succeed on the basis of restricted sovereignty and concessions to the international community, or is it likely to lead to an agreement less advantageous than the present regime from both the military and commercial points of view?

5. Are lasting guarantees of the rights of other nations—including military activities—within a zone of national jurisdiction over resources practically obtainable?

6. Will the prospects of a narrow boundary be foreclosed in the absence of American support for a moratorium? Would a moratorium indefinitely impede exploitation of the continental shelf? If a moratorium is advisable, should it apply to claims in addition to exploitation?

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 [1 of 3]. Secret. Sent for information.

364. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 364. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 26, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Potential Clash between Latin American Fishing Settlement and Law of the Sea Treaty

Recent events—(a) Peru’s seizure at the beginning of the tuna fishing season of two American fishing boats far beyond the twelve-mile fishing-rights zone that we recognize, and (b) our agreement with the Soviet Union to begin active promotion of a conference to get a new law of the sea treaty—may mean that two sets of American policies and interests, each with strong adherents in the Government, are on a collision course that can be avoided only by a clear choice of priorities or by extremely adroit diplomacy.

The recent seizures were apparently handled quietly, but there is no assurance that there will not be other seizures that will force the issue of whose definition of jurisdiction and sovereignty shall prevail. Even in this case, a collision course between our Latin American and our law-of-the-sea interests is not inevitable, but it is sufficiently likely to warrant focusing on the situation now, lest we either drift into a crisis inadvertently or foreclose policy options without realizing it.

Latin America

The U.S. is currently engaged in a long-festering dispute with Chile, Ecuador, and Peru arising from their claim to a 200-mile zone of territorial sovereignty off their coasts. In negotiations with the CEP countries we have agreed to set aside our conflicting juridical positions on the territorial sea boundary and the zone of exclusive fishing jurisdiction while we try to reach a practical modus vivendi on fishing activities. If we can agree upon a modus vivendi without prejudicing our position on the territorial sea boundary and thereby foreclosing the prospects for attaining the proposed law of the sea treaty, we shall have reconciled, for the time being, our general military and commercial interests in the orderly use of the oceans with our interests in preserving good relations with the CEP countries. If we get into an open argument with the CEP countries over fishing rights and juridicial sea boundaries—especially if we impose sanctions or physically protect tuna boats—this will almost surely wreck the present efforts to negotiate a settlement with them.

At stake in a mutually satisfactory resolution of this dispute are not only good relations with the CEP countries but with Latin America generally and also with a number of coastal states in other parts of the world—particularly the LDCs who are under the lure of great resources far off their coasts. Having just inaugurated a new cooperative partnership with Latin American countries—many of them restless under the pressure of nationalist and radical forces—we might sacrifice even more than the new partnership if our modus vivendi failed and we became involved in acrimonious and possibly armed contention over our right to fish in waters in which the CEP countries claim sovereignty. For such an involvement could undermine the credibility of the President’s concept of a less obtrusive American posture throughout the world, to the extent that Latin America is regarded as a testing ground of our new approach to the LDCs. It is unlikely that any credit we might get for upholding the rights of maritime nations against unilateral claims would offset this adverse impression.

The Prospective Law of the Sea Treaty

During the last two decades there has been a dramatic acceleration of the rate of proliferating unilateral claims to exclusive exploitation and total sovereignty on the seas (and throughout the whole water column) beyond juridical boundaries that were widely accepted before. This proliferation jeopardizes our substantial national security interest in narrow territorial sea boundaries, free navigation and overflight in the area beyond, and the right to conduct military and commercial activities off foreign shores.

It also jeopardizes our even larger interest in obtaining a new law of the sea treaty. It is unlikely that any agreement short of this treaty (which would, in addition to fixing the territorial sea boundary at 12 miles, provide for free passage through narrow straits and a system of fishing preferences for coastal states) would protect our security or commercial interests. Thus, arrangements for limited jurisdiction beyond territorial boundaries for fiscal, fishing, and other purposes have proved to notoriously susceptible to expansion in that jurisdiction in waters for one purpose tends to lead to claims of total sovereignty in those waters.

Obtaining a law of the sea treaty has recently been given new urgency by a move on the part of a number of nations in the UN to combine consideration of this treaty with a new continental shelf/deep seabeds treaty—a move which, if successful, would result in a disadvantageously broad legal regime for the whole water column. Moreover, in the absence of a new international convention governing jurisdictional and sovereign rights on the continental shelf and deep seabeds (an issue before the Under Secretaries Committee on January 29), the proliferation of unilateral claims under the ocean is likely to preclude agreement on restricted boundaries to the superjacent waters unless the prospective law of the sea treaty is achieved soon.

For these reasons the U.S. and the USSR have agreed to prepare for a law of the sea treaty conference some time in 1971 by actively canvassing the support of other states.

Advocates of a new law of the sea treaty argue that if the U.S. now permits any country physically to assert with impunity a jurisdictional sea boundary contrary to our rights and internationally agreed juridical definitions, or if the US accedes to an agreement contrary to these rights and definitions, the chance of getting a law of the sea treaty will be destroyed. They argue that if we are not prepared to enforce our rights when they are violated, or to insist upon preserving them in any modus vivendi, this will signify to many coastal states whose signatures to a treaty are essential that they have no incentive to sign a treaty but only to see that they are not left behind in the rush to stake out extensive unilateral claims. If a law of the sea treaty is not achieved, they contend the only alternative to accepting a disastrous erosion of our rights of navigation and fishing on the high seas (and continuing conflicts over these rights) will be to enforce our rights under even more disadvantageous circumstances than now.

But, obviously, enforcing our rights would bear a heavy political cost at any time. For this reason, throughout the whole period of proliferating claims during 1945-1970, neither the U.S. nor any other state has enforced its rights off the shores of coastal states that have claimed jurisdiction or sovereignty beyond agreed international boundaries.

Perhaps if the U.S. were to generalize a policy of enforcement and secure Soviet, Japanese and other support (including some LDCs), the political costs with respect to Latin America would be diminished. But perhaps this would only compound our difficulties. In any case, I am informed that if the U.S. were to be able to protect all those rights that are currently under challenge or violation—by escorting tuna boats, running the Indonesian Archipelago without permission, transiting the Philippine etc.—it would require logistic support that is probably unavailable without direction from the President and provision for funds to support these activities.

There is another basic problem with such a bold course of action: If we were generally to enforce our rights, we would still have no assurance that a law of the sea treaty would be achieved. The provision for free passage through narrow straits (Article II) is the crucial one for the U.S. and the USSR, but although the U.S. has twice held consultations with key states—Denmark, Italy, Spain, and Greece—these countries do not yet support Article II.

Spain is the most important prospective signatory. Some quarters in State and Defense consider free passage through Gibraltar, which would be jeopardized by a 12-mile sea boundary without Article II, more important than all our bases. But Spain is conspicuously withholding acceptance of Article II as a factor to be considered in the context of her relationship to Europe. Moreover, Spain is championing the claims of Latin American rights.

Whether a general policy of escorting American boats in disputed waters, pending attainment of a law of the sea treaty, would promote or obstruct such a treaty must remain doubtful until we know more about the various factors that would be involved in such a policy.

Conclusion

1. In all likelihood, the U.S. will continue not to enforce its rights on the high seas against Peru or any other state unless the President makes a major political decision to reverse familiar practice.

2. If, within the next few months, we can reach a modus vivendi with the CEP countries that saves American tuna boats from seizure and does not jeopardize our juridical position on the law of the sea treaty, then our avoidance of an open contest over other possible seizures in the meantime may be a price worth paying even though it would set a bad example for some potential adherents to a treaty.

3. But if the modus vivendi fails, the argument for enforcing our rights in contested waters will be strengthened, since we shall have less to lose in our relations with the CEP countries.

4. The chances of achieving such a modus vivendi are not bright now. They would be brighter if we were willing to put accommodation ahead of our juridical position on the territorial sea. Therefore, we may face a clear choice of priorities between the law of the sea treaty and gaining a modus vivendi with the CEP countries.

5. If within a year or not much longer we obtain a law of the sea treaty, then some (but by no means those most interested in Latin America) would consider any sacrifice of an accommodation and good relations with the CEP countries that had been necessary to facilitate this treaty a price worth paying. But if the treaty were not obtained, we would have got the worst of both of our objectives.

6. If a law of the sea treaty is not obtained, we are probably in for a difficult period of rapidly eroding rights and proliferating unilateral claims (as after the partial failure of the previous two postwar law of the sea conferences), which will confront us with the option of trying to enforce our rights under worse conditions than now or trying to cope with continual harassment by other means.

These conclusions argue that: --We should first reassess our chance of achieving a modus vivendi under the existing constraints and then.

--decide whether these constraints should be changed and whether a clear choice of priorities between a modus vivendi and fostering the law of the sea treaty is called for.

--At the same time, the Government ought to consider alternative arrangements to the law of the sea treaty that might permit limited jurisdiction to coastal states, yet protect the rights of other states in areas now in contention.

--In any case, from the standpoint of contingency planning as well as policy making we need to know more about the political, logistical, and economic implications of enforcement.

What Next?

This subject is too afflicted with strong and divergent views in the government to be usefully studied in an interdepartmental context. According to your July 12, 1969 memorandum, it might properly be presented to the Under Secretaries Committee if it were clearer precisely what issues needed deciding.

I propose to examine the issues—possibly in conjunction with S/PC, which has expressed an interest in it—with a mind to recommending what, if anything, the Under Secretaries Committee might be asked to do about it. However, I am aware that inquiries from the NSC, although scrupulously detached from a judgment on the issue, can be interpreted as indications of an NSC Staff view. (For example, an inquiry into the implications of enforcement might arouse consternation in some quarters and hope in others.)

RECOMMENDATION:

That you authorize me to study, possibly in conjunction with S/PC, the possible conflict between our efforts to resolve fisheries disputes with the CEP countries and our efforts to get a law of the sea treaty with a view to recommending what action the Under Secretaries Committee might take.

[Approve]

Disapprove

Another Course

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. Kissinger initialed his approval on February 3 and wrote next to his initials: “It needs a formal structure. Do a joint paper with State.”

365. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 365. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 30, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Meeting of the Under Secretaries Committee on the Continental Shelf Boundary, January 29, 1970

At the Under Secretaries Committee the respective positions conformed to my memorandum on the subject, with a few elaborations of arguments. Among the three principal kinds of national interests involved commercial, military, and the orderly and peaceful use of the seas—no one would admit that his agency’s position gave priority to one over the other. Instead, the real differences of priority were expressed in differences of factual judgment—as, for example, whether a narrow or a broad continental shelf boundary would be more profitable to our petroleum industry or the LDCs.

Department of State tried hard to present its position as one that combines the best features of DOD’s and Interior’s positions without being merely a bureaucratic compromise.

Interior came close to buying State’s position but balked at accepting that position’s provision of national jurisdiction over only exploitation instead of total sovereignty in the proposed “intermediate zone.”

DOD staunchly rejected State’s as well as Interior’s position on almost every ground.

Under Secretary Richardson, although commending State’s position as a genuine effort to get an acceptable Government position without merely “splitting the difference,” pointed to the strength of DOD’s arguments against State in a number of respects.

Richardson concluded that he should undertake a memorandum to the President describing the three positions, to be sent to the NSC or to the President.

My guess is that this will induce Defense and possibly State to come up with modified positions to which they will hope to gain the assent of another department in order to gain a Government-wide agreement “out of court.”

State and Interior may agree on a common position, but this will not persuade Defense unless it feels that the President will favor the combined power of the two opposing departments. In that case, DOD will try to strike a bargain by designating the State-Interior position as a backup position at a conference.

The most meritorious compromise would be one in which State would come closer to Defense, which, in my view, has the strongest case on grounds of national interest.

More likely, Justice and Defense will agree on a common position. Justice’s proposal (a modification of State’s) would be a backup position at a conference. The difficulty with a backup position, of course, is that it runs the risk of being leaked.

If this sounds Byzantine, you should hear the technicalities in terms of which these bargains will have to be argued.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-253, Under Secretaries Study Memoranda, U/SM 50-54 (3 of 3). Secret. Sent for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it.

366. Airgram CA-1381 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 366. Airgram CA-1381 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, March 10, 1970, 1907Z.

SUBJECT:

UN Seabeds Committee Mtg., March 2-28, 1970: INTERNATIONAL REGIME

BACKGROUND

General Assembly Resolution 2574 (XXIV), adopted in December 1969, requests the Seabeds Committee to submit to the next session of the General Assembly in September 1970 (a) a draft statement of principles to promote the exploration and exploitation of seabed resources beyond the limits of national jurisdiction; (b) recommendations regarding the economic and technical conditions and the rules for the exploitation of the resources of this area in the context of the regime to be set up; and (c) a report on international machinery to promote the exploration and exploitation of seabed resources beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

The General Assembly asked the Committee to expedite the preparation of a comprehensive and balanced set of principles The Government accepts these requests as realistic and desirable, and understands that (a) and (b) will be the primary topics of the discussion March 2-28. We assume (c) awaits the SYG report, and therefore that detailed comment on machinery now would be premature

We also recognize that, it is desirable for the U.S. to be, and appear to be, responsive to the concerns of others as these have emerged, without of course jeopardizing the nation’s substantive interests in the matter.

Within the U.S. Government a concerted effort is being made to obtain an early decision on the U.S. position regarding the location of the seabed boundary. Compelling domestic, as well as international, factors will be taken into account in this decision and the Delegation’s strategy and tactics in the Seabeds Committee must be such as to retain full maneuverability for the successful presentation of a position on the boundary when it becomes available.

We further recognize that there is a close relationship between our positions on the boundary and on the principles governing a regime, in that the details of each will have a bearing on the prospects of international agreement on the other — and on both.

Although the Government is also studying the details of a regime that might be acceptable, this is not and cannot be completed before the end of March.

GUIDANCE

We believe that the guidance in State 133845 of August 9, 1969 and CA-4439 of August 7, 1969 furnished the Delegation for the August 1969 Seabeds Committee meeting with the refinements set out below, equips the Delegation to move or to tread water at the March session, as necessary.

The Delegation should draw on the President’s Foreign Policy Report, and the Legal Adviser’s speech of February 18, in any private discussions of General Assembly Resolution 2574(A) regarding the desirability of new Law of the Sea Conference.

FYI. Note that the speech does not say whether the Treaty should be prepared in the UN, at a Conference, or both. END FYI.

As appropriate or as necessary the Delegation may express regret that the Secretary-General’s paper on pollution called for by Resolution 2467(B) (XXIII) will not be ready until next Summer. We recognize that this means there will be little discussion of pollution at the March meeting. This is a subject on which we, like others, are anxious for progress.

The Delegation should make clear that the United States places great importance on the need to establish an international regime which will insure and encourage the peaceful, stable, cooperative development of seabed mineral resources. We recognize this means the creation of some international machinery, and we have given some of our ideas on this question at the August session. The Delegation should be attentive to reactions of other countries to these proposals. We recognize that regime issues are complex and will not be solved overnight. The Delegation may indicate that U.S. experts are now working on models for both registering and licensing machinery.

As pointed out at the beginning of this paper, the principal task of the Seabeds Committee is now to develop a set of principles which may be referred to the 25th General Assembly for approval. The Delegation should work toward agreement at the March meeting on a set of principles along the lines indicated below, building on the synthesis achieved at the August 1969 session of the Seabeds Committee.

On the assumption that the discussion of the principles which should be incorporated in the declaration will be based on the synthesis set out in paragraphs 85-97 of the Seabeds Committee Report (Doc. A/7622), the following guidance is provided with reference to the numbered paragraphs of that report (copy attached):

85. Agreed. We continue to accept the concept that there is an area of the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof which is beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. We are not yet, however, as indicated above, prepared to discuss the location of the boundary. We are not prepared to yield to Latin American pressure to eliminate the reference to the establishment of an internationally agreed boundary. FYI. The Delegation should bear in mind that we will eventually wish to introduce our boundary position, when formulated, in the general discussions in the Seabeds Committee. END FYI.

86. This is acceptable as stated.

87. We can accept the first proposition. As for “property rights,” we could accept such a reference in the first part, to read “exclusive sovereign or property rights.” The key clause in the first part that permits this is “except as may be provided in a regime.” As to the second proposition, we can agree that no one may acquire property rights over any part of the area itself; however, we must assure that exploiters, nevertheless, enjoy secure property rights to the resources they exploit, and that, under a regime, they can receive exclusive property rights to resources within a specified area for a specified time.

88. The Delegation is now authorized to accept the “common heritage of mankind” principle. We believe that the phrase can and should be used in the conceptual sense rather than one having or sought to be endowed with the force of law. We assume that indication of our acceptance can be conveyed consistently with the positions we have already taken and with the guidance in this message. The Delegation should assure that the record indicates our interpretation of this principle as follows: It reflects the idea that States may not claim sovereignty over the area, and that the responsibility for dealing with problems affecting the use of this area rests with the international community. Above all, while not a rule of property law in itself, the principle is a solemn admonition to States that peaceful uses of the area may only be sanctioned or prohibited as provided by international law and international agreement.

89. We agree. The Delegation should continue to make clear that until new and more specific rules are agreed, existing principles of international law, including the United Nations Charter, apply.

90. The purpose of the whole exercise is ultimately to provide new rules of international law, by treaty.

91. We agree. The Delegation should repeat the U.S. interpretive statement as appropriate.

92. The Delegation should note that this principle obviously is not restricted by the limits of national jurisdiction over the exploration and exploitation of the natural resources of the seabed, but should apply to the broadest possible area of the seabeds. A consensus seems to be emerging in the CCD on the geographic scope of the draft Seabeds Arms Control Treaty, and there is no need to get into the problem in the Seabeds Committee.

93. We agree. The words “legal” and “international” are acceptable; the word “agreed” is essential. A phrase such as “including appropriate international machinery” is acceptable. The last paragraph of this Airgram is particularly relevant here.

94. We agree.

95. On dissemination, our position remains as expressed in August by John R. Stevenson in the Legal Subcommittee.

“In considering elements (it) and (iii), it is necessary to consider element (v) at the same time. In some States all oceanographic activities are conducted under a national scientific program, while this is not the case in others. I know that many members of this committee are familiar with the oceanographic activities conducted by private universities and institutions in the United States.

“While, as I shall indicate shortly, we are prepared to support dissemination provisions with respect to national scientific programs, in the case of research by private institutions, we have a long tradition of independence and believe we should do no more than provide that states shall encourage their nationals to follow similar practices.

“Turning then to the substance of elements (ii) and (iii), we would favor principles providing for timely dissemination of plans for and results of national scientific programs concerning the, area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. We would not favor a rigid publication requirement since the burden of publication cannot realistically be imposed in all cases.

“The international scientific community and, I might add, particularly the oceanographic community, has a highly developed system for disseminating information peculiarly suited to particular needs: it includes books, articles in learned journals, circulation of monographs, visits of scientists, and world oceanographic data centers. We would do well to avoid tampering with either the precise method or the precise time for such dissemination, limiting our selves here—as in other cases—to the underlying general statement of principle.”

The Delegation is authorized to accept language that scientific research should not be the basis for claims for rights of exploitation. The Delegation is authorized to accept a reference such as “including developing countries” in the “international cooperation” section, but should avoid specific language on “strengthening their research capabilities.” The Delegation should not agree to a firm obligation regarding prior communication of scientific research programs.

96. We agree.

97. No reference to the rights of coastal states in “this area” can be accepted, particularly with respect to scientific research. However, the Delegation should be careful to avoid any comment which would foreclose an intermediate zone solution to the boundary question; it may simply note that this question can only be resolved in connection with the resolution of the boundary question, and should not be dealt with in a general statement of principles. With respect to liability, the following language is authorized: “There shall be liability for damages resulting from the exploration and exploitation of this area. Specific internationally agreed rules shall be established in furtherance of this principle.”

Beyond this, the Delegation should reserve our position. FYI. The Delegation is not authorized to state a view one way or the other on state responsibility or absolute or strict liability. END FYI.

The Delegation is also authorized informally to explore with other Delegations technical aspects of a workable regime which may be created for the area of the seabeds beyond national jurisdiction. We will be interested in learning views of other delegations on institutional framework, criteria, rules and procedures of possible forms of machinery described by the Secretary-General in Document A/7622 and on the position put forward by the Delegation at the August 1969 session of the Seabeds Committee. In this connection, members of the Delegation will be prepared to discuss U.S. experience in offshore mineral resource development which may have applicability for a deep seabed regime. We believe that informal discussions will help lay a realistic basis for considering at the August session the Secretary-General’s forthcoming report on machinery in accordance with General Assembly Resolution 2574(C). If the question of scientific research is raised in these private discussions, the Delegation should be noncommittal and state that this matter is being studied by the U.S. Government.

Further instructions will be sent to the Delegation as additional U.S. positions are worked out. We do not wish to run the risk of the General Assembly writing principles in September on its own because the Seabeds Committee failed to produce a draft as instructed by the General Assembly in Resolution 2574. Consequently, the Delegation should make every possible effort to secure agreement on principles, and should not hesitate to recommend language to us which would help accomplish this result, bearing in mind, however, the importance of keeping open all our options on the boundary issue.

The Delegation should not attempt to secure agreement on particular kinds of machinery, except it may continue to oppose an international operating agency. This is not intended to prevent the Delegation from exploring the advantages and disadvantages of differing kinds of machinery. The Delegation is encouraged to make recommendations to Washington based on such explorations as to desirable forms of machinery.

Rogers

Attachment

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE PEACEFUL USES OF THE SEA-BED AND OCEAN FLOOR BEYOND THE LIMITS OF NATIONAL JURISDICTION

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OFFICIAL RECORDS: TWENTY-FOURTH SESSION
SUPPLEMENT No. 22 (A/7622)
UNITED NATIONS

Sub-Committee away from a generalized approach towards the task of devising specific formulas for a number of defined ideas. It is to be noted, however, that the multiplicity of formulations on a single point, whether those in the report of the Informal Drafting Group or those suggested by various delegations during the course of the August session could prima facie be construed as denoting differences of opinion. While this might be the case with regard to certain elements, it is not so for a number of others; various formulations contain similar ideas and do sometimes overlap. The variety of formulations is due in this connexion to differences in emphasis and as to scope. In certain instances it is to be observed that part of the membership of the Committee finds itself attached to particular concepts with which in varying degrees the other part does not concur.

84. At this stage of the Sub-Committee’s deliberations, the practicability of underscoring “areas of agreement” or “areas of disagreement” might be questioned, since none of the formulations have so far been endorsed. Yet it could be considered suitable to attempt a synthesis of the related formulations in order to determine in so far as possible common denominators. These denominators could in no way be construed as an acceptance by the Sub-Committee that they constitute an adequate basis for the elaboration of a balanced and comprehensive declaration of principles.

85. It appeared at the outset that the Legal Sub-Committee accepted as implied in resolutions 2340 (XXII) and 2467 A (XXIII) that there is an area of the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof which is beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. There was, however, no agreement on the inclusion in the draft of a reference to the establishment of a precise boundary for this area.

Legal status

86. A common denominator on this item would be the concept that the seabed and ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, shall not be subject to national appropriation by any means and that no State shall exercise or claim sovereignty or sovereign rights over any part of it.

87. This concept though acceptable to all was considered by some as not sufficiently comprehensive. For the latter, the following idea should be included that except as may be provided in a regime, no State shall claim or exercise or grant exclusive rights over any part of this area, but there was no agreement as to the inclusion in the draft that no one may acquire property rights over any part of the area by use, occupation or any other means.

88. The overall concept that the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction are the common heritage of mankind (or part of the common heritage of mankind) was widely supported but not acceptable to all.

Applicability of international law including the United Nations Charter

89. On this item it has been possible to detract as a common denominator that there are principles and norms of international law which apply to the seabed and ocean floor mid subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

90. There was however no agreement as to the extent to which the rules of existing international law apply or should be applied in the future or as to whether any rules of existing international law apply to economic activities in the exploration and exploitation of the area.

Reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes

91. A common denominator in this regard has emerged in the sense that a declaration principles would contain, in accordance with resolution 2467 A (XXIII), the that the seabed and ocean floor shall be reserved exclusively for peaceful purpose.

92. There was, however, no agreement on the nature of the references in the declaration to the geographic limits of application of this principle or to the scope of the prohibition of activities.

Use of the resources for the benefit of mankind as a whole irrespective of the geographical location of States taking into account the special interests and needs of the developing countries.

93. An agreement seems to have emerged on the need for the establishment of a regime as well as on the use of the resources for the benefit of mankind irrespective of the geographical location of States and taking into account the special interests and needs of the developing countries. The qualification of that regime is still to be agreed upon as well as the scope of the applicability. Whether the regime shall be characterized as legal, international or agreed remains to be decided on, but it was agreed that the regime should be legally binding. Similarly, whether the regime shall apply to the area or only to resources is a matter still to be settled. No agreement has yet been reached on the main features of such a regime. Thus, for example, the question of the most appropriate and equitable application of benefits obtained from the exploration, use and exploitation of this area to the developing countries, which was underlined by a number of delegations, is still under consideration.

Freedom of scientific research

94. This principle was acceptable in general, as well as the notion of the promotion of international co-operation in the conduct of scientific research. The idea that freedom of scientific research in this area shall be assured to all without discrimination and that States shall promote international co-operation in the conduct of scientific research and that there shall be no interference with fundamental scientific research carried out with the intention of open publication appeared able to command agreement, on the understanding that it would be necessary to be able to distinguish clearly scientific research from commercial exploration. One element in this distinction was agreed to be the subsequent making available or communication of results.

95. Differences still remain as to the relation between freedom of scientific research and the possible obligations regarding prior communication of programmes and subsequent communication of results, as well as differences as to whether the notions of accessibility or availability on the one hand or dissemination on the after should be employed. There is still no agreement on the inclusion of the idea that such research should not be the basis for claims for rights to exploitation. The suggestion regarding strengthening the research capabilities of the developing countries is still to be further considered.

Reasonable regard for the interests of States in their exercise of the freedom of the high seas.

Question of pollution and other hazards and obligations and liability of States involved in the exploration, use and exploitation.

96. It can be assumed that the concepts of reasonable regard for the interest of all States and non-infringement of the freedoms of the high seas and no unjustifiable interference with the exercise of those freedoms are not contested. Furthermore, there exists general acceptance of the necessity for the adoption of appropriate safeguards against the dangers of pollution. The adoption of appropriate safeguards to protect the living resources of the marine environment as well as of safety measures concerning activities in the area were not objected to.

97. On the extent of the rights of coastal States with regard to activities, including scientific research and exploration undertaken in the area, there is yet no agreement. The question of liability for damage caused by activities in the area is still under consideration.

Item 2 of the programme of work: Consideration of the legal aspects of the report submitted by the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2467 C (XXIII) regarding international machinery (A/AC.138/12 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1)

Item 3 of the programme of work: Consideration of the legal aspects of a long-term and expanded programme of oceanic exploration and research (Note by the Secretary-General, document A/AC.138/14 and Corr.1 (English only)

98. Owing to the insufficiency of time the Sub-Committee decided to postpone consideration of these two items until its next session.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by McIntyre, Simsarian, and Oxman on March 10; cleared with SCI, E, S/FW, PM, L, ACDA, Defense, Interior, Commerce, Transportation, Justice, NSF, and NCMRED; and approved by Greene. Repeated to London, Moscow, the Mission at Geneva, and USNATO. Telegram 133845 was sent to USUN and repeated to the Mission at Geneva, USNATO, London, and Moscow. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967-69, POL 33-6)

367. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 367. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 12, 1970.

Subject:

Imminent Canadian Legislation on the Arctic

The Canadian Ambassador, Marcel Cadieux, along with Alan Beesley, Legal Adviser to the External Affairs Minister, and Ivan Head of the Prime Minister’s Staff, called on Alex Johnson yesterday to discuss Canada’s position on matters relating to the Canadian Arctic archipelago and law of the sea issues. For some months we have been discussing with the Canadians the prospect of bilateral consultations on these questions, focussing particularly on the preservation of the Arctic ecology and prevention of Arctic pollution. There has been mounting public pressure in Canada for unilateral Canadian action to prevent Arctic damage and Prime Minister Trudeau has been successful in fending off demands for an assertion of sovereignty over the whole archipelago including the waters and ice between the islands which we consider to be high seas. We had indicated to the Canadians our willingness to discuss the problem.

The Ambassador said that no Canadian Government could take a position inconsistent with Canadian sovereignty over the waters of the Canadian archipelago. He referred to various statements of the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs spelling out the serious concern, of the Canadian Government over the possibility of permanent damage in the Canadian Arctic as a result of oil pollution. Cadieux further maintained that Canada must very soon take positions on the questions of Arctic sovereignty, pollution control and the establishment of exclusive fishing zones.

Cadieux then said that three courses of action were now under active consideration by the Government: A. Drawing straight baselines around the outer perimeter of the Arctic islands. This amounts to a flat assertion of Canadian sovereignty over large areas of the high seas and would in the Canadian view constitute the whole area as Canadian internal waters. Cadieux indicated that the Canadian Government would recognize a right of innocent passage subject to Canadian regulations designed to safeguard the Arctic environment and Canadian coastal interests.

B. Establishment of a 100-mile Arctic pollution zone. The zone would extend 100 miles out from every point of Canadian land in the Arctic. The preventive legislation establishing such a zone would apply to all of the waters of the Arctic archipelago. The proposed legislation would prohibit negligent or deliberate acts of pollution, would require ships entering designated “shipping safety control zones” to meet prescribed safety standards, would impose requirements of financial responsibility, compulsory insurance and liability and would include enforcement provisions, among them the authority to arrest and detain vessels. The same legislation would also establish a 12-mile territorial sea applicable to all of the Canadian coast.

C. Establishment of fisheries closing lines across the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Bay of Fundy and other areas presently outside of Canadian territorial waters and beyond 12 miles of the Canadian coast.

Cadieux requested our views and said that “they would be taken into account.” In the ensuing discussion the Canadians acknowledged that the Prime Minister had earlier talked about an international regime of the Arctic (a concept which we have endorsed in principle) but said that unless the regime were to come into being “immediately” and were to meet all of the Canadian requirements, Canada would have to act unilaterally since it is faced with “imminent irreparable damage.” The Canadians made it clear that legislation on the 100-mile pollution zone would be introduced in Parliament prior to the Easter recess, i.e. within the next two weeks. Legislation on the fisheries closing lines would be introduced either simultaneously or shortly thereafter. The Canadians would not say whether or when legislation along the lines of course A (assertion of sovereignty) would be introduced.

During the discussion it became clear that the Canadians were not interested in having our comments, suggestions, modifications, or alternatives. They admitted their embarrassment in giving us so little advance notification. It is equally clear that the Canadian presentation was in fact only a notification and that they did not anticipate real bilateral consultations before the legislation is a fait accompli. The Canadians indicated that Prime Minister Trudeau is under “tremendous” pressure to assert sovereignty in the archipelago and must act very soon. The Canadians said they would be prepared to enter into multilateral discussions after the legislation is enacted looking towards a possible regime, but that any multilateral convention would have to “confirm” the Canadian legislation rather than reduce its effectiveness.

Legal Background:

The proposed Canadian legislation is in our view entirely unjustified in international law. There is no international basis for the assertion of a pollution control zone beyond the 12-mile contiguous zone; there is no basis for the establishment of exclusive fishing zones enclosing areas, of the high seas; and there is no basis for an assertion of sovereignty over the waters of the Arctic archipelago. The proposed Canadian unilateral action ignores our frequent request that Canada not act until we have had an opportunity for serious bilateral discussions.

Comment:

The consequences of the intended Canadian action are serious for private United States interests. They are critical for national security interests and seriously degrade the entire United States law of the sea posture on which military mobility depends.

Part of this complex problem is that the SS Manhattan, a United States privately owned (ESSO) oil tanker and icebreaker, is preparing for an April 1 voyage through the Northwest passage as a follow up to its unprecedented passage through the same area several months ago. These passages have given tremendous support to inflamed nationalists pressing for declarations of Arctic sovereignty. They argue that such voyages with their attendant risk of oil spills which will irreparably harm Arctic ecology require immediate action by Canada to declare its sovereignty. If the Canadians impose their legislation prior to the next Manhattan voyage and if the Manhattan goes through, Canada may well assert that the Manhattan complied with Canadian law in recognition of Canadian jurisdiction over the North-west passage. On the other hand, if the Manhattan does not make the voyage, the strong inference is that it held back because it either could not or would not comply with Canada’s requirements, thus implying recognition of Canada’s right to regulate. The third alternative is also damaging: if the Manhattan should make the trip in violation of Canadian regulations, the Canadians may well take enforcement measures against the vessel. The Canadian Transport Minister has stated in Parliament that “no icebreaker assistance or any other assistance will be provided unless the [Manhattan] meets with the qualifications that would, in fact, be in effect if the legislation were implemented.” We have learned informally that the Humble Company will try to avoid any correspondence with Canadian officials relative to meeting any regulations which Canada may advance concerning ships voyaging into the Canadian Arctic.

We cannot accept the assertion of a Canadian claim that the Arctic waters are internal waters of Canada nor can we accept their other proposals. Such acceptance would jeopardize the freedom of navigation essential for United States naval activities worldwide, and would be contrary to our fundamental position that the regime of the high seas can be altered only by multilateral agreement. Furthermore, our efforts to limit extensions of coastal state sovereignty over the high seas worldwide will be damaged when other nations see that a country—physically, politically and economically—as close to the United States as Canada, feels it can undertake such action in the face of United States opposition.

Our opposition to the establishment of fishery closing lines by Canada has been restated many times and is well known to the Government of Canada. In 1967, bilateral discussions were held with Canada which resulted in a generally agreeable formula which provided not only for the special interest of the coastal state in fisheries conservation, but also the economic interest of the coastal state in fisheries adjacent to its coast. Since then and in a modified form the same principles have been incorporated in the United States/Soviet initiative for a law of the sea conference on the territorial sea and related issues (fisheries).

One of the principal elements in the 1967 United States/Canadian draft proposal was that it would provide preferences for Canadian fisheries in areas off its coast which would not be protected by the utilization of fishery closing lines. This factor is still relevant and valid and should serve as a basis for reopening the issue with Canada as the best alternative to the establishment of fishery closing lines.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret. Drafted by Neuman and cleared by Johnson, Stevenson, and McKernan, and with EUR/CAN, Defense, Interior, and Transportation.

368. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 368. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT:

Impending Canadian Unilateral Action in the Arctic—Secretary Rogers Wishes You to Telephone Trudeau

On March 11, the Canadians officially informed Under Secretary Johnson that Canada is considering taking certain unilateral actions relating to the Arctic and law of the sea issues, designed to protect the Arctic environment. By legislative action, the Canadians would deal with issues of sovereignty, pollution control and exclusive fishing zones. The Canadian demarche of March 11 was in effect notification of Canadian intent to act unilaterally.

Secretary Rogers in the attached package urges you to telephone Trudeau to express our grave concern and to back up an oral presentation which the Secretary would shortly thereafter make to the Canadian Ambassador.

Deputy Defense Secretary Packard has certain reservations concerning the proposed presentation by Secretary Rogers, particularly to a passage in which he would state that “The United States thus would be required to take lawful and appropriate steps to protect the integrity of its position in these matters.” Although Secretary Rogers would not go beyond this sentence the actions contemplated by the State Department would include continuation of passage and overflight through the waters and the airspace in question by US public vessels and aircraft at present levels. As I understand it, Secretary Packard would prefer to have a high-level US team go to Ottawa to discuss the Canadian moves and their implications before such a far-reaching threat is made.

At the same time, I understand that Trudeau would be receptive to intervention by you since it would help him to meet the very considerable pressures to which he has been subjected on the question of the Arctic and which have precipitated the Canadian decision to act.

Your Talking Points

1. That you are gravely disturbed by the presentation Ambassador Cadieux made to Alexis Johnson on March 11 concerning Canada’s intention to take unilateral actions with regard to the Arctic and other areas of the high seas;

2. The contemplated Canadian legislation would, in your view, present serious security and economic problems to the United States, which the Secretary of State intends to discuss at greater length in an interview with. Ambassador Cadieux;

3. That you share Trudeau’s concern for the preservation of the Arctic environment;

4. But that instead of unilateral actions by Canada, you hope we can work together on a cooperative international basis; and

5. That you would be prepared at once to send a high-level US team to discuss these matters with appropriate Canadian officials and to consider various options including the possibility of international cooperative efforts.

If you approve, I will inform Secretary Rogers of the foregoing and suggest that for the time being the more threatening elements of his presentation be withheld, pending the proposed trip to Ottawa by a high-level US group which would include Deputy Secretary Packard. This step would enable us to examine more fully the implications of possible retaliatory measures.

[Approve]

Disapprove

See me

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, March 1969-August 1970 (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. Next to the approval line, Nixon wrote: “ I called Trudeau. He agreed to hold up until he talked to team-I informed Alex of the call-I have one reservation-perhaps appointing Packard puts too much military emphasis.” According to Document 369, Nixon called Trudeau on March 17. In the attached March 16 memorandum to Nixon, Rogers also explained the dangers posed to U.S. interests by unilateral Canadian action and outlined in detail the points he would convey to Ambassador Cadieux immediately after Nixon spoke to Trudeau.

369. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to President Nixon 369. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to President Nixon1

Washington, March 21, 1970.

Subject:Canadian Legislation on the Arctic

In accordance with your telephone conversation with Prime Minister Trudeau on March 17, I yesterday visited Ottawa and met all day, until late in the evening, with State Secretary for External Affairs and Acting Prime Minister Sharp (Trudeau was in Winnipeg for several days), and two other Canadian Ministers, the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development Chretien, and Donald MacDonald, President of the Privy Council and Government Leader in the House. Ambassador Cadieux and other senior Canadian Government officials were also present. I was accompanied by Under Secretary of the Navy Warner and senior representatives from DOD, DOT, Interior and the Chief Counsel of the Coast Guard.

In summary, I believe we have caused the Canadians to rethink, and undoubtedly to make some revisions in the proposals they are committed to make to Parliament next week. However, as it is quite clear they face overwhelming political pressures on the pollution issue in the Arctic and nationalistic claims to the waters in the area (this is clearly the present political issue in Canada), I am not sanguine that they will find it possible to eliminate all of those features that we find objectionable. However, the tabling of legislation next week is only the first step and I am satisfied that they intend to handle the matter in a manner that will buy as much time as possible for both of us to try to work out mutual solutions.

In addition to making the points contained in the “talking paper” attached to Secretary Rogers’ memorandum of March 16 to you, I proposed to the Canadians the immediate formation of a Joint U.S.-Canadian Commission under which we would enforce against American flag vessels mutually agreed regulations for operations in the Arctic off both of our coasts. The Canadians would do the same with respect to their vessels. I pointed out that this would meet the immediate practical needs and also avoid the issue of principle for both countries while buying time to work out a wider international solution. While appreciating our effort to offer a constructive solution, the Canadian representatives felt that the political pressures they faced were such that they could not accept a solution which would appear to give the “big and powerful” U.S. such a strong voice in how they handle their Arctic waters.

Much of our discussion through the day revolved around various possible alternatives to this proposal, formulae for Canadian legislation, and other possible solutions.

The Canadians are very sensitive on its becoming known that they are discussing with us legislation being considered by the Government before its presentation to the Parliament. The Canadians themselves are meeting again today on the subject and plan to discuss the matter with the Prime Minister when he returns this afternoon. I offered to leave in Ottawa any members of my delegation that would be helpful, but Sharp suggested that we keep in touch through Ambassador Cadieux, who returned to Washington with me. I have promised to follow up work here on the problem and expect to hear from Cadieux not later than Monday. However, I think it also possible that Prime Minister Trudeau might telephone you.

U. Alexis Johnson

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, March 1969-August 1970 (1 of 2). Confidential. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates the information was included in the President’s Daily Brief for March 21. An additional notation reads: “OBE/D.” On April 1 the Canadian Government proposed legislation to control Arctic pollution, regulate fisheries, and extend territorial waters (External Affairs [Canada], May 1970, pp. 130-131). On April 15 the Department of State lodged a formal protest with Ottawa, noting the potential impingement on U.S. interests and the likelihood of impairment to UN-sponsored sea law negotiations. See Department of State Bulletin, May 11, 1970, pp. 610-611.

370. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 370. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, March 26, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Seabeds Convention

State, Defense, and USUN believe that the urgency of a Presidential decision and announcement of a US position on the seabeds convention is undiminished by the adjournment of the UN Seabeds Committee. They believe that the announcement of our position—providing that it is the Richardson or DOD position—should still be made as soon as possible (preferably within a week or two) and that the diplomacy surrounding the announcement can be managed adequately despite the Committee’s adjournment.

Several recent developments add to the urgency of a decision: (a) The UK has learned that the President is being asked to make a decision that might basically change our stance on the seabeds issue and has nervously inquired about the accuracy of the rumors to this effect while emphasizing its desire to be consulted in advance of any US announcement, consistent with the UK’s agreement with us not to announce its leaning toward a broad boundary position. US representatives, in responding to the British, have fuzzed the reality without denying it and have promised to notify the British before any announcement. No one expects that the British would openly oppose a US position for a narrow boundary and an international regime beyond. The significance of this development is simply that it indicates that there may soon be other nations which, in anticipation of a Presidential decision, will be snooping and lobbying.

(b) Canada has agreed to delay until after Easter recess introduction of the prospective legislation that would be contrary to our legal view of national jurisdiction on the oceans. We shall be in a better position to restrain the Canadians if the President has by that time announced an internationally appealing position on the seabeds and law of the sea issues. (If we were to come out for a broad boundary or any position that would be interpreted as grabbing for ourselves exclusive management of the resources of the whole continental shelf off our shores, we would, of course, be in a very poor position to insist on Canadian restraint.)

(c) Unconfirmed but undoubtedly accurate reports indicate that New Zealand has just issued a lease (to what firm, I am not sure) for exploitation on its continental margin at a depth of over 1300 feet, which is far beyond the 200-meter isobath and will be taken as an important event in interpreting the extent of national sovereign rights beyond the 200-meter boundary under the Geneva Seabeds Convention of 1958.

(d) Brazil has just followed up its recent claim of sovereign rights over the entire continental margin off its shores (including its right to prohibit military activities in the area) with an announcement that its territorial sea boundary extends to 200 miles. This example of uncontested creeping jurisdiction is bound to have an effect in Latin America and elsewhere.

(e) On April 8 Senator Metcalf, who has been pressuring the US to take a position on the seabeds issue, is scheduled to start hearings on this issue in the Subcommittee on the Outer Continental Shelf of the Senate Interior Committee. Interior and Defense will testify. This will expose, once more, an internal hassle in this government and perhaps put the President in a bad light, if not in a difficult position.

(f) The Wall Street Journal, I am told, is about to publish a long piece on the seabeds issue which will say that the President is being urged to make a decision, that there is considerable internal controversy about the decision, and that he ought to support a narrow boundary and international regime.

These developments, in my view, indicate that the President, unless he wishes to support Interior’s position, ought to make a decision on the US position concerning a seabeds convention within a week. This means that if he is to have the option of supporting a position other than Interior’s, he ought to be alerted to the necessity of making a decision in the very near future, lest this complicated issue burst upon him out of the blue. It also means that we should meet with Ehrlichman as soon as possible.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

1. That this weekend you inform the President in a general way of the issue that he will soon be called upon to resolve and alert him to the internal and external pressures for determining the US issue on a seabeds convention as soon as possible.

Approve

Disapprove

2. That you make an arrangement for us to meet with Ehrlichman on Monday.

Approve

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates a copy was sent to Haig and that he had seen it. Another notation next to the subject line reads, “Re Urgency of Decision.” There is no indication of approval or disapproval of the recommendations.

371. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman) 371. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs (Ehrlichman)1

Washington, April 7, 1970.

SUBJECT:

U.S. Commercial Interests and a Seabeds Convention

The argument between Defense and Interior on what the U.S. position should be concerning a seabeds convention has been represented as an argument between military security interests and commercial interests. I am convinced—and so is State, the Marine Commission, and most students of oceans issues—that this representation distorts the real issues with respect to both our national security interests and our commercial interests. This memorandum presents a brief explanation of the relevance to U.S. commercial interests of the debate between a narrow and a broad boundary of national sovereign rights on the continental margin.

The Law

It is argued that existing international law, based on the Geneva Seabeds Convention of 1958, should be interpreted to give coastal states exclusive sovereign rights over the whole continental margin (the shelf, the slope, and the rise, down to the abyssal ocean bottom). According to this interpretation, any limitation of the boundary of sovereign rights short of the abyssal ocean bottom would be giving away what is ours.

In fact, international lawyers disagree on the interpretation of the Geneva Convention. The weight of legal opinion is by no means in favor of Interior’s interpretation. Article I of the 1958 Convention defines the continental shelf on which coastal states have exclusive sovereign rights as an area of the “seabed and subsoil…adjacent to the coast…to a depth of 200 meters or, beyond that limit, to where the depth of the superjacent waters admits of the exploitation of the national resources…” Some lawyers maintain that this article was a codification of customary law and therefore applied only to the area that was then exploitable. Undoubtedly, the whole margin will eventually he exploitable; but even so, the legal test of its exploitability does not yet exist in the view of many lawyers.

In any case, the extent of national sovereign rights is preeminently a non-legal question. The point of a new seabeds convention is to define more precisely the legal regime for an area in which legal rights have been rendered ambiguous by rapid technological progress in exploitation.

Commercial Access and Profit

Interior argues that a narrow boundary and an adjacent area under international authority would deprive U.S. commercial interests of assured access, with the prospect of reasonable profits, to deep sea oil extraction. There are several reasons for believing that this. is not the case.

1. 94% of the world’s continental margins are off foreign shores and only 6% off U.S. shores. In the existing areas of foreign sovereign rights U.S. companies are under a growing threat of expropriation, tax discrimination, and other harassments. This threat will be extended in area as well as intensity in the absence of a new seabeds convention or if a new convention gives coastal states sovereign rights over the continental margins off their shores. Communist and unfriendly states would probably deny U.S. companies access to their margins on any terms. An international regime beyond the 200-meter isobath provides the best assurance of U.S. access in the future.

2. The argument that an international authority would discriminate against U.S. companies does not make sense. U.S. deep-sea extraction industries are far ahead of any others in technology. They will dominate extraction for years to come, no matter who does the leasing. An international authority that would distribute royalties from extraction to an international community fund would have a direct interest in inducing U.S. companies to exploit the continental margin.

3. The operations of an international authority will be governed by a treaty in which the U.S. will have a major voice.

Other Commercial Interests

It is understandable that the large oil industries which have had experience in dealing bilaterally with coastal states should prefer to continue this way, even if their calculation of their interests is short-sighted. But it should be recognized that there are other U.S. industries that see their interests lying in a narrow shelf boundary; for example, the distant water fisheries, the deep-sea hard minerals extraction industries, and the Merchant Marine.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for information.

372. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 372. Memorandum From Robert Osgood of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, April 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Seabeds

I want to add a footnote to two aspects of the seabeds issue, in preparation for our next talk with Ehrlichman and Whitaker. Both pertain to the effect of DOD’s position on U.S. commercial interests.

U.S. Commercial Interests

The “giveaway” argument against a narrow shelf boundary is not convincing, but it is the argument that has convinced Ehrlichman—and in its simplest form. In our meeting on Tuesday, the 7th, I gave Ehrlichman a brief memorandum on the implications of the shelf boundary for U.S. commercial interest, with the thought that it would at least fill in some of the gaps left in the Interior Department’s 25-minute presentation to him. I attach a copy (Tab A).

One might add to this brief some common views of why the oil industry really prefers a broad boundary. I have heard their spokesmen argue that they get better deals when they can play off one state against another in bidding for drilling rights. Others charge that oil companies have become masters at personal diplomacy and bribery. Still others believe that the oil industry is concerned about the tax on imports from beyond the boundary of national sovereignty, although oil spokesmen deny this. But only an impartial expert on the oil industry would know the accuracy of these views, and they are not essential to forming an opinion on the policy issues in any case.

An International Authority’s Effect on U.S. Commerce

Whatever restrictions coastal states may impose on U.S. companies operating off their shores, there is also some indefinable prospect that an international regime would impose restrictions too. It is difficult to predict precisely how an international authority would operate, whereas we know how coastal states have operated—at least in the past. Nonetheless, the following considerations may provide clues.

1. Many international organizations are inefficient and unimaginative. Some are not—perhaps the International Civil Aviation Organization would be the closest analogue to an international sea authority, and it is quite efficient. The main question, however, is not whether such an authority would be inefficient but whether it would be discriminatory and otherwise disadvantageous from the standpoint of U.S. commercial interests. Since coastal states are capable of cutting off their economic noses to spite the U.S., one cannot rely entirely on an international authority’s economic advantage in attracting U.S. exploitative industry to check discrimination. Although a multilateral organization provides some restraint against the rapacity of any particular member, a multilateral organization, like nationalistic coastal states, might be tough to deal with if it favored a particular bloc of states, baited U.S. industry, or squeezed profits unreasonably for the sake of collective economic aggrandizement.

2. Since the LDCs recent discovery of the great wealth on the continental margins they have seen two paths toward securing what they conceive to be their just share of this wealth. One is for coastal states to stake out unilateral claims of sovereign rights. The other is to bring this wealth under control of an international regime that would redound to their benefit. Conceivably, the latter course could result in collective greed no less disadvantageous to our industry than the individual creed of coastal states.

3. Probably, oil companies can make bigger profits by dealing bilaterally with familiar governments than by dealing with an international authority.

* * * * *

Thus, there is a certain element of commercial danger in an international authority. The policy questions, however, are (a) whether this danger exceeds that which would be posed by coastal states with internationally agreed sovrereign rights over the whole continental margin—which is quite unlikely, I think—and (b) whether the danger from an international authority can be minimized.

Several considerations have a bearing on the second question: 1. Since pressure for an international authority is building up, there may be some such authority no matter what position the U.S. takes. Already it is generally accepted that the deep seabeds seaward of the continental margins should be under an international regime. The policy question, then, is whether the U.S. can shape the nature of this authority. (Of course, there is no doubt that we could defend our margins from encroachment by any authority.)

2. If the U.S. supports a broad boundary or otherwise fails to respond to the LDCs’ interests, an international authority might be organized according to an alignment of LDC’s against the U.S. and other developed states.

3. If the U.S. takes the initiative in advocating an international authority, it would certainly have a dominant role in determining its charter and its mode of operating. The organization would be established on the basis of a working partnership in which the technological advancement of the U.S. would command cooperation on a basis of mutual advantage.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 381, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume I, May 1970, (1 of 2). Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Haig and Lord. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Kissinger saw it on May 23. Tab A is published as Document 371.

373. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 373. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Seabeds Convention to Determine Continental Shelf Boundary and Seaward Regime

The Decision Before You

In recent months there has arisen in Defense and State a growing sense of urgency about the need to adopt a U.S. position on an international seabeds convention to determine the boundary of national sovereignty on the continental shelf and the nature of the regime governing the use of the seabeds beyond this boundary.

You are now asked to determine and announce a U.S. position on this convention, based on proposals submitted to you by Defense, Interior, State, and Under Secretary Richardson in his capacity as chairman of the Under Secretaries Committee.

Background

The growing sense of urgency occurs against a background of rapid technological progress toward exploitation of the oceans’ wealth, growing concern about offshore pollution, and a rising sentiment of coastal states to advance their interests against the legal regime established by maritime states. It springs from the need to: --check the resulting proliferation of expansive unilateral claims of exclusive national jurisdiction on the seabeds and the waters above, to which the recent Brazilian and Canadian actions give great impetus;

--establish the proper international climate to resist the resulting restrictions of U.S. military mobility and commerce and to obtain a new law of the sea treaty limiting territorial sea boundaries and assuring free passage through international straits.

Unless you clearly and quickly back international agreements to achieve these two objectives, it is felt that: --“creeping jurisdiction” will lead coastal states to exclude our emplacement of SOSUS listening devices on the continental slope;

--the establishment of 200-mile territorial boundaries will paralyze our military mobility on the seas and in the air above;

--expanding unilateral claims will precipitate bitter disputes resulting from our fishing and other activities off foreign shores.

Faced with this critical situation, the proponents of a seabeds convention seek multilateral agreements assuring the orderly use of the oceans for the benefit of all states. The alternatives, they fear, are acquiescence to increasing anarchy on the oceans or forcible protection of our interests. Yet the very effort to reach international agreements on the oceans and seabeds has stimulated the pace of unilateral claims.

Agency Positions

The four agency positions before you agree that the area of the continental shelf from the coast to a 200-meter isobath should be under national sovereignty of the coastal state. (See attached diagram.) They also agree that the area on the abyssal ocean floor beyond the continental margin should be under an international regime. The area of controversy is the continental margin beyond the 200-meter isobath.

The chief differences with respect to this area can be summarized as follows:

Interior: Coastal states should have sovereign rights in the whole area.

State: The area should be an intermediate zone in which coastal states would have exclusive jurisdiction over exploitation and exploration only and in which other activities (including military, by implication) by foreign states would be permitted. Coastal states would pay a 2% royalty on value of resources exploited, to be allocated to an international community fund.

Defense: Exploitation of the seabeds in this area should be under an international authority that would set standards and conditions and allocate royalties to international economic development. Preferential bidding rights to coastal states might be established.

Richardson : This area should be under an international authority like that in Defense’s proposal and royalties would similarly be allocated to economic development. But coastal states would have the exclusive right to grant concessions and collect royalties as “trustees of the international community.”

Issues

The principal rationale of the positions of Defense, Richardson, and State is the same. There are three basic issues upon which they and Interior differ.

I. Should the US support a seabeds convention that would restrict the authority of coastal states on the continental margin beyond the 200-meter isobath?

Yes (according to Defense, Richardson, and State)

1. The present Geneva Seabeds Convention of 1958 is legally ambiguous and obsolete and is therefore powerless to check expanding unilateral claims.

2. A new agreement to supplement it is indispensable to check the threat to our security, commercial, and general foreign interests posed by proliferating unilateral claims.

3. Only by renouncing sovereign rights beyond the 200-meter isobath and setting up a generous international regime in the seaward area can the US and other major maritime states gain the adherence of coastal states and developing countries generally to a new law of the sea treaty.

No (according to Interior)

1. The Geneva Convention of 1958 is adequate if interpreted to provide coastal states with sovereign rights over the whole continental margin.

2. Any legal restriction of US sovereign rights over the continental margin off its shores would be tantamount to giving away great potential wealth that is rightfully ours.

3. The way to protect our rights on the high seas is to enforce them.

II. If the US supports a seabeds convention, do we need sovereign rights on the continental margin off our shores in order to enjoy adequate access to its resources for the purposes of national security and, commercial benefit?

Yes (according to Interior)

1. Without explicitly assured sovereign rights, the access and profits of American firms may be unduly restricted by an international regime.

2. In the future only ownership of the resources on the entire continental margin will give us the access to oil we need for national defense.

No (according to Defense, Richardson, and State)

1. Considering the great technological advantage enjoyed by American deep-water petroleum and mining industries, American firms will dominate exploitation of all seabeds for years to come, no matter what authority grants the leases.

2. Considering the interest of an international regime in getting funds for development, it will not want to make drilling unprofitable for American firms.

3. The US will have a dominant part in establishing any international authority and in running it if we initiate the project.

4. If the US initiates the proposal for an international authority, it can negotiate preferential rights for coastal states to protect them against discrimination.

5. The Defense Department says that oil resources beyond the 200-meter isobath off our shores are not needed for national defense.

III. In exploiting the continental margins off foreign shores would US firms be better off dealing with them under a convention that gives coastal states sovereign rights over their margins than if the same areas are under an international regime? (NOTE: 94% of the world’s continental margins are off foreign shores.)

Yes (according to Interior)

It is likely to be safer and more profitable to cope with the familiar difficulties and risks of dealing bilaterally with coastal states than to deal with an international regime.

No (according to Defense, Richardson, and State)

In the future US oil firms face a growing risk of expropriation, profit squeezing, and general harassment by coastal states; and these risks will be increased if coastal states are given or allowed to assert ownership of resources on their continental margins. The best protection against their risk is a convention establishing narrow shelf boundaries and an international regime beyond.

* * * * * *

If, after considering these issues, you should decide that the US does not need another seabeds convention or that it should support a broad boundary of sovereign rights, then Interior’s position is the proper one. If you conclude that the US should quickly announce its support for a seabeds convention that would confine sovereign rights on the continental margin to the 200-meter depth boundary and establish an international regime beyond, then the following issues should be considered in determining the US position.

Although the Department of State has adopted Richardson’s position and Interior is inclined to accept State’s abandoned position, you may wish to compare the merits of all three of the remaining positions—Defense, Richardson, and State—with respect to the issues below.

In choosing between Defense, Richardson, and State it will help to realize that each position, in this order, makes progressively greater concessions to the control by coastal states of the resources of the continental margin beyond the 200-meter isobath off their shores (and, hence, their legal capacity to restrict US activities) and progressively less concession to the international character of the area.

On the other hand, some authorities insist that, in reality and as it appears to most states now, the only reliable distinction between these three positions is whether or not coastal states would have the explicit right to grant leases for exploration and exploitation of resources. (Only Defense would renounce this right beyond the 200-meter line.) According to this view, the difference between Interior and either Richardson’s and State’s position is largely cosmetic and, in practice, illusory.

* * * * * *

IV. Which position will best check the proliferation of unilateral claims and restrictions by coastal states?

Defense believes that only its position, by clearly renouncing coastal-state ownership of resources beyond the 200-meter line, is likely to achieve this purpose. Richardson’s and State’s positions, it contends, would be tantamount to Interior’s since they give coastal states the exclusive authority to grant leases in the area and would therefore encourage expansive claims by coastal states and fail to check creeping jurisdiction.

Richardson relies on “international rules, “ the “international sovereignty” of the area, and the provision that coastal states should act as “trustees of the international community” to discourage such claims and to check creeping jurisdiction.

State relies only on the definition of the area as an “intermediate” zone in which coastal states have “jurisdiction.” (not “sovereign rights”) for purposes of exploration and exploitation and in which “other activities” by foreign states would be assured.

V. Which position has the best chance of gaining the adherence of other states to a seabeds convention and a law of the sea treaty that will serve our interests?

State’s position can claim the most direct economic appeal to some key coastal states with abundant seabed resources (if they are not concerned about exploiting foreign shelves), since it gives the clearest title to these states over the seabed resources off their own shores.

Richardson believes that his position, in making a greater concession to the international character of the area, will be more salable than State’s position to the general international community, yet more salable than Defense’s position to coastal states because it gives them the right to grant leases.

Defense contends that Richardson’s as well as State’s concession to coastal-state interests would deprive the US of a basis for resisting the expanding claims and restrictions of coastal states and attracting the necessary number of signatories with the benefits of an assured international regime. It reasons that if concessions to coastal states are needed, they can best be made by providing preferential bidding rights for them.

VI. Which position will best protect American commercial interests off our shores?

Richardson’s and State’s positions, by giving coastal states the exclusive right to grant leases, would protect US petroleum firms from any possible discrimination by the international authority.

Defense argues that the same objective can be achieved—and without jeopardizing the international regime—by giving coastal states preferential bidding rights. In any case, it denies (as only Interior affirms) that an international authority would jeopardize our commercial interests.

VII. Which position will best protect American commercial interests off foreign shores?

Defense maintains that coastal states will tend to nullify any international regime and expand their own jurisdiction to the disadvantage of US firms if they are given management of the resources in the area, as in Richardson’s or State’s position.

Richardson, however, may give more protection against this danger than State because he explicitly gives greater recognition to international authority in the area.

VIII. Which position is likely to be more acceptable to the Senate?

Richardson’s position may have a broader appeal than State’s but would also be less vulnerable than Defense’s to sentiment against the “giveaway” of “our” resources.

Defense believes that its position provides the President with the soundest, clearest, and most honest basis for taking a striking initiative in international affairs that will carry the Senate with him.

State’s position will have the greatest appeal to Senators who are sympathetic to the oil industry’s views on this issue.

IX. Which position is tactically the best to begin with in international negotiations?

Defense argues that if we begin with a position that gives coastal states the right to grant leases over the whole margin, they will have no incentive to accept restrictions of other rights and will prefer to claim maximum control of the margin’s resources; whereas, if we start with the maximum restriction of coastal states sovereign rights to a narrow boundary and hold out an attractive international regime, we will be in a better bargaining position to get an acceptable international agreement by granting concessions to coastal states as a quid pro quo. Thus, in negotiations Defense might be willing to back up to Richardson’s position if necessary.

Richardson is willing to back up to State’s position in the negotiating process, if necessary; but his position could hardly be negotiated toward Defense.

State’s position may be so close to Interior’s in practice that in the process of negotiation it would lose its provisions that restrict coastal state sovereignty in the area.

Conclusion

The choice between Interior and the other three positions depends on a basic judgment about international political forces and American interests. I believe that our overriding national security interests militate against Interior’s position. Our oil and other commercial interests are not likely to be seriously disadvantaged by any of the other positions, the views of the oil industry notwithstanding.

State’s position looks better than Interior’s from the standpoint of checking unilateral claims and restrictions, but in practice it seems likely to be tantamount to Interior’s position with some window dressing.

The choice between Defense and Richardson depends on a finer judgment concerning the real international effects and Congressional reactions to proposals that are almost identical in rationale but different in form. Defense believes that Richardson’s formulation would, in practice, defeat its avowed intent either in the process of negotiation or as a treaty. Richardson believes that his position is more salable internationally and in the Senate.

I can live with either Defense’s or Richardson’s position.

Ehrlichman and Whitaker favor State’s position since they believe it gives maximum protection to the U.S. in controlling resources on the continental margins of this country while being internationally acceptable.

As soon as you have indicated your choice, I shall prepare a NSDM and a scenario for promulgating your decision.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you choose Defense’s or Richardson’s position on a seabeds convention.

Approve Defense’s Position

Approve Richardson’s Position [Signed “RN” May 29, 1970]

Approve State’s Position

Approve Interior’s Position

Approve No Position

Attachment
Diagram

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume II, March 1970-December 1970, (2 of 2). Secret. Sent for action. The President initialed his approval of the Richardson position on May 20

374. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) 374. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson)1

Washington, May 13, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Expanded basis for “insider” LOS consultations

July, August and September will be critical months for making decisions affecting the future course of our LOS effort. During this period, we will have to decide on UNGA tactics, items for the agenda, and whether or when to surface revised versions of Articles 2 and 3.

I believe that the confined nature of our “close” consultations—i.e. between ourselves and the Soviets may no longer be the most effective method of proceeding. In the first instance, if we have to revise Articles 2 and 3 and wish to surface those revisions sometime in the near future, we had better air our differences with the Soviets and either attempt to reach agreement or frankly give recognition to the fact that we will have to part company in certain substantive ways. Moreover, this process of “facing the realities” will involve very close consultation with several other countries who should at this point, I feel, be brought into the “inner circle.” Japan and the U.K. particularly are beginning to smart over their exclusion from joint planning. Additionally, we are being too closely associated with the Soviets in this initiative, and that close association, while itself undesirable, may become even more disadvantageous in the event the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. cannot agree on the substance of the articles.

I, therefore, think it would be a good idea if we were to convene a meeting late in June of a small group of nations on a very confidential basis. Aside from the U.S., I think this group should include the Soviets, the U.K., Japan, France and Mexico. Our objectives would be to discuss both procedure and substance in an effort to broaden our base of support and share the task of eliciting support from other countries. The active participation of France would provide an additional benefit: in seeking to engage France more extensively, we might gain a useful ally in Africa. The same might be said of the U.K. in relation to Asia.

I have discussed this proposition with Don McKernan who seems to be in strong agreement. He adds the suggestion that our “inner group” might also include one “salesman” from Africa and Asia—e.g. perhaps Malaysia or Singapore, and Senegal or the Ivory Coast.

I would propose that we seek the views of these few countries, suggesting a meeting in late June. A convenient and tactically appropriate place for the meeting might be in Paris. This would have the additional advantage of getting the French more interested and more enthusiastic in support of our proposals. I believe such a meeting would provide many substantial benefits, not the least of which would be probable Soviet pleasure over being included in a discussion of these “quasi-strategic” questions in a “western group.”

If you think there is merit in this proposal, I think we should discuss it very soon, prior to raising it with other agencies.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. A copy was sent to Oxman.

375. National Security Decision Memorandum 62 375. National Security Decision Memorandum 621

Washington, May 22, 1970.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Secretary of Interior

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of Transportation

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director, Bureau of the Budget

The Director, Office of Science and Technology

The Director, National Science Foundation

The Executive Secretary, National Marine Council

SUBJECT:

Convention on Continental Shelf and Seabeds

The President has decided that the U.S. Government shall adopt the following principles governing the use of the seabeds beyond the territorial sea as the basis for a proposed treaty or detailed proposals to be submitted at the next session of the UN Seabeds Committee: 1. Coastal states have sovereign rights over the seabed’s natural resources out to a depth of 200 meters, and will not have such rights in the area beyond.

2. The entire area of the seabed and its natural resources seaward from the 200-meter depth is to be under the authority of an international regime, and shall be regarded as the common heritage of mankind. Exploration for and exploitation of natural resources shall be carried out for the benefit of mankind. International rules concerning pollution, liability, protection of navigation, work requirements, scientific research and other freedoms of the seas, settlement of disputes, expropriation and similar matters shall apply in the entire area. Internationally agreed royalties derived from mineral exploitation shall be disbursed to an international community fund, principally for the purposes of economic assistance to developing countries that are participants in the treaty. These royalties should be at a level that will make a substantial contribution to development, render participation in the treaty attractive to the necessary signatories, and at the same time encourage exploration and exploitation of natural resources of the seabeds.

3. Beyond the 200-meter depth and to the edge of the continental margin, including the continental rise, hereafter called the international “trusteeship zone,” coastal states shall act as trustees of the international community, shall be authorized to license exploration and exploitation of seabed natural resources, and shall collect the international royalties. The coastal state shall receive a percentage of the international royalties collected in the zone in which it acts as trustee and may, in its discretion, collect additional royalties or taxes from producers in this area.

4. In the area seaward of the trusteeship zone, international machinery will be established to license and regulate exploration and exploitation of natural resources and collect the international royalties from this area.

5. In the trusteeship zone the authority of coastal states to license the exploration and exploitation of resources shall not impinge upon the rights of other states to conduct other activities, including scientific research. All uses of the area, including exploration and exploitation, must be exercised with reasonable regard for the interests of other users of the seabed and superjacent waters in accordance with the freedoms of the high seas.

6. Pending achievement of an international agreement on the lines outlined here, the U.S. will call on other nations to join her in an interim policy. All permits for exploration and exploitation of the seabeds beyond the 200-meter depth boundary will be issued subject to the international regime to be agreed upon, and that regime will include due protection for the integrity of investments made in the interim. A substantial portion of the revenues derived by a state from exploitation beyond 200 meters during this period should be turned over to an appropriate international development agency as soon as a sufficient number of other countries are prepared to do the same. Appropriate Congressional action should be sought to make such funds available.

7. Appropriate Congressional and other governmental action shall be proposed to assure that minerals exploited by United States nationals in the area of the seabed within the United States trusteeship zone as well as the area governed by international machinery would be treated as domestic minerals for tax and import purposes.

The Department of State will be responsible for preparing a detailed treaty proposal, negotiating positions, and the necessary legislative and regulatory measures in full coordination with the Departments of Defense and Interior.

There should be no discussion of this decision with the public or Congress, except as specifically authorized by this office, until the policy is announced shortly.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret.

376. Statement Issued by President Nixon 376. Statement Issued by President Nixon1

Washington, May 23, 1970.

Statement About United States Oceans Policy.

THE NATIONS of the world are now facing decisions of momentous importance to man’s use of the oceans for decades ahead. At issue is whether the oceans will be used rationally and equitably and for the benefit of mankind or whether they will become an arena of unrestrained exploitation and conflicting jurisdictional claims in which even the most advantaged states will be losers.

The issue arises now—and with urgency—because nations have grown increasingly conscious of the wealth to be exploited from the seabeds and through-out the waters above and because they are also becoming apprehensive about ecological hazards of unregulated use of the oceans and seabeds. The stark fact is that the law of the sea is inadequate to meet the needs of modern technology and the concerns of the international community. If it is not modernized multilaterally, unilateral action and international conflict are inevitable.

This is the time then for all nations to set about resolving the basic issues of the future regime for the oceans—and to resolve it in a way that redounds to the general benefit in the era of intensive exploitation that lies ahead. The United States as a major maritime power and a leader in ocean technology to unlock the riches of the ocean has a special responsibility to move this effort forward.

Therefore, I am today proposing that all nations adopt as soon as possible a treaty under which they would renounce all national claims over the natural resources of the seabed beyond the point where the high seas reach a depth of 200 meters (218.8 yards) and would agree to regard these resources as the common heritage of mankind.

The treaty should establish an international regime for the exploitation of seabed resources beyond this limit. The regime should provide for the collection of substantial mineral royalties to be used for international community purposes, particularly economic assistance to developing countries. It should also establish general rules to prevent unreasonable interference with other uses of the ocean, to protect the ocean from pollution, to assure the integrity of the investment necessary for such exploitation, and to provide for peaceful and compulsory settlement of disputes.

I propose two types of machinery for authorizing exploitation of seabed resources beyond a depth of 200 meters.

First, I propose that coastal nations act as trustees for the international community in an international trusteeship zone comprised of the continental margins beyond a depth of 200 meters off their coasts. In return, each coastal state would receive a share of the international revenues from the zone in which it acts as trustee and could impose additional taxes if these were deemed desirable.

As a second step, agreed international machinery would authorize and regulate exploration and use of seabed resources beyond the continental margins.

The United States will introduce specific proposals at the next meeting of the United Nations Seabeds Committee to carry out these objectives.

Although I hope agreement on such steps can be reached quickly, the negotiation of such a complex treaty may take some time. I do not, however, believe it is either necessary or desirable to try to halt exploration and exploitation of the seabeds beyond a depth of 200 meters during the negotiating process.

Accordingly, I call on other nations to join the United States in an interim policy. I suggest that all permits for exploration and exploitation of the seabeds beyond 200 meters be issued subject to the international regime to be agreed upon. The regime should accordingly include due protection for the integrity of investments made in the interim period. A substantial portion of the revenues derived by a state from exploitation beyond 200 meters during this interim period should be turned over to an appropriate international development agency for assistance to developing countries. I would plan to seek appropriate congressional action to make such funds available as soon as a sufficient number of other states also indicate their willingness to join this interim policy.

I will propose necessary changes in the domestic import and tax laws and regulations of the United States to assure that our own laws and regulations do not discriminate against U.S. nationals operating in the trusteeship zone off our coast or under the authority of the international machinery to be established.

It is equally important to assure unfettered and harmonious use of the oceans as an avenue of commerce and transportation, and as a source of food. For this reason the United States is currently engaged with other states in an effort to obtain a new law of the sea teaty. This treaty would establish a 12-mile limit for territorial seas and provide for free transit through international straits. It would also accommodate the problems of developing countries and other nations regarding the conservation and use of the living resources of the high seas.

I believe that these proposals are essential to the interests of all nations, rich and poor, coastal and landlocked, regardless of their political systems. If they result in international agreements, we can save over two-thirds of the earth’s surface from national conflict and rivalry, protect it from pollution, and put it to use for the benefit of all. This would be a fitting achievement for this 25th anniversary year of the United Nations.

NOTE: On the same day, the White House released the transcript of a news briefing on the statement by John R. Stevenson, Legal Adviser of the Department of State.

1 Source: Public Papers: Nixon, 1970, (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1971), pp. 454-456.

377. Circular Airgram CA-3320 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts 377. Circular Airgram CA-3320 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, June 18, 1970, 1305Z.

Subject:

Law of the Sea and Seabed Matters

Ref:

State 079318

Department believes it will be important to the long-run success of the President’s May 23 proposal on the seabeds (text transmitted in State 079318) for all addressees to be prepared to discuss the proposal and to gain support for it. In discussing the proposal with host governments, addressees should point out advantages the proposal offers both to the international community and to individual states.

Department appreciates reports already sent in on preliminary reactions by a number of host governments. The following documents are attached which addressees may find useful in discussing the President’s proposal and US initiative on LOS issues: (1) Undersecretary Richardson’s May 27 testimony before the Special Senate Subcommittee on the Outer Continental Shelf, relating to President Nixon’s statement of May 23 on seabeds (caveat: The Under Secretarys remarks were designed for use before a legislative committee and some of their emphasis and language may not be suitable for use with host governments, particularly in developing countries; the remarks should therefore be used only for broad guidance by posts and should not be handed out to host government representatives);

(2) “Questions and Answers” concerning the President’s seabeds proposals, to be drawn upon by posts but not handed to host governments;

(3) A factsheet prepared for newsmen at the time of the president’s May 23 statement on seabeds, which summarizes the physical characteristics of the seabed and legal background, copies of which may be handed to host government representatives for their information

(4) A schematic representation of the seabed proposal;

(5) A speech entitled “International Law and the Oceans”, delivered by John R. Stevenson, The Legal Adviser, on February 18, 1970, regarding our initiative on the law of the sea issues.

The United States is actively pursuing two separate initiatives, one relating to law of the sea issues which involve the waters above the seabeds and the other to the seabeds themselves, and posts should ensure that host governments are not confusing the two. Our specific law of the sea policy objective is to secure at the earliest practicable time and under United Nations auspices an international treaty which would (1) fix the maximum extent of the territorial sea at 12 nautical miles; (2) ensure freedom of transit through and over international straits; and (3) recogize special fishing interests of coastal states off their coasts. With regard to seabeds, our recently announced objective is to obtain agreement on an international treaty under which nations would renounce national claims to seabed resources beyond the point where the high seas reach a depth of 200 meters and would regard such resources as the common heritage of mankind; specifically, President Nixon has proposed that (1) within a trusteeship. zone extending from the 200 meter depth line to the seaward edge of the continental margin, coastal nations would act under the authority of the treaty regime as trustees for the international community, receiving in return a portion of revenues derived from exploitation of that zone; (2) beyond the trusteeship zone, authorization and regulation of exploitation of seabed resources would be carried out directly by international machinery and (3) as an interim policy, all nations should issue exploration and exploitation permits beyond the 200 meter isobath subject to the provisions of the future international regime and turn over a substantial portion of such exploitation revenues for assistance to developing countries.

While the two initiatives are in no way inconsistent with one another, they should not be regarded as a single “package”, and their technical aspects should not be confused. The two initiatives do bear a relation to one another, however, in that (1) both are designed to relieve uncertainties in existing international law, (2) both are intended to limit escalating claims of national jurisdiction, and (3) both represent a practical balancing of coastal state and international interests.

In soliciting comments on the seabeds proposal, posts should bear in mind the specific factors which will help to determine the host government’s interests in this area: e.g., whether the nation is coastal, land-locked, or shelf-locked (i.e., so situated on closed shallow seas that a nation would gain little or nothing from national jurisdiction over the seabeds beyond 200 meters); the extent of its continental margin; its expectation of mineral resources in the margin; the state of its technology; its general state of development (i.e., whether it is a potential donor or beneficiary under the international revenues aspects of the proposal); its attitude on other oceans policies, such as the extent of the territorial sea and preferential fishing interests; etc. Such factors should be borne in mind in studying the attachments, in order to clarify which aspects should be emphasized in discussion with host governments.

FOR EMBASSY’S BACKGROUND ONLY

FYI. The President’s seabed policy is an attempt to meet three important U.S. policy objectives by offering an alternative to territorial sea claims by coastal states who wish to gain control of seabed mineral resources off their coasts. First, we seek to establish a rule of law on the oceans to prevent the seabeds from becoming an area of future conflict. Secondly, the proposal would not minimize U.S. access to mineral resources of the U.S. continental margin as it provides for U.S. administration of seabed resources in the continental margin off the United States. In addition, the international regime will establish basic norms for the exploitation of the world’s continental margins beyond 200 meters as well as machinery for dispute settlement. In other words, United States technology and capital will operate under a uniform set of internationally agreed standards throughout the world. Third, the proposal seeks to limit exclusive sovereign rights on the seabed to that point at which the high seas reach a depth of 200 meters. This has important implications for United States national security. One of the great threats to the United States strategic posture has been the potential limits on military mobility caused by unilateral assertions of jurisdiction by coastal states over large areas: of the high seas, seabed and air space off their coasts. It is hoped that the President’s seabed proposal, by extending the coastal state administrative control under trusteeship arrangements over the exploitation of the resources of the entire continental margin off its coasts will remove part of the incentive for unilateral claims. The fact that such claims would be at the expense of international revenues for developing countries should also create general international pressure against such claims.

We hope to formulate specific proposals based on the President’s May 23 announcement in advance of the August Seabeds Committee meeting. While we do not wish to prod governments into taking premature positions on a seabeds regime, we would. appreciate receiving any views they may have at this point. END FYI.

Rogers

Attachment 5

SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF THE SEABEDS
(Showing the Proposed Trusteeship Zone)

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Confidential. Drafted by Salisbury and Harrison on June 16; cleared by McIntyre, E, S/FW, L, Oxman, and the Departments of Defense and Interior; and approved by Stevenson. Attached but not published were Richardson’s May 27 statement, a Questions and Answers paper, a Factsheet, and Stevenson’s February 18 speech.

378. Memorandum for the Record 378. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, July 25, 1970.

Subject:

Convention on Continental Shelf and Seabeds

Reference:

NSDM 62

Al Haig called on July 23 stating that as we were aware the President had made his decision with respect to the Seabeds issue. His position was reflected in NSDM 62. He observed that State and Defense had been successful in reaching a compromise position but the Interior Department held to a protectionist position. As a result of certain efforts emanating in large part from the Interior Department an attempt was underway to try to bring this matter before the President again. He stated that the Department should not be thrown off course in proceeding forthwith to prepare treaty language for submission to the United Nation He also indicated that the White House would be informing Secretary Hickel that Interior should “cool” it.

I informed Jack Stevenson of the above who indicated that Interior has been trying to have a document submitted to the UN which would be a description of our position rather than proposing treaty language. In the meantime certain committees in Congress have also shown increased interest in this matter. As a consequence, while Jack is proceeding to develop the treaty language for submission to the UN he is also at the same time endeavoring to get Interior on board and to smooth the way with key members of the Congress.

Jack Stevenson indicated he appreciated the information conveyed to us by Al Haig. His program of action is in fact consistent with White House wishes.

Robert L. Brown
Deputy Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 3, NSDM 62-5/22/70-Convention on Shelf and Seabeds. Secret. Prepared by Brown. For NSDM 62, see Document 375.

379. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 379. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, July 29, 1970.

Subject:

Status of the President’s Proposal regarding A New International Regime for the Seabed—INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

On May 23, 1970 the President announced that the United States would propose an international agreement under which coastal states would limit their sovereign right over the seabed to the point where the high seas (the United States is also proposing a 12-mile limit on the territorial sea) would reach a depth of 200 meters. The President’s proposal further contemplated that coastal states would act as trustees for the international community in an international trusteeship zone comprised of the continental margins beyond a depth of 200 meters off their coasts, determining who shall exploit the seabed’s resources and receiving a share of the international royalty payments from the zone in which they act as trustees. Exploration of seabed resources in the area beyond would be authorized by an international authority. The President also announced that the United States would introduce specific proposals at the next meeting of the United Nations Seabed Committee, which meets in Geneva convening on Monday, August 3.

Since the time of the President’s announcement, an inter-agency task force, of which I have served as Chairman, has prepared a draft treaty spelling out in detail the President’s proposal. This draft treaty has now been cleared by State, Defense, Interior and the other agencies concerned for presentation as a working document for discussion purposes and not necessarily representing the definitive views of the U.S. Government.

During the course of the preparation of the draft treaty, we conferred with representatives of the oil and hard mineral industries and have incorporated a number of their suggestions in the present version of the treaty and I have also appeared this week before the Interior and Foreign Relations Committees of the Senate and will appear on Friday before the Foreign Affairs and Fisheries Committees of the House. Senator Pell, the Chairman of the Ocean Subcommittee of the Foreign Affairs Committee, and Senator Hollings, Chairman of the Commerce Committee have announced support for the treaty. Senator Jackson and three other members of the Senate Interior Committee wrote you last week indicating their concern regarding presentation of the treaty at this time. However, at the end of my meeting with the Interior Committee on Monday to explain the changes we had made in the treaty in the light of some of the questions they raised together with our intention to present the draft as a working paper for discussion, Senator Metcalf indicated that he regarded my explanation as an appropriate answer to the letter.

Yesterday I talked with Senator Jackson who had been unable to attend the hearing and he asked that I write a letter to him indicating that we were planning to proceed and would keep Senator Metcalf’s subcommittee advised.

It is our present plan to submit the draft treaty to the Seabeds Committee in Geneva next Monday and at the same time to make copies available to the press and various capitals in order to achieve the maximum benefit for our overall Law of the Sea effort.

I understand that Secretary Packard discussed with the President and Mr. Kissinger the possibility of a further Presidential announcement at this time with respect to the introduction of the treaty but I do not know whether the White House has taken a final decision on this or not. You will recall that I showed the draft statement to you on Monday and indicated to the White House that the statement was satisfactory to you.

Attached hereto for your information are (1) May 23, 1970 Statement by the President on U.S. Oceans Policy; (2) a summary prepared by me of the draft treaty; (3) the draft treaty; and (4) a brief statement of the benefits to various states which would result from the treaty.

Attachment

Statement of John R. Stevenson, The Legal Adviser, Department of State, summarizing draft “United Nations Convention on the International Seabed Area”

On May 23, 1970, President Nixon announced a new oceans policy for the United States and stated that the United States would make specific proposals at the UN Seabeds Committee in August with regard to the proposed regime for the seabeds beyond national jurisdiction which he set forth in broad outline in his announcement. The submission of a draft “United Nations Convention on the International Seabed Area” to the Seabeds Committee as a working paper for discussion within that Committee as well as with other governments and within the United States, implements the President’s announcement. The draft Convention and its appendices raise a number of questions with respect to which further detailed study is clearly necessary and do not necessarily represent the definitive views of the United States Government.

The basic structure of the Convention reflects the President’s proposals that states should by international agreement renounce their sovereign rights in the seabed under the high seas* beyond a water depth of 200 meters; establish an international regime for the area beyond with certain basic principles and general rules applicable throughout this area; authorize the coastal states as trustees for the international community to carry out the major administrative role in licensing the exploration and exploitation of natural resources from the limit of coastal state national jurisdiction to the edge of the continental margin, and share in the international revenues from the trusteeship area which they administered; and establish international machinery to perform similar functions in the area beyond the continental margin.

Basic Principles

Among the basic principles which would become applicable to the entire International Seabed Area (including the International Trusteeship Area) under the Convention would be the following:

The International Seabed Area would be the common heritage of mankind and no State could exercise sovereignty or sovereign rights over this area or its resources, or, except as provided in the Convention, acquire any right or interest therein.

The International Seabed Area would be open to use by all States without discrimination, except as otherwise provided in the Convention, and would be reserved exclusively for peaceful purposes.

Provision would be made for the collection of revenues from mineral production in the Area to be used for international community purposes including economic advancement of developing countries and to promote the safe, efficient and economic exploitation of the mineral resources of the seabed.

Exploration and exploitation of the natural resources of the Area must not result in unjustified interference with other activities in the marine environment and all activities in the Area must be conducted with adequate safeguards against pollution and the protection of human life and the marine environment.

A contracting party would be responsible that those authorized by it (as Trustee in the Trusteeship Area) or sponsored by it (in the area beyond) complied with the Convention and for any damage caused by them.

The general rules would be as follows:

Mineral Resources

All exploration and exploitation of the mineral deposits in the Area would be licensed by the appropriate Trustee in the Trusteeship Zone and by the International Seabed Resource Authority in the area beyond subject to general provisions relating to the terms of licenses included as Appendices forming part of the Convention, a number of which allow greater discretion to the Trustee State in the case of the Trusteeship Area. The Contracting Parties would have primary responsibility for inspecting activities licensed or sponsored by them. The International Seabed Resource Authority would also have authority to inspect and determine if a licensed operation violates the treaty. Licenses would be revoked only for cause and in accordance with the Convention with expropriation of investments made, or unjustifiable interference with operations conducted, pursuant to a license prohibited.

Living Resources of the Seabed

All contracting parties would have the right to explore and exploit these resources (e.g. king crab) subject to necessary conservation measures and the right of the Trustee in the Trusteeship Area to decide whether and by whom such resources should be exploited.

Protection of the Marine Environment, Life and Property

The International Seabed Resource Authority would be authorized to prescribe rules to protect against pollution of the marine environment and injury to persons and resources resulting from exploration and exploitation and to prevent unjustifiable interference with other activities in the marine environment.

Scientific Research

Each party would agree to encourage and to obviate interference with scientific research and to promote international cooperation in scientific research.

International Trusteeship Area

The provisions of the Treaty relating to the International Trusteeship Area would define the outer limit of the area as a line beyond the base of the continental slope where the downward inclination of the seabed reaches a specified gradient, such gradient to be determined by technical experts taking into account, among other factors, ease of determination, the need to avoid dual administration of single resource deposits and the avoidance of including excessively large areas in the Area; would limit the Trustee’s rights to those set forth in the Convention; would include among those rights the issuing, suspending and revoking of mineral exploration and exploitation licenses subject to the rules set forth in the Convention and its Appendices, with full discretion to decide whether a license should be issued and to decide to whom a license should be issued; to exercise criminal and civil jurisdiction over its licensees; and to retain a portion (a figure between 33 1/3% and 50% is suggested for consideration) of the fees and payments required under the Convention for activities in the Area; to collect and retain additional license and rental fees to defray its administrative expenses; and to collect other additional payments, retaining the same portion as above of such other additional payments.

International Seabed Resource Authority

The principal organs of the proposed International Seabed Resource Authority would be an Assembly of all Contracting Parties; a Council of 24 members, including the six most industrially advanced Contracting States, at least twelve developing countries and at least two landlocked or shelf-locked states; and a Tribunal of from five to nine judges elected by the Council.

The Assembly which would meet at least once every three years, would elect members of the Council, approve budgets proposed by the Council, approve proposals of the Council for changes in allocation of net income within the limits prescribed in an Appendix to the Convention, and make recommendations. The Council, which would make decisions only with the approval of a majority of both the six most advanced industrial members and of the eighteen other members, would appoint the Commissions provided for in the Convention, submit to the Assembly budgets and proposals for changes in the allocation of net income within the limits prescribed in an Appendix, and could issue emergency orders at the request of a Contracting Party to prevent serious harm to the marine environment. The Tribunal would decide all disputes and advise on all questions relating to the interpretation and application of the Convention. It would have compulsory jurisdiction in respect of any complaint brought by a Contracting Party against another Contracting Party for failure to fulfill its obligation under the Convention, or whenever the Operations Commission, on its own initiative or at the request of any licensee, considered that a Contracting Party or licensee had failed to fulfill its obligations under the Convention. If the Tribunal found the Contracting Party or licensee in default, such party or licensee must take the measures required to implement the Tribunal’s judgment. The Tribunal would have the power to impose fines of not more than $1,000 for each day of an offense as well as to award damages to the other party concerned. Where the Tribunal determined that a licensee had committed a gross and persistent violation of the provisions of the Convention and within a reasonable time has not brought its operations into compliance, the Council could either revoke the license or request the Trustee Party to do so. Where a Contracting Party failed to perform the obligations incumbent on it under a judgment of the Tribunal, the Council, on application of the other party to the case, could decide upon measures to give effect to the judgment, including, when appropriate, temporary suspension of the rights of the defaulting party under the Convention (the extent of such suspension to be related to the extent and seriousness of the violation). In addition, any Contracting Party, and any person directly affected, could bring before the Tribunal the legality of any measure taken by the Council, or one of its Commissions, on the ground of violation of the Convention, lack of jurisdiction, infringement of important procedural rules, unreasonableness, or misuse of powers and the Tribunal could declare such measure null and void.

The Convention also provides for the establishment of three Commissions, each of from five to nine members: the Rules and Recommended Practices Commission would consider and recommend to the Council adoption of Annexes as described below. The Operations Commission would issue licenses for mineral exploration and exploitation in the area beyond the International Trusteeship Area and supervise the operations of licensees in cooperation with the Trustee or Sponsoring Party, but not itself engage in exploration or exploitation. The International Seabed Boundary Review Commission would review the delineation of boundaries submitted by the Contracting Parties for approval in accordance with the Convention, negotiate differences among the Parties and if the differences were not resolved initiate appropriate proceedings before the Tribunal, and render advice to Contracting Parties on boundary questions.

The members of the Council could not be employees of the Authority and the members of the Rules and Recommended Practices Commission and the International Seabed Boundary Review Commission would not be full-time employees of the Authority.

The Secretariat of the Authority would consist of a Secretary-General appointed by the Council and a staff appointed by the Secretary-General under the general guidelines established by the Council.

Any amendment of the Convention or the Appendices would require the approval of the Council and a two-thirds vote of the Assembly and would come into force only when ratified by two thirds of the Contracting Parties, including each of the six most advanced industrial states.

Appendices, which are integral parts of the Convention, are included in the draft Convention by way of example only as they require extensive consideration by technically qualified experts of the questions involved.

The illustrative Appendices included in the draft Treaty relate to a) terms and procedures applying to all licenses in the International Seabed Area; b) terms and procedures applying to licenses in the International Seabed Area beyond the International Trusteeship Area; c) terms and procedures for licenses in the International Trusteeship Area; d) division of revenue; and e) designation of members of the Council representing the six most industrially advanced states.

Appendix A, applicable to the entire International Seabed Area, would provide for: non-exclusive exploration licenses not restricted as to area authorizing geophysical and geochemical measurements and bottom sampling; exclusive exploitation licenses including the right to undertake deep drilling and expiring at the end of fifteen years if no commercial production is achieved; deep drilling for purposes other than exploration or exploitation of seabed minerals under a permit issued at no charge by the Authority provided the Authority judges the proposed drilling does not pose an uncontrollable hazard to human safety and the environment; certification by the Trustee or Sponsoring Party of the operator’s technical and financial competence; a minimum and maximum limit on license fees, the applicable fee to be specified in an Annex to the Convention with authorization to the Trustee or Sponsoring Party to impose additional fees within specified limits to help cover its administrative costs; the categories of minerals and areas covered by licenses; relinquishment of part of the licensed area when production commences; maximum and minimum rental fees prior to and after attaining commercial production, the applicable fee to be specified in an Annex to the Convention; minimum annual work requirements; submission of work plans and data under exploitation licenses prior to commercial production; submission of production plans and reports; unit operations; minimum and maximum payments on production, the applicable amount to be specified in an Annex to the Convention (such payments to be percentages of the gross value at the site of oil and gas or minerals, to be proportional to production, and to be in the nature of payments ordinarily made to governments under similar conditions); the levels of payments on production and work requirements to be graduated to take account of probable risk and cost to the investor, including such factors as water depth, climate, volume of production, vicinity to existing production, or other factors affecting the economic rent that can reasonably be anticipated from mineral production in a given area; and the operator and the Authorizing or Sponsoring Party, as appropriate, to be liable for damage to other users of the environment and to require operators to subscribe to an insurance plan or provide other means of guaranteeing responsibility.

Appendix B, applicable to the area beyond the International Trusteeship Area, would permit Contracting Parties to obtain exploration and exploitation licenses from the Authority if they designate a specific agency to act as operator on their behalf; and to authorize persons they sponsor to apply for licenses; require the Sponsoring Party to certify as to the technical and financial competence of the operator; would require the Authority to grant licenses on proper application unless another application for the same block has been received at the monthly intervals at which applications are opened; if more than one application has been received, to award the license at competitive bidding among such applicants; to provide for award of a license by competitive bidding in the event of termination, forfeiture, or revocation of an exploitation license, or sale of a block contiguous to a block on which production has begun, or of a block from which hydrocarbons or other fluids are being drained; would authorize transfer of an exploitation license with the approval of the Sponsoring Party and the Authority and the payment of a transfer fee; would provide limits on the duration of exploitation licenses; and would stipulate minimum and maximum work requirements, the applicable amount to be stipulated in an Annex to the Convention.

Appendix C, applicable solely to the International Trusteeship Area, would reaffirm the Trustee’s exclusive right, in its discretion, to approve or disapprove applications for exploration and exploitation licenses; and to use any system for this purpose; to establish the term of the exploitation license and conditions, if any, under which it may be renewed provided that continuance after the first 15 years is contingent upon achieving commercial production; to impose proration; and to set work requirements above the minimums specified in Appendix A.

Appendix D would provide that the net income, after administrative expenses of the Authority, devoted to the economic advancement of developing States Parties to the Convention would be divided among a list of stipulated international and regional development organizations, the list to indicate the percentages assigned to each organization.

Appendix E would stipulate the formula for determining the six most industrially advanced Contracting Parties for purposes of designation to the Council.

Annexes to the Convention would be prepared by the Rules and Recommended Practices Commission, submitted for comments to the Contracting Parties and to the Council for adoption and would come into force unless more than one-third of the Contracting Parties disapproved within three months. In addition to fixing the level, basis and accounting procedures for determining international fees and other forms of payment within the ranges specified in Annex A and establishing work requirements for the area beyond the Trusteeship Area within the ranges specified in Appendix B, Annexes could establish criteria for defining technical and financial competence of applicants for licenses; assure that all exploration and exploitation activities and deep drilling were conducted with strict and adequate safeguards for the protection of human life and safety, the marine environment and living marine organisms; prevent or reduce to acceptable limits interference arising from exploration and exploitation activities with other uses and users of the marine environment; assure safe design and construction of fixed exploration and exploitation installations and equipment; and related matters. Any Contracting Party believing that a provision of an Annex could not be reasonably applied to it because of special circumstances might seek a waiver from the Operations Commission.

The Convention would provide for the due integrity of investments in the International Seabed Area made prior to the coming into force of the Convention. Authorizations by a Contracting Party to exploit granted prior to July 1, 1970, would be continued without change after the coming into force of the Convention, with the Contracting Parties being obligated to pay the production requirements provided under the Convention, and new activities under such authorizations being subject to the regulatory requirements of the Convention relating to pollution and unjustifiable interference with other uses of the marine environment. With respect to authorizations granted after July 1, 1970, the authorizing Contracting Party would be bound to either issue a new license in its capacity as Trustee or, in the area beyond, to sponsor the licensee’s application for a new license from the International Resource Authority. A new license issued by a Trustee would include the same terms and conditions as the previous authorization and the Trustee would be responsible for complying with the increased obligations resulting from the application of the Convention. Moreover, any Contracting Party authorizing activities after July 1, 1970, would be required to compensate the licensee for any investment losses resulting from the application of the Convention.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 73 D 288, Box 9, General Files on NSC Matters, NSC/Misc-Seabed. No classification indicated. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. For Attachment 1, see Document 376. Attachments 2 and 4 are dated July 29. Attachment 3, August 3, is entitled, “Draft United Nations Convention on the International Seabed Area, Working Paper” and is available as UN Document A/AC.138/25.

* The President also referred to the U.S. proposals to fix the boundary between the territorial sea and the high seas at a maximum of 12 nautical miles with free transit through international straits and carefully defined preferential fishing rights for coastal states on the high seas.

380. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Harry Dent of the National Security Council Staff 380. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Harry Dent of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, August 8, 1970.

SUBJECT:

The President’s Decision on Seabeds

Your July 13 memorandum mentioned the concern of some Republican Congressmen over the President’s seabeds decision. You asked whether something could be done about this matter, citing Congressman Bush’s feeling that the proposal should be reversed or put under reconsideration as soon as possible.

In brief, the President has firmly decided our basic course on this matter, many details remain to be worked out, and there are some useful points which you could make to concerned Congressmen.

The President’s Decision

This complicated problem was studied exhaustively in the bureaucracy by all interested agencies, including Interior. The government drew upon outside studies, the views of the oil and other interested industries and the opinions and hearings of interested Congressional committees. On the basis of an interagency study, as well as individual positions from State, Interior and Defense, the President issued a formal decision memorandum which was reflected in his public announcement on May 23 concerning US oceans policy (Tab A). Since that date, as foreshadowed by the President’s announcement, the agencies worked on a draft treaty which was submitted on August 3rd to the United Nation’s Seabeds Committee. During the course of this process the government consulted with representatives of the oil and other industries. The draft treaty is only illustrative and that the process of negotiating an international seabeds treaty will be intricate and prolonged.

As outlined in the President’s announcement the basic thrust of his decision is to combine a 200 meter depth limit for national sovereign rights over resources; a trusteeship zone for the continental margins beyond the 200 meter depth in which coastal states would act as trustees for the international community; and an agreed international machinery to authorize and regulate exploration and use of seabed resources beyond the continental margins.

Clearly, the oil industry would have preferred a much wider area of national jurisdiction than that contained in the President’s proposal. On the other hand—for your information—his decision did not go as far in the other direction as the position recommended by the Department of Defense which would not have given the coastal states trusteeship over the continental margins and would have given much wider powers to the international community.

The President’s decision on the whole has gotten very enthusiastic comment from a wide spectrum in the media, in the Congress, from many industries, and from other countries. Many have called it a bold and imaginative move of great potential importance for the world community. The President’s proposal for a seabeds convention arose from his concern to counter the rapidly rising threat to broad national security interests — principally the following: --our global military mobility (especially by free passage through international straits);

--freedom of certain military activities on the continental slope (which for obvious reasons we are not emphasizing or specifying); and

--the avoidance of jurisdictional conflicts with coastal states (as, for example, those that have arisen with Peru and, more recently, Canada).

The objective of the President’s decision is to protect these basic interests against the proliferation of unilateral claims by coastal states to extensive and exclusive jurisdiction throughout the whole water column for commercial, anti-pollution, and other purposes. Realistically, the only alternative to a chaos of such unilateral claims is the creation of multilateral arrangements.

The seabeds convention is a crucial move in this direction. If the U.S. were to remain content with the existing legal ambiguities with respect to the seabeds or were to assert exclusive sovereign rights or jurisdiction over the whole continental shelf and margin, it would be in no position to protect its global interests against comparable actions by other coastal states.

Talking Points for Congressmen.

In talking to Congressman Bush and others I hope you will find useful the above information, the text of the President’s announcement, and then Under Secretary Richardson’s Congressional testimony on the President’s decision (Tab B). In particular I would suggest that you stress the following points: --While the President has firmly fixed our general policy course on this subject, many details remain to be worked out and the government will continue to consult interested industries and the Congress as we move forward in international negotiations.

--The President, in making his decision, had to take into account a host of military, political and economic factors. (I suggest you highlight the ones I have noted above about our global military mobility; military activities on the continental slope; the avoidance of jurisdictional and political conflicts with coastal states; and the protection of our own commercial and military interests against claims by other states.)

--The President’s decision will not jeopardize the essential commercial and resource interests of the U.S., including the interests of U.S. seabeds oil exploration and exploitation. It would give coastal states the exclusive authority to license for exploration and exploitation in the trusteeship zone beyond the 200-meter depth, subject only to international rules and regulations designed to prevent pollution, protect scientific exploration, etc. The proportion of royalties resulting from exploitation in this zone that would be allocated to international economic assistance has yet to be determined, but clearly the terms would have to be sufficiently attractive for commercial firms to induce them to exploit seabed resources.

If you would like more details on this complex and important subject, Robert Osgood of my staff, who has been following it closely for many months, would be available to give you further background.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume II, March 1970-December 1970, (1 of 2). Confidential. Tab A is published as Document 376. For Tab B, Richardson’s statement before the Special Subcommittee on Outer Continental Shelf of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, U.S. Senate, May 27, 1970, see Department of State Bulletin, June 15, 1970, pp. 737-739. George Herbert Walker Bush (R-Texas) was a member of the House of Representatives from 1967-1971.

381. Memorandum From Charles Pittman of the Office of Ocean Affairs, Department of State to the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) 381. Memorandum From Charles Pittman of the Office of Ocean Affairs, Department of State to the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman)1

Washington, August 28, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Latin American Views on Law of the Sea

1. A Divided Camp. Recent events indicate quite clearly that there is no solid Latin American bloc which can be expected to act in concert on Law of the Sea and seabeds issues. At least four distinct groups of countries can be identified. First, there are the traditional “hard line” countries which now claim or publicly support a 200 mile territorial sea limit for the purposes of exercising sovereignty or for other jurisdictional purposes: Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Nicaragua, Peru, Uruguay, Panama, El Salvador, and Argentina. Although those nine countries signed the Montevideo Declaration of May 8, there is no unanimity within the group. Chile and Argentina are much more compromising in their attitude than the others. Panama and El Salvador are followers, not leaders. Nicaragua claims a 3-mile territorial sea limit.

Second, there are those states which actively oppose extreme territorial sea claims: Venezuela, Mexico, and Costa Rica. Mexico voted for the Lima Declaration of August 8 but with the very strong reservation noted later in this memorandum. The two land-locked Latin American states, Bolivia and Paraguay, joined with Venezuela in voting against the Lima Declaration. Bolivia voted against the Declaration saying it was not representative of Latin America because it reflected the interests of only some states. The head of the Paraguayan Delegation at the Lima Meeting, Alberto Nogues, said that Paraguay opposed the Declaration as being contrary to GOP policy because of the prevision giving coastal states the right to extend their territorial seas, areas over which, according to Nogues, other states—especially land-locked states like Paraguay—have limited rights.

A third group of countries, Colombia, Honduras, Guatemala, and Guyana, are a mixed lot. Colombia, Honduras and Guatemala voted for the Lima declaration. Rumors circulating have Colombia and Guatemala on the verge of moving to 200 miles. The Colombian government has expressly denied these reports. The Guatemalan Foreign Minister has said that the 12 mile limit has been overtaken by events since 1958. The Guatemalans are apparently thinking that the infiltration of Cuban terrorists by sea could be controlled by an extension of the territorial sea limits. The Honduran Government is under some pressure to extend its present 12 mile territorial sea. Our recent visit to Guyana has elicited an assurance from the GOG not it extend its present 12 mile limit at least until 1971, on the condition that an international LOS conference will be underway or imminent at that time.

The Caribbean states constitute a fourth group whose interests should not be expected to approximate those of the Central and South American countries in all cases. Edmundo Vargas, Legal Adviser of the Chilean Foreign Ministry, has noted differences between the Caribbean versus an “oceanic” outlook as evidenced by the voting (or lack of it) of Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and Barbados at Lima. The Dominican Republic, for example, stated in a reservation to its signature of the Lima Declaration that it interpreted the phrase “maritime sovereignty” in accordance with common principles of international law as reiterated in the 1958 Geneva Territorial Seas Convention. Our canvass team concluded that the GOJ does not favor extreme extensions of territorial sea limits. The team reported that “Jamaica is more concerned over the radical Latin American position on law of the sea matters than over any ‘conservative’ inclination on the part of the USG.”

2. The Hard Liners. The positions of Ecuador, Uruguay, Peru, and Brazil on territorial sea issues appear to be unalterable. Ecuador’s Foreign Minister Valdivieso confirmed this in a conversation with Mr. Stevenson in June. Ecuador thinks that the U.S. is on a losing course on Law of the Sea matters and is not optimistic that a satisfactory agreement can be reached with us on fisheries. Emilio Oribe of Uruguay stated the essence of the 200 mile position when he told Stevenson in June that so much national honor was involved in sovereign claims of Latin American nations (i.e. 200 mile limits) that it would be impossible to abandon them even in the context of an international agreement. Peru’s obstinancy on LOS issues is proverbial; the unilateral “Lima Declaration” of late April was adopted without substantial change by participants at Montevideo and became the Montevideo Declaration. Brazil was the leading spokesman for the 200 milers at Lima and has reportedly (Italian Embassy, Washington) dispatched a roving ambassador to West Africa in an attempt to persuade countries there to extend their territorial sea limits.

3. Rumblings of Disatisfaction and Problems of Confidence. Nevertheless, there are indications that the hardliners are experiencing difficulty in winning disciples. The Montevideo Conference was apparently not as harmonious as its promoters claimed. The Lima Meeting was intended by its organizers to widen Latin American support for the Montevideo Declaration, implying approval, at least in principle, of a 200 mile limit. The final result was short of that objective. With Uruguay and Venezuela taking opposite sides, the question of the limits of maritime jurisdiction jeopardized for a time the progress of the meeting. In that instance, Peru apparently felt compelled to approach various foreign offices on an urgent basis to appeal for “flexibility” in the name of Latin American unity. A source in the Bolivian Foreign Ministry deemed to be reliable confirmed that differences exist among the LA’s, and that those countries realize that a majority of the world’s nations want to fix territorial sea limits between 3 and 12 miles.

Moreover, there is evidence that some Latin American and Caribbean countries are beginning to resent the persistent efforts by the West Coast Latin Americans to slant regional LOS meetings solely toward their interests. Trinidad and Tobago’s representative at the UN Seabeds Committee meeting termed the West Coast LA countries’ attitude and conduct at Lima as “oligarchic.” Bolivia voted against the Lima Declaration after its move to have a reference to land-locked states included in the Declaration was given shabby treatment. (A Bolivian official later commented that the GOB had opposed the Lima Declaration not for what it contained but for what it did not.)

A Peruvian official told the Costa Rican Foreign Office Director General “in confidence” that if a UN LOS conference were held soon, the “200 milers would lose.” The Peruvian and Uruguay’s Oribe said that the 200 milers’ tactic would be to seek African and Asian support to block effectively a UN conference or to sabotage it by loading the agenda. (This comment could presage difficulty in the General Committee for obtaining satisfactory allocation of either 26(c) or the separate Soviet LOS item.)

The Lima Declaration contains a significant qualification to the right of a coastal state to establish the limits of its sovereignty and maritime jurisdiction in the phrase “in accordance with reasonable criteria.” This qualification was, of course, opposed by the nine signatories of the Montevideo Declaration. Mexico, the Dominican Republic, and Venezuela made explicit reservations on this point: Mexico, which voted for the Lima Declaration, interpreted “reasonable criteria” as constituting extension of territorial sea limits of up to 12 miles; Venezuela stated that it could not accept any territorial sea extension which infringes in any way or affects its rights of free navigation or other rights it enjoys in waters adjacent to coasts.

According to Vargas of Chile, the adoption of the “reasonable criteria” phrase makes the Lima Declaration more susceptible of Latin American consensus than the Montevideo one. Vargas concluded that “reason” had prevailed at Lima and that although there will be no LA bloc at any international LOS conference, “at least 12 or 14 TA countries are in general agreement on major issues.” On the basis of available evidence, that assessment may be unduly optimistic. What Vargas does not say is that several signers of the Lima Declaration, e.g., Argentina, Mexico, Chile, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Guatemala, appear willing to compromise on the territorial sea issue.

4. The Moderates. Mexico and Venezuela have become quite vocal and active in working for a moderate position on LOS issues. The Venezuelan Foreign Minister told Ambassador McClintock recently that we would be “allies” in any law of sea conference. Argentina and Chile, particularly the former, continue to work more and more independently from the other states which espouse extreme sovereign and jurisdictional claims. The Argentine Legal Adviser confirmed to Mr. Stevenson in June that Argentina makes no territorial sea claim; the 200 mile limit relates to resources control. Argentina is quite concerned with interference to her freedom of navigation which the 200 mile claims, particularly Brazil’s pose. Costa Rica feels that legislation now pending in its Congress and purporting to extend CR’s territorial seas to 200 miles is inappropriate while preparations for a U.N. LOS conference are underway. Costa Rican Foreign Minister Facio recently told our Ambassador that the GOCR categorically opposes the concept of a 200 mile territorial sea and officially supports Mexico’s advocacy of a 12 mile limit. Facio acknowledged that the Costa Rican delegation at the U.N. was under considerable pressure from proponents of a 200 mile limit.

Though an original member of the 200 mile club, Chile—especially Legal Adviser Vargas—goes to some lengths to dissociate herself from the more extreme stands of Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil.

It seems clear that as these countries develop larger navies and wider maritime interests generally, they will be less apt to tolerate restrictions on their freedom of navigation in the form of excessive jurisdictional claims.

5. Summing Up. With some Latin American and Caribbean countries, principally Mexico, Venezuela, Guyana, Jamaica and Barbados, our canvassing efforts seem to have paid off.

There is reason to think that further tactful pressure on certain other major Latin American countries, like Chile and Argentina, would be productive. Hopefully, Mr. Stevenson’s contemplated trip to Colombia this September will strengthen the GOC’s resolve to resist domestic pressure for a territorial sea extension.

It is important to acknowledge the attractiveness to some LDC’s, in Latin America and elsewhere, of the principle that a coastal state has the right to set unilaterally the limits of her own territorial sea and to implement measures for her own economic benefit and security. Nevertheless, it may not be idle speculation to say that Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil have pressed their stubborn views to the point of antagonizing their own LA neighbors. Those three countries had probably hoped for more than they got at Lima. But their self-serving and rather abrasive conduct at Lima clearly annoyed some participants, particularly the land-locked states.

I think that the information set out above supports—if not confirms—the theory that the position of Latin American countries which advocate a 200 mile territorial sea limit is not as strong as is generally assumed. I conclude, therefore, that a satisfactory modus vivendi can be achieved with Ecuador and Peru in the quadripartite talks without compromising our Law of the Sea position.

We have at least three strong bargaining points in our favor at the CEP talks: First, we seem to have only two real adversaries, Ecuador and Peru; Chile, according to Vargas, sees herself as a mediator between those two countries and the U.S. (Ecuador has already given a minor concession in agreeing that fisheries and LOS subjects can be treated separately, something that she has been reluctant to do for quite some time.) Second, while I am not completely familiar with the issues involved, I presume that the Foreign Military Sales aspect can and will be used to our best advantage. Finally, the possibility that we may be moving to a law of the sea conference in 1971 would suggest that we could afford to hold our peace with Ecuador and Peru at least during this round of quadripartite talks—-realizing that their views during an eventual conference may well not receive wide support.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OES Files: Lot 75 D 88, Box 1, untitled folder. Confidential. An August 28 cover letter from Neuman to the Law of the Sea Executive Group indicated that this document, prepared by the Law of the Sea Task Force, was circulated to the U.S. delegation to Buenos Aries negotiations and to those dealing with Law of the Sea and seabeds issues at upcoming UN meetings. For the Lima Declaration, see UN Document A/AC.138/28, August 14, 1970. Rogelio Valdivieso Eguiguren was Ecuadorian Minister of Foreign Affairs. Robert McClintock was U.S. Ambassador to Venezuela. Gonzalo Facio Segreda was Costa Rican Minister of Foreign Relations.

382. Airgram CA-5062 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 382. Airgram CA-5062 From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations1

Washington, September 30, 1970, 1102Z.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea: Instruction for US Delegation

REF:

USUN 2099

This Airgram provides guidance for the US Delegation to the General Assembly on the US position on Law of the Sea (LOS).

Background

1. A number of issues involving the territorial seas, straits, fisheries, seabeds (including boundaries) and marine pollution resulting from seabed exploration and exploitation are before the 25th General Assembly. We have maintained that the territorial sea, straits and fisheries issues should be treated as a separate package apart from seabed issues. However, most international pressures are in the direction of a single LOS conference rather than separate conferences. This is evident from the responses to the SYG’s inquiry to UN members (A/7925, July 17, 1970 and Addendum of August 27, 1970). Since it appears that continued opposition to the single conference concept will make more difficult achievement of our substantive goals, this instruction must start from a realistic acceptance that if there is to be a conference on the matters, in which we have substantial interests, it will have to be a single conference. Moreover, we anticipate that our acceptance of this idea will produce a more favorable negotiating climate.

2. Acceptance of the concept of a single conference and our willingness to follow this approach is based upon the idea of successive or concurrent sessions, or meetings of committees or working groups, under the umbrella of a single LOS conference. Our views with respect to the handling of the issues in “manageable packages” were indicated in the Legal Adviser’s speech of February 18, 1970 in Philadelphia.

3. Time is of the essence in consideration of all LOS issues. Exploitation of deep seabeds even beyond continental margins is rapidly approaching. Exploitation by technologically advanced nations may take place even in areas far distant from their shores; a seabeds regime treaty is becoming a necessity. Territorial sea, straits and fisheries questions even more urgently require resolution if we are to avoid worldwide unilateral 200 mile territorial seas (or possibly greater). These could other-wise become, to the extreme detriment of US interests, a grim reality in the new few years.

4. Although the Seabeds Committee has not proved to be an effective organ, it seems best to assume that it will continue at least for another year and that it will be desirable, therefore, to link its work to that of the LOS Conference in as constructive a manner as possible.

5. We recognize that the timetable set forth in the US position below will be difficult to obtain agreement on. Nevertheless, in view of the urgency of the problems, it is worth a strong effort by the Delegation to achieve agreement on this timetable if at all possible.

UNITED STATES POSITION

1. The Delegation should strive to obtain a General Assembly resolution or resolutions providing for the following. Our primary objective is to have a conference of plenipotentiaries dealing with subjects described below in paras (a) and (b) no later than in the first half of 1972. (a) Establishment of a small Preparatory Committee, preferably not to exceed 25 or so member countries, charged with working out, in cooperation with the SYG, the procedures for the Preparatory Conference (see para (b) below), and a preliminary substantive position on territorial sea, straits, fisheries, seabeds (including boundaries) and seabed related marine pollution, or at least clarification of the issues involved in these subjects. India is interested in forming a Preparatory Committee and might be persuaded to take the lead in the General Assembly. However, should the situation appear to be favorable, there would be obvious advantages to US leadership with the active support of India. The Committee should reflect the major LOS interests and should be reasonably representative geographically. It should begin its work in January or February 1971, or as soon thereafter as possible.

The role of the Preparatory Committee is likely to be limited with respect to seabeds because we expect that the Seabeds Committee will continue to function and that it will have primary responsibility for developing the substantive position on this subject for the Preparatory Conference. (See para (b) below re the conference and para (c) below re the Seabeds Committee.)

(b) A LOS Preparatory Conference to be held in 1971, preferably before the 26th GA, in which all members of the United Nations and its specialized agencies would be included. The purpose would be to draft texts of treaties on the territorial sea, straits, fisheries, seabeds (including boundaries) and seabed related marine pollution. The Preparatory Conference should act by 2/3rds vote of those present and voting. It should be followed by a full scale diplomatic conference on LOS to arrive at and provide for signature of the final treaties as soon as possible after the Preparatory Conference (preferably with a target date of no later than June 1972). Our preliminary view is that the Preparatory Conference should proceed through Working Groups on (1) territorial waters and straits, (2) fisheries, and (3) seabeds and seabed related marine pollution. It should be permitted to continue in session or reconvene if necessary to complete preparations for the diplomatic conference.

(c) The Delegation should make every effort to achieve the objectives contained in paras (a) and (b) above. We would strongly prefer to keep substance focussed in the Preparatory Committee and Conference. However, if it is apparent that the Seabeds Committee will continue, then its work should be made as relevant and productive as possible to the work of the Preparatory Committee and Preparatory Conference. In this event the resolution should also include instructions to the Seabeds Committee to convene in February Working Groups of experts to develop recommendations concerning the scope and character of a seabeds regime, the area to which it is to apply, the rules that would govern exploration and exploitation and that would safeguard the marine environment from pollution and avoid conflicts among users, the distribution of benefits from seabed exploitation, and the machinery necessary to implement the regime and its rules; and prepare during its March meeting a report for the use of the Preparatory Conference setting forth its recommendations on these matters or summarizing the alternatives it believes to be worthy of further consideration. Its work should be clearly aimed at preparing for the Preparatory Conference.

2. The Delegation should avoid inferences that these international conferences would reopen existing conventions. The Delegation should make clear that the aim is to fill present voids in international law. The Delegation may refer to the President’s Statement of February 18, 1970 (Report to Congress on US Foreign Policies for the 1970s), that as man’s uses of the oceans grow international law must keep pace.

3. If in the early stages the Delegation determines that there is little support for the continuation of the Seabeds Committee it may propose that all of the work described under (c) above be undertaken by the Preparatory Committee. In either case, it should be made clear that the convening of the Preparatory Conference is not contingent on the completion of substantive reports prepared either by the Seabeds Committee or the Preparatory Committee.

4. The Delegation should: (a) Seek support for our substantive positions without, however, negotiating on them, and

(b) Stress dangers to individual countries and to international community of further unilateral assertions of jurisdiction and of delay in reaching agreement on a seabeds regime. The Delegation should point out to other delegations that unilateral assertions of jurisdiction over the oceans and seabeds are not in the interest of the world community at large. Such actions produce friction between states. The great majority of LDCs, the land-locked or shelf-locked countries (which number about 40) and countries with small coast lines are all adversely affected by unilateral extensions of jurisdiction.* It is equally disadvantageous to countries with worldwide maritime and military interests such as US, UK and Soviet Union. Some countries’ worldwide interests will increase in the future and might well find themselves seriously disadvantaged by a 200 mile territorial sea around the world. Brazil could be an example.

5. The USG would not favor extending beyond this session of the General Assembly the attempt to reach a separate agreement on principles since in the context of negotiations on the draft treaty appropriate principles would be drafted. If it appears that it may be possible to reach agreement at this General Assembly on legal principles consistent with instructions described in CA 3955 of July 24, 1970, the Delegation should work to achieve this result. If principles were agreed by this General Assembly, the way would be cleared for full attention to be devoted to negotiating a seabeds treaty. This negotiation should be begun as soon as possible, and in any case no later than in the Preparatory Committee and the Preparatory Conference, preferably taking the US draft as the basis. If the Seabeds Committee does meet in March, other members must come to grips with the issues and send experts to the Committee if discussions with other delegations on the US Draft are to be meaningful.

6. The Delegation should make clear we want high priority given to development of international agreements of appropriate scope on all aspects of marine pollution. The Delegation should refer to the President’s Statement of May 23, 1970, in which he said that it is necessary to establish general rules to protect the ocean from pollution. The Delegation should not indicate, however, that we are proposing that marine pollution as a general, separate subject be dealt with in the LOS context; rather our proposal is limited to seabed related pollution.

7. The Delegation should seek to foster the continuation of the narrowing of differences between a number of Afro-Asians and the United States which resulted from introduction of our draft seabeds treaty.

8. The Delegation should make every effort to gain support for our seabeds treaty. It should indicate we would welcome suggestions and comments from other countries. We recognize the treaty will have to be revised. The Delegation should seek to persuade others that the draft might serve as a basis for further deliberations in Preparatory Committee and in Preparatory Conference.

9. If the approach of this paper does not find widespread support, and if there is no hope of convening a Preparatory Conference before 1972, the Delegation should attempt to have the Seabeds Committee instructed along the lines described above, and in terms that will insure the participation of experts in duly authorized representative working groups. If the Preparatory Conference cannot be scheduled for 1971, the Delegation should during the present Assembly seek to ensure that a Preparatory Committee is established in order to prepare for a plenipotentiary conference to be convened no later than in the first half of 1972.

10. The Delegation should resist efforts to enlarge the Seabeds Committee, but should generally avoid involvement in the rotation of membership on the Seabeds Committee. It should consult with the Department on any instances where inclusion or exclusion of a particular country through rotation would impinge seriously on United States interests.

11. The Delegation should use the tactics it deems appropriate to achieve the objectives set forth above.

Irwin II,
Acting

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by McIntyre on September 25; cleared by Stevenson, E, IO/UNP, S/FW, and the Departments of Interior and Defense; and approved by Herz. Repeated to Bonn, London, Moscow, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, the Mission at Geneva, and USNATO.

* Delegation should clearly distinguish foregoing from States’ sovereign rights to explore and exploit to depths of exploitability under Article 1 of the Geneva Continental Shelf Convention of 1958.

383. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) 383. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser for Politico-Military and Ocean Affairs (Neuman) to the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson)1

Washington, October 20, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Some Observations on the Law of the Sea

The following are some thoughts and conclusions on various aspects of our law of the sea (LOS) efforts It seemed to me that it would be useful at this point to set these observations down on paper, since, in our discussions, we rarely if ever attempt to consider these substantive and procedural elements as part of an integrated whole, involving ultimate as well as transitory goals and real as opposed to tactical USG interests.

National Interests

The interests of the United States in the development of ocean law coincide with the fundamental priorities of other aspects of our foreign policy. That is, our needs and objectives can be regarded in both a parochial and a global sense. We have certain goals and needs that arise out of the peculiar economic, geographic, technological and strategic situation of the United States, and this “bundle” of interests will coincide to a greater or lesser extent with the national interests of certain nations, while it will differ from the interests of others. In the larger sense, we have as a superpower an over-riding interest in a stable world order, which for LOS purposes means stability and certainty in the rules and procedures governing the use of the seas. While most major powers share this general interest, smaller, newer and poorer countries may not, since, their interests may be better served by disrupting established (or establishment) rules, thus creating an atmosphere of uncertainty in which their claims to a more equitable allocation of ocean resources may be more effectively realized.

In seeking to promote our wider goal of LOS stability, we should and will simultaneously pursue our specific national objectives. In so doing, however, we must not delude ourselves into mistaking tactical objectives for real interests. If only for purposes of negotiation, the identification of our real interests appears to be a priority matter that has not yet been seriously undertaken. I would recommend that an effort to arrive at interagency agreement on a comprehensive statement of national interests be undertaken at an early date; once achieved, I believe a good deal of the continuing inter-agency bickering over tactical matters would be eliminated.

For purposes of illustration, and by no means with a pretension to completeness, the following descriptive list of national interests is suggested. Priorities among these interests are discussed infra.

USG interests in LOS

1. Strategic. a. Naval access to all marine areas where presence of US warships is likely to be important either in a combat situation, as a deterrent, or for intelligence gathering purposes.

b. Ability to overfly strategic marine areas for purposes of combat, deterrence or surveillance.

c. Ability to effect submerged transit of significant international straits with nuclear armed and nuclear powered submarine vessels.

d. [3 lines not declassified]

2. Economic a. Protection of domestic fishing industries (coastal and distant water).

b. Protection of US offshore petroleum operations.

c. Protection and encouragement of offshore (deep seabed) hard mineral operations.

d. Facilitation of US merchant shipping operations.

e. Facilitation of commercial scientific marine research (really, a factor of sub-items a. through d.).

3. Technological a. Facilitation of marine research for purely scientific purposes.

b. Facilitation of marine research for either military or scientific - military applications.

c. Development of marine techniques for more effective commercial, scientific or military utilization of the seas.

4. Environmental a. Protection of US coasts and adjacent waters from marine pollution or degradation.

b. Protection of living marine resources beyond US coastal waters from pollution.

5. Foreign Policy a. Utilization of marine resources for maximum economic advancement of LDC’s, consistent with other USG interests.

b. Avoidance of political, military, economic or ideological conflicts arising from ocean use.

c. Promotion of international marine cooperation as a factor of world order and stability.

Discussion

These various national interests are in some ways complementary and in some ways competitive. The satisfaction of all of these interests will clearly require compromise with respect to some of them. We can neither seek nor expect to achieve all of our objectives to their maximum extent. Thus, an ordering of priorities is necessary. For this purpose, the various components of our interests out of which a national LOS policy should emerge are examined below.

Military/Strategic Objectives

There are two paramount naval interests in LOS development: mobility for our forces and detection of hostile forces.

With regard to naval mobility, the DOD position generally is predicated upon two premises; the major premise is that broad territorial seas (e.g.: 200 miles), if widely accepted as a rule of conventional international law, would severely constrict the areas of high seas within which US naval forces could operate at will. The minor premise reflects the “creeping jurisdiction” argument: that extensions of coastal state special-purpose jurisdiction beyond territorial waters will inevitably lead to wider territorial sea claims.

It might be both relevant and useful to analyze the underlying objective of maximum naval mobility (leaving aside for the time being the question of passage through international straits). Why, for example, would our naval forces be hampered in the execution of their mission by wider territorial seas? In a combat situation, the breadth of the territorial sea hardly seems to be a relevant factor. Allies will presumably permit entry of our naval forces into their. territorial seas, enemies are after all, belligerents, and [1 line not declassified]. In peacetime, our allies would presumably consent to US naval manoeuvres in their seas, while we would be unlikel to carry out naval exercises [1 line not declassified]. With regard to naval movements other than manoeuvres, the regime of innocent passage continues to apply. For the purpose of this analysis, however, the primary objective—maximum naval mobility—may be conceded, since the other elements of the DOD position are then brought into sharper relief.

Presumably, DOD would be less concerned over widely-accepted international agreement on a broad limit than over unilateral claims to a territorial sea wider than twelve miles. The rationale is that international agreement puts an end to wider unilateral assertions. Yet the end result of seeking widespread agreement on the breadth of the territorial sea may well be a consensus on a sea broader than twelve miles (though not necessarily 200 miles). From this standpoint, it would seem that our major objective ought to be the achievement of a widely accepted treaty provision setting a maximum permissible breadth for the territorial sea, and that the agreed maximum ought to be as narrow as obtainable.

If, from a strategic posture, this should be our primary goal, then DOD tactical objectives are not always consistent with it. DOD argues that the USG must enthusiastically oppose broad special-purpose jurisdictional limits, even if such limits come about as the result of multilateral agreement. Thus, for example, DOD opposes a treaty provision giving coastal states special jurisdiction for pollution purposes beyond the territorial sea. Defense also opposes special coastal state resource jurisdiction beyond territorial waters. Yet the inability of LDC’s to acquire rights such as these through an international treaty may be a stimulus to the assertion of ever-wider unilateral claims—and in the end, LDC frustration will create pressure for a wider territorial sea at an eventual LOS conference.

With regard to transit through international straits, DOD insists that unrestricted free passage for warships as well as merchant vessels be guaranteed as the price for USG agreement to a territorial sea wider than three miles. This is patently unrealistic, and it may even be unnecessary. The Defense position rests on the proposition that a 12-mile territorial sea will “close” approximately 116 international straits wider than six miles but narrower than twenty-four miles. Under a 12-mile regime, these straits would be entirely overlapped by territorial waters, whereas at present the USG can argue that there is a corridor of high seas running through such straits.

Looking at the list of 116 straits, it is a parent (and DOD will reluctantly admit) that only [less than 1 line not declassified] have significant strategic value—[less than 1 line not declassified]. The remainder are minor straits which are nonessential in terms of the mobility of U.S. naval forces. With regard to [text not declassified].

Thus, in the absence of agreement on a territorial sea wider than three miles, and in the face of 12 mile (or wider) claims, the U.S. is forced either to assert its high-seas rights as against coastal states protesting submerged transit in important straits, or to acquiesce in the asserted jurisdiction of the coastal states. The first option obviously contains the seeds of serious problems, and presumably the USG would very carefully weigh the consequences of pursuing it. [3 lines not declassified] Clearly, there will have to be some give in Article 2. Coastal states will demand the right to exercise pollution, customs, security, health and other aspects special purpose jurisdiction in the territorial waters of straits. Rather than wait until an LOS conference to “fall back” to these positions, we should affirmatively express our understanding of and readiness to satisfy these legitimate coastal state demands. Our rigidity on Article 2, rather than giving us bargaining leverage, serves only to rigidify coastal state positions. We have seen even our NATO partners remain firmly opposed to Article 2 in its present form.

Whether we will have to fall back on submerged transit remains to be seen. It is clear that very few of our allies, and even fewer LDC’s, favor unrestricted submerged transit as an absolute right. It would appear, however that we [3 lines not declassified].

What may, in the end, result from all of this is a definition of “innocent passage”. Indeed, the vague standard of “passage not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security” of the coastal state seems ripe for redefinition, especially after the Tiran dispute preceding the 1967 Middle East hostilities. The idea of defining innocent passage is not a startling one, and there is a good deal of agreement on the need for such definition. In the process of such an exercise, we may well be able to accomplish a greater portion of our strategic objectives than by pressing our demand for a presently non-existent right—unlimited free passage through the territorial waters of international straits.

There are certain other concessions we may have to make regarding straits. There seems to be both a need and a justification for making some provision for [1 line not declassified] In such areas, the regime of transit need not apply to all straits, but rather only to some of them. Moreover, we may have to accept a distinction between straits traditionally used for international navigation and straits not traditionally or historically so used. Finally, we may have to accept some special regime, perhaps in the form of regional agreements, for straits leading to closed seas [2 lines not declassified].

While considering the basis of our defense interests in LOS, attention should also be directed to future technological developments that might substantially alter our naval strategy. For example, the development of long-range submarine launched ballistic missiles (like the ULMS system), supplanting Polaris/Poseidon, could radically alter our LOS requirements within 5-10 ears. This new breed of SLBM is based on a [2 lines not declassified]. The implications for our territorial sea and straits positions are obvious.

With regard to detection, DOD’s position rests primarily on the strategic components and requirements of the SOSUS system. Because of the restricted nature of SOSUS data, this analysis will not discuss the mechanics of the system (though I believe all members of the LOS Executive Group should receive an in-depth briefing on SOSUS, since it is the lynch-pin of DOD’s case). However, several interests and considerations may be identified without regard to restricted data.

[2 lines not declassified]. To date, all such systems in operation are connected in this fashion. (Whether it is possible to operate [less than 1 line not declassified] should be determined from DOD). Thus, the requirement of [text not declassified].

Other questions should be asked about submerged stationary detection systems: What are the alternatives to them, especially in terms of technological advances (e.g.: [less than 1 line not declassified] What are the possibilities for development of [2 lines not declassified]. How effective will they be in the face of advanced evasion technology?

These issues are raised because they are rarely addressed. In the bureaucratic process, DOD tends to advance its interests as dogma, challenging the priorities of other agencies while defending the unchallengeability of its own. Those within DOD who cater to the doctrinal strategic positions of that Department without questioning them carefully do a disservice to the agency, for our real defense interests may in fact be more readily achieved by tactical flexibility rather than the rigid advocacy of either unobtainable or non-essential goals.

Commercial Interests

Living Resources

The United States has both coastal and distant-water interests which, both as an economic and as a political matter, call for protection. Draft Article 3 is a sensible and practical attempt to balance what are essential competitive goals. It seeks to 1) preserve coastal fisheries “of substantial importance to the economy of the coastal state or a region thereof”; 2) preserve “the percentage of the allowable catch traditionally taken by fishermen of other (distant-water) states”; and 3) accomplish these goals within the exigencies of sound conservation principles. The only trouble with Article 3 is that it may not satisfy the principal distant-water states (notably Japan).

The coastal states will demand, among other things, the following: a. Protection of high seas fisheries off their coasts against distant-water incursions even in those cases where the coastal state has not established a substantial coastal fishing industry. This amounts to a reservation against future use. Understandably, LDC’s will be unprepared to agree to remain frozen in a de minimus posture vis-a-vis distant water fishermen. Put conversely, they will be unwilling to reserve to the distant-water states that portion of the MSY “traditionally” taken by the latter. This obstacle might conceivably be overcome by retaining the proposed reservation in favor of distant-water states so long as the coastal state fails to acquire the capacity to increase its catch in the adjacent high seas fishery. However, a sliding scale might be provided allowing for reductions in the allowable distant-water catch when the coastal industry develops and demonstrates an effective ability to increase its catch.

b. Coastal states will object to being limited, in terms of the allocation of the adjacent high-seas fishery, to fishing with small coastal vessels not capable of sustained high-seas fishing. Thus, for example, Pakistan argues that the present draft of Article 3 precludes her from developing a viable tuna fishery in the Indian Ocean. The “free competition” argument does not persuade Pakistan, for she argues that her nutritional needs are indefinitely more demanding than those of Japan, and that Indian Ocean tuna caught by Japan is a commercial product earning foreign exchange for Japan, while the resource could be a basic source of protein for the population of Pakistan. Her case is not frivolous, though to developed-country listeners, it may seem demanding.

c. Coastal states will continue to be skeptical of catch data and other statistics supplied, or withheld, by distant-water states. The redraft of Article 3 attempts to alleviate these fears by using international arid regional fisheries organizations as managerial units. Nevertheless, LDC’s are likely to demand impartial, internationally provided data supplied to the relevant organizations either by developed states or by contractors or agents of the organizations themselves.

Which way should the USG go? In terms of commercial health, our distant-water industry has a more favorable prognosis than coastal fisheries. On the other hand, coastal/regional interests need both protection and stimulation if they are to survive. And of course, the domestic political impact of New England, Gulf Coast and West Coast congressional delegations is a relevant factor in policy formulation. On balance it would seem that we should, both from a domestic and a tactical standpoint, lean towards the satisfaction and protection of coastal fishing interests. Our distant-water industry, primarily tuna and shrimp, will have to compete more effectively with other distant-water fleets and with coastal fishing enterprises, while seeking to derive maximum benefit from negotiated regional arrangements. At the same time, U.S. coastal fishermen cannot expect to compete effectively against massive distant-water efforts (particularly Soviet) off U.S. coasts using 19th century techniques. The USG cannot long protect local U.S. fishing interests against the pressures of modern sustained fishing if those local interests cannot protect themselves through modernization of equipment. Perhaps interim federal subsidies might be a short-term aid, but in the long run coastal fishermen will probably be compelled to improve their techniques if they are to survive.

There is of course the implicit possibility that an LOS conference might adopt a broad exclusive fisheries zone beyond the territorial sea. This result would satisfy our coastal fishermen and presumably would be acceptable to DOD, assuming other DOD objectives were concurrently achieved. However, the “exclusive zone” solution has serious defects in terms of worldwide fishery objectives, i.e. increasing available stocks and more efficient utilization of living resources. Overall productivity would probably decrease, since the coastal states could not engage in full exploitation of the exclusive areas, and would be unlikely, for political and other reasons, to allow access to distant water fleets except under onerous conditions. Moreover, rational management of resources would be impossible based on the authority of single coastal states, due to the highly migratory nature of high seas species. In short, any proposal for broad exclusive fishery zones would have to be conditioned upon a system of close international cooperation and participation of regional/international organizations, with apportionment and allocation of the MSY an inherent ingredient. This amounts, in effect, to an Article 3-type solution; the insertion of the-exclusive zones concept complicates, rather than simplifies, the problem.

Whatever the ultimate resolution of the fisheries question may be, it should satisfy the following criteria: 1. It should be consistent with other elements of the LOS package, both rationally and in terms of USG goals.

2. It should ensure preservation of species and enlargement of stocks.

3. It should encourage the development of LDC fishing industries and stimulate increased LDC yields.

4. It should protect U.S. coastal fisheries to the extent consistent with other goals.

5. It should not unduly penalize U.S. distant water interests.

6. It should remove fishery matters from the area of political conflict.

Non-living Resources

As with living resources, our tactics with respect to non-living resources must take account of two commercial objectives: fulfilling the expectations of LDC’s, and protecting U.S. economic interests.

The President has opted for a seabeds solution which involves international ownership and management of the deep seabed, and a “trusteeship” concept in a zone beyond the 200-meter isobath to the edge of the continental margin. That decision assumes an inclination to forego maximum U.S. commercial gain in favor of the LDC’s. The decision having been made, we should follow through in a manner that will assure rational management and equitable allocation of resources. We cannot now, as DOD suggests, present our seabeds proposal as a quid pro quo for Article 2—i.e. no Article 2, no seabeds treaty (we have all heard the DOD representative advance this strategy many times).

Our main tactical objective regarding seabeds is to satisfy LDC expectations in a manner which will preclude the need (real or imagined) for wider coastal state unilateral assertions of jurisdiction. From this perspective, the proposed sharing must be genuine, and the benefits accruing to LDC’s must be both real and substantial. Efforts by other USG agencies or particular industries to chip away at the U.S. proposal should be vigorously opposed. At the same time, we should be aware that we might ultimately have to go further than the present seabeds draft. This might, for example, require flexibility on the 200-meter boundary. If a wider area of exclusive coastal state control is what LDC’s want, we should be prepared to accept it (within reason). Eventually, of course, the seabed boundary question is intimately connected with the breadth of the territorial sea, and I can see no way for the two to be resolved independently of each other.

We all recognize that it may be many years before there is international agreement on a regime for the deep seabed. Thus, the question of an interim regime is a pressing one, in the face of rapidly developing technology. Without going into detail on interim policy, the following objectives may be identified: 1. Facilitate and encourage deep seabed mining technology.

2. Avoid activities by U.S. nationals (and others) which could be construed as an attempt to deplete seabed resources without reference to international revenue sharing.

3. Protect U.S. commercial investments in seabed activities.

4. Avoid implications of exclusivity with respect to seabed activities of U.S. nationals.

5. Avoid and resist pressures to enter into formal “interim” arrangements with other “developed” states (although informal commercial arrangements—e.g.: mining consortia—, with reservations in favor of the international community—might be both acceptable and desirable).

6. All activities, arrangements and commitments should be consistent with USG plans for an eventual deep seabed regime.

Environmental Objections

It is quite certain that marine pollution problems cannot be cured through jurisdictional solutions. It is also natural for coastal states to think along the lines of national action, with wide sea “pollution zones” within which the coastal state is free to “protect itself.” Indeed, there is a good deal of this sentiment within the United States. Yet it is also clear that marine pollution can be effectively combatted only through coordinated international action; as more data becomes available about the causes and effects of marine pollution, this proposition will become apparent to all coastal nations.

The components of marine pollution problems are inherently transnational. There is diversity of flags, ownership of vessels, ownership of cargo, crews, etc. Ocean currents and winds spread pollutants far from their source. A significant part of ocean pollution is caused by dumping or other discharges in territorial waters or estuarine systems. Thus, the problem by nature defies national solutions.

However, if we are to head off wide assertions of special-purpose pollution jurisdiction, we will have to demonstrate considerable vigor in multilateral forums. Many organizations are currently engaged in serious marine pollution projects, among them IMCO, ECE, IOC, GESAMP, WHO, NATO’s CCMS, and UNESCO. In these and other bodies, the USG should take the lead in pressing for stronger measures of prevention, more effective means of clean-up, stricter standards and higher limits of liability.

In searching for effective international measures, however, we should recognize the legitimate interests and needs of coastal states. There are certain functions which coastal nations will want to and should perform beyond their own territorial waters (assuming a 12-mile sea), and we should not obstruct the exercise of such functions, especially in cases where the international community has failed to act (e.g.: ocean dumping).

The interagency task force should, at an early date, undertake to identify those functional areas where coastal states can and should act nationally to prevent or minimize marine pollution. If such areas are recognized early enough, they might be included by way of specific delegation in multilateral pollution treaties (not necessarily the new LOS treaty), thus relieving the pressure for unilateral coastal state action.

Conclusion

The problems of the world in the foreseeable future are the problems of the United States. Chief among these are the pressures of population and the degradation of the human environment. The population of the globe will double within 35 years, with concommitant effects in the areas of food supply, adequate nutrition, availability of living and non-living resources, recreation and health. The marine environment offers substantial opportunity to accommodate many of our present and future needs.

It is axiomatic that if poorer countries are deprived of significant ocean benefits by the actions of developed nations, the former will seek unilaterally to extend their marine boundaries without much regard to potential military or political conflict. Such extensions of course have an adverse effect on U.S. strategic requirements (although to an extent not yet determined). Since the poorer countries are also those with undeveloped maritime or fishing interests, arguments based on freedom of navigation or competitive commercial freedom are largely unpersuasive.

We cannot think in terms of “trading off resources for freedom of navigation,” as some have expressed it. What we are after, or should be, is a way to satisfy legitimate LDC expectations regarding ocean uses, while preserving reasonable and necessary rights of movement for merchant and naval vessels. At the same time, we should be able to continue and improve the quality and quantity of U.S. commercial exploitation of resources. I am convinced that these several objectives are not incompatible.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret.

384. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 384. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, December 21, 1970.

SUBJECT:

Canada Sets Fisheries Zones

The attached State memorandum (Tab A) informs you of last week’s Canadian government announcement establishing fisheries closing lines across the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the Bay of Fundy, and Queen Charlotte Sound—all international waters. These actions, which will become effective in two months, are based on a 1964 enabling act as amended last June. (You may recall the flurry over this and other aspects of Canadian Artic legislation last spring, including Prime Minister Trudeau’s telephone call to the President.) While not in itself unexpected, the timing of the Canadian announcement—just one day after agreement in the UN to convene a Law of the Sea Conference in 1973—has caused a stir. The Canadians supported the UN initiative.

Because of an existing bilateral agreement on reciprocal fishing rights, U.S. fishing privileges will not be affected by the new Canadian zones. But the timing and the principle of the matter does concern us. We have opposed all such unlaterial actions, which are contrary to international law, and have supported a Law of the Sea conference to deal with fisheries and related issues on a multilateral basis. It is rumored that the Canadians are contemplating applying anti-pollution regulations to these fishing zones as a next step. If it eventuates, such a move could seriously harm our interests by imposing new controls on U.S. vessels using the St. Lawrence Seaway, for example.

Last Friday the Department issued a press release (Tab B), expressing regrets over the Canadian decision, and a note of protest was delivered the same day to the Canadian government by Embassy Ottawa. There seems to be little else we can do at the moment. An interagency committee will be discussing the matter.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, Volume II, Mar 70-Aug 71. Confidential. Sent for information. In the last two sentences, Kissinger underlined from “seems to” through “committee” and wrote in the margin, “Which one? To what end?” Tab A, not published, is a December 18 memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. For Tab B, see Department of State Bulletin, February 1, 1971, p. 139.

385. Telegram 211200 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 385. Telegram 211200 From the Department of State to the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization1

Washington, December 30, 1970, 2355Z.

Subject:

NAC Seabeds Consultations

Ref:

USNATO 4758

1. Following is a resume of resolutions concerning LOS and seabeds matters adopted by 25th UNGA and background on LOS Conference resolution.

2. You may use resume for purposes suggested para 4, Reftel, in preparation for briefing of NAC by Legal Adviser Stevenson on January 7. Additional amplifying information requested para 4 to follow by septel.

3. BEGIN RESUME: On December 17, UNGA adopted four resos concerning LOS and seabeds. U.S. voted for all four, and all were adopted by overwhelming majority.

4. Res 2749 (XXV) contains declaration of seabeds principles. Declaration result of two years of negotiation and represents important necessary step in securing agreement on LOS issues. Principles include common heritage concept for area and resources beyond national jurisdiction and prohibit assertion of sovereign rights over area or appropriation by States or persons. All exploration and exploitation of resources in the area shall be governed by regime to be agreed, and no rights in area shall be acquired incompatible with regime. Area shall be open to use exclusively for peaceful purposes by all States without discrimination in accordance with regime to be agreed. States shall act in accordance with applicable principles and rules of international law. Exploitation shall be carried out for benefit of mankind as a whole, taking into consideration interests and needs of developing countries. States shall promote cooperation in scientific research and pay due regard to rights and interests of other States. Legal status of waters and airspace not affected by principles, nor is coastal state right with respect to measures for preventing grave and imminent pollution dangers to coastline subject to regime. Principles affirm State responsibility and provide for liability for damages and dispute settlement in accordance with UN Charter and regime to be agreed. Vote on Res 2749 (XXV) was 108 (US) for, 0 against, 14 abstentions (USSR).

5. Res 2750A (XXV) requests UN SYG to identify and study problems arising from production of certain minerals from deep seabed and propose effective solutions for dealing with these problems, such study to be submitted to UN Seabeds Committee in 1971. Vote on Res 2750A (XXV) was 104 (US) for, 0 against, 16 abstentions (USSR).

6. Res 2750B (XXV) requests UN SYG to prepare current study on question of access to sea by landlocked countries, such study to be submitted to UN Seabeds Committee in 1971. The study would also include a report on special problems of landlocked countries relating to exploration and exploitation of seabed resources. Vote was 111 (US) for, 0 against, 11 abstentions (USSR).

7. Res 2750C (XXV) decides to convene in 1973 Conference on Law of the Sea “which would deal with the establishment of an equitable international regime, including an international machinery, for the area, and the resources of the seabed and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, a precise definition of the area, and a broad range of related issues including those concerning the regimes of the high seas, the continental shelf, the territorial sea (including the question of its breadth and the question of international straits) and contiguous zone, fishing and conservation of the living resources of the high seas (including the question of the preferential rights of coastal states), the preservation of the marine environment, (including inter alia the prevention of pollution), and scientific research.” Precise agenda of Conference not decided by Res. Preparatory work will be begun by enlarged (86 members) UN Seabeds Committee meeting in March and July-August 1971 in Geneva. Committee to draft treaty articles on seabed regime and list other LOS issues as described above as well as draft articles on such issues. UNGA at 26th and 27th sessions will review preparatory work and decide on agenda, and 27th UNGA may decide to postpone Conference if it determines progress of preparatory work has been insufficient. Vote on this compromise Res was 108 (US) for, 7 against (USSR), 6 abstentions. END RESUME

8. FYI Essence of compromise is on four points. First, U.S. originally sought fixed dates for preparatory session conference in 1972 and definitive session in 1973. Some Latin American’s opposed mentioning any date at all. Compromise is decision now to convene conference in 1973, with future GA determining precise date, place, etc., and with understanding that 27th GA could decide to postpone conference if it determines preparatory work to be insufficient. Second, U.S. favored listing specific agenda items now, with provision that preparatory committee and conference could decide to act on other issues. Some LDC’s argued for a complete review of law of the sea. Compromise provides for conference to “deal with” broad range of law of the sea issues, with future GA determining precise agenda. Third, U.S. originally sought two committee system, with seabeds commitee handling seabeds regime and boundary, and new preparatory committee handling other issues. Compromise was to expand size and mandate of Seabeds Committee, and authorize it to establish subcommittees. Corridor conversations indicate principle of dividing issues will be applied in forming subcommittees, although precise nature of division not decided. Finally, U.S. sought simultaneous treatment of all issues. Some LDC’s, particularly LA’s, argued that seabeds regime article must be completed before work can begin on drafting articles on the LOS issues, including seabeds boundary. Compromise text gives prominence in a terms of order of listing and detail to seabeds regime but does not repeat not require delay on other items.

9. In addition, it is notable that WEO’s had most difficulty in deciding on committee representation, and tended to favor committee of the whole. LDC’s, particularly Afro-Asians, argued strenuously that this would create chaos, and only reluctantly agreed to expanding the committee to as much as 86 members. END FYI.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-6. Limited Official Use. Drafted on December 28 by Oxman, Salisbury and Francis S. M. Hodsoll (IO/UNP); cleared by Stevenson and Herz, and in S/FW and EUR/RPM; and approved by Hillenbrand. Repeated to USNMR SHAPE and USUN.

386. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 386. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 14, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Canadian Fisheries Zones

On our memorandum of December 21 on this subject (Tab A), you made a note asking which interagency committee will be following up on this matter and to what end. The Law of the Sea Task Force, chaired by State Legal Advisor Stevenson, will be discussing it in relation to the forthcoming Law of the Sea Conference in 1973. They will also be watching for Canadian application of anti-pollution regulations to the new fishing zones—expected in the next few months.

Anti-pollution regulations already exist for the St. Lawrence River. The application to the Gulf of St. Lawrence of similar regulations would not adversely affect our shipping on the Great Lakes. However, if applied to the new fishing zones, such regulations could affect our fishing boats and other vessels. There is also a legal ambiguity regarding the bilateral agreement cited by the Canadian government in exempting U.S. fishing vessels from the new zones. The Task Force will be watching these questions. It may consider a further protest if Canadian anti-pollution regulations are enacted and applied to the zones, which include international waters.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 670, Country Files, Europe, Canada, Volume II, Mar 70-Aug 71. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is published as Document 384.

387. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Laird 387. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers and Secretary of Defense Laird1

Washington, February 10, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador

The President has directed that vigorous efforts be undertaken to negotiate a practical settlement of the fisheries dispute with Ecuador and the other South Pacific nations which: -- avoids further adverse impact of this dispute on our political relationship with the nations of the Hemisphere, and

-- reserves our juridical position on the extent of the territorial seas.

He has asked that the Secretary of State, in coordination with other appropriate agencies, submit a memorandum to him reporting on United States negotiating strategy and the actions taken or planned to implement that strategy. The memorandum should include, as appropriate, recommendations for actions requiring Presidential decision. In this connection, consideration should be given, inter alia, to: -- steps required to waive the suspension of Foreign Military Sales to Ecuador;

-- designation of a special emissary; and

-- consultations with the Congress and domestic industry representatives.

The memorandum should be submitted to the President by February 22, 1971.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 283, Agency Files, Department of State, Vol. X, 1 December 1970-15 April 1971. Secret; Limdis. Also sent to Secretary of Defense Laird. Copies were sent to the Secretary of the Interior, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the director of the CIA. Between mid-January and mid-February 1971, Ecuadorian naval vessels seized 18 U.S. fishing boats operating within the 200-mile exclusionary zone claimed by Ecuador. The Ecuadorian government imposed fines in excess of $850,000. On January 18, 1971, the United States government suspended military sales to Ecuador under Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act, which states, “No sales, credits, or guaranties shall be made or extended under the Act to any country during a period of one year after such country seizes, or takes into custody, or fines and American fishing vessel for engaging in fishing more that twelve miles from the coast of that country. The President may waive the provisions of this subsection when he determines it to be important to the security of the United States or he receives reasonable assurances from the country involved that future violations will not occur, and promptly so reports to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate. The provisions of the subsection shall not be applicable in any case governed by any international agreement to which the United States is party.” On February 1, 1971 the government of Ecuador ordered all U.S. military personnel to leave the country. For the response to this document, see Foreign Relations 1969-1976, E-Vol. 10, American Republics, 1969-1972.

388. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense Laird and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 388. Transcript of Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of Defense Laird and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, April 9, 1971, 10:57 a.m.

L: Several things I thought that we ought to … Do you have a couple of minutes?

K: Sure.

L: One of the problems that is developing around here in the past six to seven months is that there’s been a lot of real in-fighting on this question of the law of the sea.

K: Yes.

L: You’ve got these private interests and fishing interests and others doing a hell of a job on this. But I’m, afraid national security interests are not being adequately thought of the protected. Bill is going to this meeting on Tuesday of next week and he plans to talk informally with Brazil and some others about the question of the two hundred mile limitation. But once you bring that up without our policy resolved it causes difficulties. We can make some changes in our position, but we have to be careful because this idea that Brazil is going to start taking our boats—we’ve got to hard-line it before we resolve these issues. The right of transit through straights (?) is important, not only to us but to the Soviet Union too, and before informal discussions with anyone get started we have got to have a national policy. I think this is important. I think it is more important than SALT. I know that for everyone SALT takes the front burner, but our ocean policy from a long-term point of view is very important. If we don’t have the capability to operate we might as well not have an Air Force or a Navy.

K: I agree.

L: There was a NSSM sent out…

K: And then there was some misunderstanding and I held it until we could talk again.

L: That had to do with the point that’s coming up on Tuesday. But I’ve been pressing for a year on this. I think it’s important.

K. I will do something about it. I think the problem that arose was that I didn’t sufficiently distinguish between the 200 mile policy and the law of the sea problem. I will do that and get it out today, if you’ll back me up on it.

L: I will back you on it but let me see how you write it.

K: I will. I will get Kennedy to check with General Pursley.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, Kissinger Transcripts, Chronological File, Box 9, April 8-14, 1971. No classification.

389. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers 389. Memorandum From the Legal Adviser of the Department of State (Stevenson) to Secretary of State Rogers1

Washington, April 14, 1971.

SUBJECT:

U.S. Position on 200 Mile Territorial Sea Claim-INFORMATION MEMORANDUM

The fundamental position of the United States on the issue of the extent of the territorial sea is that this matter is one which must be settled through international agreement rather than through unilateral action by individual States. The traditional three mile territorial sea is recognized by the United States as the only existing international norm. The establishment of a new norm can be achieved only through broad multilateral agreement. The United States is hopeful that the United Nations Law of the Sea Conference scheduled for 1973 under UN Resolution 2750C (XXV) of December 17, 1970, will succeed in defining, inter alia, the maximum permissible breadth of the territorial sea. Attempts to reach this agreement on this issue at the two previous LOS Conferences in 1958 and 1960 narrowly failed, in the latter case by one vote.

Since 1952, nine countries have unilaterally extended their territorial sea or fishery jurisdiction to a limit of 200 miles. In each such instance, the United States has filed a formal protest, setting forth its view that these attempts to extend jurisdiction unilaterally in the absence of international agreement are without basis in international law, and reserving its rights and those of its nationals on the high seas beyond the traditional three mile limit.

With respect to the specific question of fisheries, the United States and a large majority of other countries recognize the right of a coastal State to exercise exclusive fishery jurisdiction to a distance of 12 miles from shore. In 1966 the United States established an exclusive fishery zone of nine miles contiguous to the three mile territorial sea by legislation (16 U.S.C. 1091). Beyond 12 miles, fishing vessels may exercise their right to fish on the high seas without interference unless the country whose flag they are flying has entered into an international agreement under which this freedom is restricted. The United States has entered into several such bilateral and multilateral agreements for the purpose of conserving the fishery resources off our shores and around the world.

During the past twenty years a large number of U.S. fishing vessels have been seized by countries claiming 200 miles fishery jurisdiction limits, notably Ecuador and Peru. During 1971 alone, Ecuador has made 24 seizures and Peru one. These seizures are damaging not only to the U.S. fishing industry directly affected, but also to the broader economic and security interests of the United States in Latin America.

In an effort to overcome the problems caused by these continued seizures, the United States has offered to negotiate a practical solution with the countries of Chile, Ecuador and Peru, pending any resolution of the underlying issue through international agreement. Quadripartite talks have been held in Buenos Aires in August, 1969, and September, 1970, in an effort to reach agreement. Although no final agreement has as yet been reached, there has been some progress and further four party discussions are scheduled to be held before July 31, 1971.

In addition to the negotiation of a practical solution, the United States has proposed from time to time that this fishing dispute be submitted to the International Court of Justice for adjudication. This offer has not been accepted by any of the 200 mile countries affected. Pending a resolution of the basic issues through adjudication or international negotiation, the United States will continue to support is long standing position consistent with existing international law.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent through S/S. Drafted by Horace F. Shamwell, Ocean Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser and Nordquist on April 13 and cleared by Oxman.

390. National Security Study Memorandum 125 390. National Security Study Memorandum 1251

Washington, April 21, 1971.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of Interior

The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT:

U.S. Ocean Policy

The President has directed that a study be undertaken on measures for the achievement of U.S. ocean policy objectives as outlined in NSDM 62 and the President’s statement of May 23, 1970 in the light of overall U.S. interests.

Particular attention should be given to the actual and potential jurisdictional claims of coastal or archipelago states such as Brazil, Chile-Ecuador-Peru, the Philippines, Indonesia, Japan, Spain, Great Britain, Iceland and Canada. The study should set forth possible U.S. policy choices regarding the handling of such claims which would limit the use of the surface, sub-surface, and airspace of international straits or of waters adjacent to a coastal state, and which would be contrary to U.S. policies on territorial seas and seabeds as outlined in NSDM 62 and the President’s statement of May 23, 1970. Such claims may be to full jurisdiction or may be lesser in nature (e.g., claims of jurisdiction to prevent pollution and certain fisheries claims). The study should evaluate the impact on our strategic and other interests of the assertion of such claims and their possible acceptance by other nations.

In presenting the options for the United States with respect to these various law of the sea matters, the advantages and disadvantages of each of the policy choices should be clearly set forth. Any issue on which there is interagency disagreement should be identified, accompanied by a thorough discussion of differing views.

The study should be conducted by an Ad Hoc group within the framework of the Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force under the chairmanship of the representative of the Secretary of State with participation by representatives of the addressees of this memorandum and a representative of the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. The study should be submitted to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs for consideration by the Senior Review Group not later than June 15, 1971.

This study does not supersede the February 10 request to the Secretaries of State and Defense for a memorandum for the President on the fisheries dispute with Ecuador and other South Pacific nations. This latter memorandum should be forwarded at the earliest possible date.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. For NSDM 62, see Document 375. For the President’s statement of May 23, 1970, see Document 376.

391. Memorandum of Conversation 391. Memorandum of Conversation1

Brasilia, May 11, 1971, 10:00 a.m.

Subject:

Presidential LOS Mission: Meeting with the Foreign Minister

Participants:

John R. Stevenson, Legal Adviser of the Department of State

John Warner, Under Secretary of the Navy

Mario Gibson Barbosa, Foreign Minister

Jorge Carvalho e Silva, Secretary General of the Foreign Office

Carlos Calero Rodrigues, Assistant Secretary General for International Organizations Affairs

Ronaldo Costa, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

C. A. Boonstra, Charge D’Affaires American Embassy

Stephen Low, Political Counselor

Captain Trost, United States Navy

1. Following opening of the meeting by the Foreign Minister, Mr. Stevenson described the purpose of the Mission’s visit to Brazil. He said it had been instructed by the President to explain in the frankest terms to the Foreign Minister and members of the Government the problems which would be created for the United States Navy in carrying out its responsibilities for free world defense should a 200 mile territorial limit be declared by nations all over the world. Second, Mr. Stevenson said the United States Government appreciates the need to find an accommodation to protect the legitimate fishing and other economic interests at coastal states outside of the twelve mile limit. In view of this, there were discussions presently under way within the United States Government aimed at developing a position which would be laid before the Expanded Seabeds Committee meeting in Geneva next July and August. The United States hoped that nations would withhold taking positions before that time in order that the matter could be discussed in a multilateral framework as constructively as possible. With this in mind, the Mission had come to Brazil to request that it delay enforcement of its fishing regulations until the fall of this year.

2. Under Secretary Warner described in some detail the problems which a 200 mile limit declared by all nations would present for the United States Navy in its role of defending free world security. He displayed a map which he had recently showed President Nixon, outlining a 200 mile territorial waters band extending from coastal nations. Mr. Warner demonstrated that this would close many straits as well as the Mediterranean and Carribbean Seas and the Southwestern Pacific. He described the difficulties this created for the Poseiden-Polaris submarine defense, as well as surface vessels. Describing Brazil’s navy as our partner in defense of the Americas, he said the same problems would be created for Brazil’s submarine and surface fleet. Foreign Minister Gibson interrupted briefly to comment, partly facetiously, that he thought Brazil could be described as a sea power but not a naval power. The most that could be said was that it had a few ships afloat. In this connection he said he recalled vividly his experience as Ambassador to the United States trying to convince the United States to sell destroyers to Brazil. The obstacles created, he said, were not placed there by the United States Navy however.

3. Following Under Secretary Warner’s exposition, Foreign Minister Gibson responded at length. He said he wanted to make it clear that Brazil neither supported a 200 mile limit for all nations nor was encouraging other nations to adopt such a position. Nations were unequal in this matter. Some had no sea coast at all, others had long ones. It was obvious that nations in the Mediterranean and Caribbean could not adopt 200 mile territorial waters limits. It was Brazil’s contention that each nation had the right to decide this matter for itself.

4. So far as Brazil’s own 200 mile limit was concerned, there were four aspects to the problem: mineral, scientific, fishing, and security. Turning first to the matter of security, he assured the Mission that the United States and Brazil would have no problem in arriving at arrangements satisfactory to both sides and said that the United States could count completely on Brazil’s complete cooperation in its security plans. However, this would not be the case with other nations, the names of which he said he preferred to leave unstated. The Minister said that the GOB stand does not affect the position of other countries. If, in fact, Brazil’s position did influence others, then its cooperativeness in the security field would carry as much weight as its 200 mile territorial waters Decree. Brazil’s Decree furthermore gives the U.S. an advantage because the GOB will not give the same security assurances to other countries. Mr. Stevenson restated the U.S. concern that in fact Brazil’s adoption of a 200 mile limit would lead other countries to do the same. To this, the Foreign Minister responded that Brazil was not engaged in inducing other countries to follow its example. It was only taking measures it felt necessary to protect its own interests in view of the present state of world disorder in matters regarding law of the sea. He stated emphatically, as he was to repeat a number of occasions during the course of the conversation, that it was impossible for Brazil at this stage to contemplate revoking its 200 mile territorial waters decree. With regard to the mineral and scientific aspects of the matter, the Foreign Minister said that the GOB had not reached the point of being ready to discuss these matters with other countries.

5. Minister Gibson then turned to fishing, describing the circular which had been distributed to all foreign missions, which enclosed the fishing regulations, declared that they were effective as of the date of issue, but noted that their implementation would not start until June 1. He said that this latter provision arose from a conversation during Assistant Secretary Meyer’s recent visit to Brazil. At the end of the conversation with Mr. Meyer he himself had brought up the matter of the fishing regulations which he said were about to be issued. At that time, Mr. Dean had mentioned that the fishing boats needed time before the regulations went into effect. As a result, the Foreign Minister decided to ask the President for a delay in enforcement.

6. The Foreign Minister noted that he could not give an answer to the Mission’s request for a delay in enforcement since many ministries, as well as the National Security Council, and the President himself must be consulted. He noted however that there were many difficulties involved in the U.S. request. A delay applied to U.S. vessels would have a number of effects. Legally, it would create a law which in effect was not being applied. Politically, the matter is becoming a national issue in Brazil and to delay enforcement would lay the Government open to accusations from Congress and the press of failure to take the law seriously. Internationally, he said a delay could create a precedent for other nations. Trinidad and Tobago, as well as France, have already asked to enter into negotiations under the fishing decree and there was some indication the Japanese also wished to do so. The French were sending a delegation at the end of June or beginning of July to begin negotiations. Brazil cannot inform the French that such negotiations are not necessary. Besides, he noted, lack of possibility to identify fishing boats themselves until they are actually seized would make it difficult to delay enforcement for the United States and not others. The Minister then asked whether the United States was contemplating entering into an agreement on fishing. Without waiting for an answer he defended the Decree law as a constitutional rather than an arbitrary act. Its issuance was within the right of the President to decree laws in the realm of national security. The Decree was later approved by the Congress. He said that Brazil is ready to discuss and enter into agreement in order to protect what it thinks is its right to protect; that is, the resources of the sea adjacent to its territory. He said that he could not imagine that the United States would have any difficulty reaching agreement with Brazil in the matter. Acknowledging the legal problem, he said there was no reason why a way could not be found to take this into account.

7. Mr. Warner repeated our desire for another four months in order to consider these problems in a climate free from political pressures. The Foreign Minister again asked what would happen during this time. Stevenson pointed out that the subject would be discussed in detail in Geneva, along with a whole range of other issues. When the Foreign Minister again emphasized that there was no possibility of revoking the Decree, Mr. Warner said we understood that and Mr. Stevenson added that we were merely requesting postponement of enforcement. The Foreign Minister turned the discussion to the Andean countries of the West Coast, noting that the U.S. had been discussing arrangements with them. Mr. Stevenson acknowledged this and stated that it was unlikely we would revive the quadripartite negotiations with them before the Geneva meeting. The Foreign Minister noted that multilateral agreement on this issue would be much more difficult and would take years. Brazil was ready to try to reach an accord but at the most optimistic this could not happen until 1973. In the meantime, Brazil could not postpone a solution. He again asked what would happen until then. Mr. Stevenson said that the U.S. was not suggesting that we wait until 1973. Next fall the U.S. would be in a much better position to declare its direction, making it easier to deal with bilateral problems. The United States was preparing within the Government to be in a better position to deal with the bilateral situations. The Foreign Minister repeated his understanding of the United States position. in the following way: the reason why the United States is asking for a delay in enforcement of the fishing regulations until the Geneva Committee meeting was because it wanted to see what was going to happen there, and only after the results of that meeting were known would it feel it was in a position to negotiate bilaterally. The United States did not contemplate entering U.S.-Brazil bilateral negotiations before the committee meeting.

8. Both sides agreed that the less publicity about the Mission the better. There was some discussion of an answer to the press in case questions were asked. The Brazilian side seemed pleased with the idea of acknowledging that the Mission had visited Brazil to discuss law of the sea matters in general including the Geneva Seabeds Committee meeting in July and August. Mr. Warner wanted a reference made to ongoing discussions. The Minister closed the meeting saying that Secretary General Carvalho e Silva would chair the afternoon meeting at which representatives of the Navy and SUDEPE would be present.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, L/OES Files: Lot 75 D 88, Box 1, LOS Ecuador (January-July) 1971. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Stephen Low on May 17. The meeting was held at the Brazilian Foreign Ministry.

392. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 392. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 20, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Disputes with Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil

State and Defense have had long-standing differences as to how best to deal with proliferating territorial sea claims which are contrary to your oceans policy. These matters have acquired some urgency because Brazil issued a decree in early April, which it intends to enforce starting June 1, affecting foreign vessels fishing in the 200 mile coastal waters over which Brazil asserted territorial sea claims a year ago.

State, Defense, and Commerce all have submitted memos to you outlining their views.

--State’s position is that specific steps should be taken to calm the situation with respect to vessel seizures pending the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. Such steps would include a recommendation to Congress that it repeal the “Pelly Amendment” to the Foreign Military Sales Act which requires a one-year suspension of military sales to a foreign country which seizes or fines a U.S. fishing vessel for fishing more than 12 miles from the coast, and negotiation of agreements with Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil for payment of license fees into an escrow account to be disbursed on the basis of the principles which will be established at the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference with respect to coastal state fishing rights.

--Defense’s position is that it would be unwise to take any such tactical steps while the question of how to advance our overall oceans policy objectives is under review in NSSM 125. Defense also reasons that we should avoid tactical concessions prior to the July 19, 1971, meeting of the UN Seabeds Committee in Geneva, Switzerland, at which we will be seeking to advance our overall oceans policy objectives.

--Commerce has taken yet another position which is essentially that we should negotiate with Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil along the lines proposed by State but should not propose removing the element of sanctions through repeal of the “Pelly Amendment.”

I believe the issues and alternate approaches need to be more fully explored and to this end have issued NSSM 125, which calls for a full review by June 15 of measures for the achievement of your oceans policy.

Meanwhile, a negotiating mission was sent to Brazil on May 10 in an effort to delay the implementation of Brazil’s new fishing regulations from June 1 until next fall. I also informed the Brazilian Ambassador privately of your personal interest in this problem, and of your desire to avoid unnecessary conflicts with Brazil while we work out our position on this complex issue. If the mission is successful, then we will be afforded the time necessary to consider our overall approach without the pressure of vessel seizures and the unfavorable implications such seizures would have for our bilateral relations. The agencies have also been directed to develop contingency options in the event Brazil does not agree to postpone implementation of its fishing regulations.

Finally, I have informed the agencies that the specific steps favored by State will be considered in the overall context of NSSM 125, and that action on these suggested steps is, therefore, deferred.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-183, NSSM Files, NSSM 125 [2 of 3]. Secret. Sent for information. For NSSM 125, see Document 390. Kissinger sent a memorandum the same day to Rogers, Laird, and Stans, indicating that consideration of their recommendations concerning the fisheries disputes would be deferred pending completion of NSSM 125. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, OES/OLP/OCEANS Files: Lot 90 D 180, Box 3, POL 33.14(c), CEP talks on fisheries)

393. Circular Airgram CA-2554 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts 393. Circular Airgram CA-2554 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, May 28, 1971, 1104Z.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea

REF:

A. CA-1573; B. CA-6413, December 29, 1970; C. Lima 2142 Notal; D. Geneva 1141 Notal

Enclosed is a summary and analysis of the March 1-26 meeting of the Law of the Sea Conference Preparatory Committee prepared by the U.S. Delegation and the Department. This summary and analysis should provide important background information to addressees in contacts with host government officials responsible for law of the sea matters. The next meeting of the Committee is scheduled for July 19-August 27 in Geneva.

Rogers

Enclosure

SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS
March 1971 Meeting LOS Conference
Preparatory Committee

A. Organization of Committee on Principal Issues

1. On March 26, the enlarged UN Seabeds Committee (86 members), which serves as Preparatory Committee for the 1973 LOS Conference, completed the first of two sessions planned for this year. The Committee reached agreement on its fundamental organization and the general mandates of its Subcommittees and held two weeks of general debate on procedure and substance.

2. The first two weeks of the session were devoted to organizational arrangements including the setting up of three subcommittees of the whole under the main committee: (1) seabeds regime, (2) other related matters (e.g., territorial seas, straits, fisheries), and (3) marine environment and scientific research. The main committee under Chairman Amerasinghe of Ceylon will constitute essentially a steering group under which the subcommittees, and their Working Groups which we hope to see established, will engage in the drafting of treaty articles to be presented to the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. Ambassador Amerasinghe has proved himself an extraordinarily able chairman of the Seabeds Committee over the last three years, and we are especially pleased by his reelection

3. Subcommittee I on Seabeds Regime, is chaired by Dr. E. E. Seaton of Tanzania who has proved himself very able during the 25th GA and who is also the author of the only draft seabed convention produced so far by a developing country. The key question remaining with regard to this subcommittee is whether it will be able to consider the limits of national jurisdiction over the seabed (boundaries), at the same time as it develops a seabed regime.

It is our view and that of the Soviets and other developed countries that drafting treaty articles containing a regime to govern the exploration and exploitation of the deep seabed is impossible without at the same time considering the definition of the area to which it is to apply.

While the mandate of the subcommittee does not specifically extend to the seabed boundary question, it is not prohibited from dealing with it. We can expect, nevertheless, that at the July-August meeting the Latin Americans will attempt to get the Africans and Asians to agree that the seabed boundary issue should be dealt with together with other ocean boundary questions in Subcommittee II which is chaired by a Latin American from a “200-mile” territorial sea country.

4. The first task of Subcommittee II will be to “draw up a list” of those oceans matters on which it will draft treaty articles. It is our view that work on certain of these treaty provisions should begin even before the compilation of the list (which could be a dilatory maneuver) is completed. For example, the question of a new regime for high seas fisheries (including certain coastal state preferences therein) needs to be dealt with as soon as possible and there is general agreement that work should begin in this respect.

The Latin Americans can be expected to attempt to delay the substantive work of this Subcommittee by insisting that full agreement be achieved on the list of subjects to be dealt with prior to commencing substantive work on any of them. Galindo Pohl (El Salvador) is Chairman of Subcommittee II and may not be particularly effective. However, he is not personally a militant 200-miler and has confided to the Legal Adviser his strong desire to find a basis for accommodation between the US and Latin American positions.

The US favors narrow limits of absolute national jurisdiction, but is willing to concede to the coastal state certain preferences off its shores with respect to marine resources and the prevention of pollution. The Latin Americans, on the other hand, want much greater coastal state control over a broad adjacent area. Nine Latin American countries claim jurisdiction of one sort or another out to 200 miles.

5. Subcommittee III which will deal with questions of marine pollution and scientific research, is chaired by van der Essen (Belgium). While we are quite anxious to deal with certain outstanding marine pollution problems in this Subcommittee, we feel that any extensive consideration of scientific research in this forum can only result in restrictions of its freedom.

B. Developments at the March Session

1. The development of the foregoing organization was achieved in two weeks of informal meetings taking up one-half of the March session. The Africans would not agree to a formal meeting of the Committee until they were satisfied that the organizational arrangements including African Chairmanship of the Regime Subcommittee. The long procedural dispute was really a continuation of the fight which had begun last January in New York; and, while the three Subcommittees described above were in fact organized, working Groups of limited composition (considerably less than 86) to do the actual drafting were not set up at the March session.

2. Fortunately, in the very last days of the meeting, a number of Africans in particular questioned the absence of working groups. It is hoped that we shall be able in the first days of the July-August meeting to establish small working groups to begin the actual drafting of treaty articles on such priority matters as seabeds regime and boundary, and fisheries. It is virtually impossible for an 86-member committee to engage in such drafting.

3. A further development during the period of procedural conflict was the gradual coalescence of the developing countries in the so-called Group of 77. Developing countries which began by meeting in regional groups eventually came to see their interests in the oceans as one of concern to developing countries generally.

4. Another development involves the coalescence of the land-locked and shelf-locked* countries which began to organize themselves informally and held secret meetings. This new group formed by Koh (Singapore) and Prohaska (Austria) wants our support, but cautions us strictly against embracing them publicly for fear that such an embrace could destroy them as a group.

5. The second two weeks of the meeting were devoted to general debate in the main committee and organizational sessions of the Subcommittees. General debate began with Arias Schreiber (Peru) laying down in the strongest terms the gospel of unilateralism, i.e., the right of the coastal state to determine its own limits of national jurisdiction over ocean space in accordance with its political, economic and geographic interests.

6. Zegers (Chile), although a “200-miler”, took a more moderate view; and privately some of the Latin Americans such as Argentina, Guatemala and Mexico, as well as a number of Afro-Asians, criticized the high-handed tactics of Schreiber. Nevertheless, a number of speakers mentioned the unilateral approach as a viable alternative to resolving outstanding oceans problems through broad international agreements. In this respect “unilateralism” achieved a respectability at the March session which it did not previously enjoy.

7. Perhaps the most important speech of the session was that of Pardo (Malta) who in a three-hour presentation gave his prescription for a new international order for the oceans. (Pardo initiated UN consideration of these issues by a speech before the 22nd General Assembly in 1967.) Pardo advocated a single treaty which would define the limits of national jurisdiction over ocean space and describe norms governing activities in the area beyond national jurisdiction. He proposed a new international institution in which there would be a balancing of interests and voting power to deal with the oceans as a whole beyond national jurisdiction. He singled out fisheries as the most valuable ocean resource today and pointed out that effective management of world fisheries was needed.

Perhaps most importantly, Pardo advocated a single over-all clearly defined outer limit of national jurisdiction recognizing and satisfying the totality of coastal state interests—200 miles. At the same time, Pardo stated that coastal state rights within 200 miles would be limited by general and specific international norms established by treaty and subject to judicial review. These norms would be related to such questions as marine pollution and scientific research. Pardo stated that navigation could no longer be exercised without regulation, but regulation of navigation must remain of a general nature administered through international institutions.

8. In our general debate speech, we sought to be accommodating despite considerable provocation by the Latin Americans. This approach won the US plaudits and permitted debate to continue on a serious level. We detailed US views on substance with respect to seabeds and marine pollution. With regard to seabeds, we emphasized the balancing of interests (coastal/non-coastal; developed/developing) contained in our draft convention and pointed out that nations would have to assess their national interests and then accommodate those interests to others in order to achieve international agreement which would avoid conflict and at the same time encourage seabed exploitation on behalf of all mankind.

9. A serious tactical problem emerging is that the hard line 200 mile Latins such as Brazil urged an extreme seabed regime with one-nation one-vote. If they gain support for this from the Group of 77, it could result in developed countries being forced to support a wide limit of national jurisdiction so as to protect themselves against an international regime which would be weighted against them. Our presentation thus pointed out that an international regime drawing revenues only from an area beyond 200 miles would have only limited benefits for developing countries since most oil and gas is probably located within 200 miles. While our statement was well-received, many delegations clearly wished more time to study the problem. With regard to marine pollution, we emphasized our commitment to achieve international agreements which would preserve the marine environment.

10. Ceylon and a few other delegations indicated a willingness to consider the trusteeship concept contained in our draft seabeds convention. Belgium and Denmark supported our convention, while some Latin Americans and Kuwait were critical. By and large, however, there was little specific comment on our seabed proposals. Other nations are still considering our ideas and are not yet ready to comment in detail. Even Seaton (Tanzania) has privately complained that he cannot get Africans to comment on his own draft seabed treaty. At the same time, LDCs are increasingly vocal on the need to “participate” in exploration and exploitation of ocean space—i.e., not just share in the benefits. Ceylon, Kuwait, Brazil and India all spoke on the need for any international organization setup not only to administer the seabed but to exploit it directly.

11. Most delegations strongly favor increased coastal state fishing rights without complex procedures, although most statements in favor of broad exclusive fishing zones came from the Latin Americans. The general view appears to support greater coastal state fishing preferences on the high seas than are contained in our present position on fisheries set out in Article 3.

C. Conclusion

While specific accomplishments at this session were thus modest, most delegates felt that it was necessary to go through the process of sorting things out before the Committee could engage in the process of accommodation that will be essential to the success of its work. We consider that as a result of the March session, there is a greater chance that the July-August session can make significant progress on substance, although it is widely recognized progress will be difficult.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Pitman and McIntyre on May 5; cleared by McKernan, Herz, Oxman, EUR/CAN, ARA/LA/APA, AF/I, EA/RA, and NEA/RA; provided for information to Defense, Interior, and NOAA; and approved by Stevenson.

* Shelf-locked countries are those whose continental margins abut those of their neighbors in all directions at less than 200 meters depth of water.

394. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy, Arnold Nachmanoff, and Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 394. Memorandum From Richard Kennedy, Arnold Nachmanoff, and Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT:

Brazilian Territorial Sea Claims and Related Fisheries Problems

The Problem

On May 11 and 12, under White House instructions, a U.S. mission sought to persuade the Brazilian Government to defer, from June 1 until fall, implementation of its new regulations affecting foreign flag fishing vessels operating within its claimed 200-mile territorial sea. The Brazilian Foreign Minister has now replied officially to our demarche stating that these regulations are now a matter of law and the Government of Brazil cannot agree to our requested delay.

State and Defense agree that most of the 300 U.S. shrimp trawlers, which fish regularly within 100 miles of the Brazilian coast, will not stay out of the contested waters. Thus, in the absence of a Brazilian decision to postpone enforcement of its regulations or the negotiation of a modus vivendi, the U.S. and Brazil will be in confrontation on this issue after June 1 with the attendant risk of fines, vessel seizures, and imprisonment of vessel captains. The Foreign Military Sales Act, as amended, requires the suspension of military sales to a foreign country which seizes or fines a U.S. vessel fishing more than 12 miles from the coast.

State and Defense have prepared a paper with five options, some with variants, to deal with the situation (Tab B).

The Interests

The situation brings in to play a complexity of interests: --Our Oceans Policy: We wish to secure freedom of mobility for U.S. warships and military aircraft. Two hundred mile territorial claims such as those of Brazil, Peru, and Ecuador pose a threat to our global security interests. While these or other nations may at present attempt only to enforce these claims with respect to fisheries or other special interests, they may in the future have the capability and inclination to enforce them with respect to navigation. They may also, by their example, succeed in encouraging other less developed countries to pursue similar claims.

--Access to the High Seas for U.S. Citizens fishing, exploring for minerals, conducting scientific research or simply navigating.

--U.S. Relations with Brazil and Latin America: If not dealt with skillfully, strong anti-U.S. nationalism in Latin America could lead to erosion of U.S. influence and leadership in the hemisphere and the world. Brazil is the most important country in Latin America and U.S. private investment there totals $1.7 billion.

The Issues

In our view, the issue at stake here is that of weighing the danger of confrontation with Brazil against the danger that a willingness to negotiate on fisheries matters will encourage other developing countries to conclude that the best procedure for achieving satisfaction in coastal waters from the maritime powers would be first to make a tough unilateral claim and then negotiate. The latter risk could also affect our negotiating posture for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference as negotiations with Brazil may be interpreted by other nations as U.S. willingness to deal with unilateral and exclusive claims in a way contrary to our strongly expressed position that these problems be considered in the multilateral context of the Law of the Sea Conference.

There is a subsidiary issue of timing. An Oceans Policy review is currently under way in NSSM 125 which will deal with problems such as this one in an overall context. One proposal which may emerge from the study is a recommended shift in our present fisheries policy to more fully accommodate coastal state fishing interests.

This proposal might then be tabled at the Law of the Sea preparatory conference convening in Geneva, July 19. By this fall, therefore, we should have a more thoroughly spelled out oceans policy.

The Options

State and Defense perceive the options confronting U.S. as falling into two broad categories: --Further efforts to persuade Brazil to postpone enforcement of its regulations without agreeing to undertake fisheries negotiations or,

--Negotiation on fisheries to achieve a modus vivendi pending the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

The former approach, which Defense favors, would be designed to convince the Brazilians of our resolve, and would aim at solving our oceans policy problems in an overall framework rather than by piecemeal accommodations which might prejudice our law of the sea position. The approach would also involve the highest risk of confrontation with Brazil.

In line with this approach, Defense favors Option B-2, whereby we would advise Brazil that we are prepared to make an immediate public announcement of President Medici’s visit to Washington (now scheduled for September 28) provided Brazil will postpone enforcement of their regulations. The other option acceptable to Defense is C-1, which would entail direct and immediate contact between Presidents Nixon and Medici in which we would endeavor to persuade him to reconsider his decision but without proposing arbitration.

State recommends the latter of the two basic approaches described above and recommends that we should seek to avert seizures and avoid confrontation by making a commitment to negotiate next fall in return for Brazil’s postponing enforcement of her fishing regulations until then. If Brazil insists that in order to postpone enforcement of her fishing regulations she must be able to enter into immediate negotiations with the U.S., State believes we should be prepared to begin negotiations now on a modus vivendi. State believes we should at the very least explore the possibility of an agreement that does not prejudice our law of the sea position in either its legal or bargaining aspects.

Accordingly, State favors (in order of desirability in terms of protecting our world-wide bargaining leverage on law of the sea matters): --Option D, which would attempt to persuade Brazil to avoid seizures until fall by obtaining Brazilian agreement to call multilateral negotiations on shrimp fisheries which would include other states whose vessels fish for shrimp off Brazil;

--Option E, which would attempt to persuade Brazil to avoid seizures until fall by announcing bilateral U.S.-Brazil fishing negotiations for the fall; or if the Brazilians insist on immediate negotiations, then

--Option F, which would entail an immediate standstill agreement with Brazil which could be on the basis of payment of licenses into an escrow account under protest or agreement for third-party jurisdiction with disbursement or adjudication to be determined in accordance with principles established at the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. (Defense believes Brazil would reject this proposal as prejudicial to her law of the sea position, which is that she can determine the width of her territorial seas unilaterally.)

Our Recommendation

We believe that a course should be selected which minimizes the risk of vessel seizures but still allows us time to deal with the Brazilian question in the overall context of our oceans policy. We believe these objectives are most likely to be met by informing Brazil that we are prepared to enter into negotiations with Brazil on fishing matters this fall after the preparatory seabed conference is completed in Geneva (Option E). In association with this option we would also consider consultations with other countries whose vessels fish off the Brazilian coast in an effort to concert our positions, and the desirability of a letter from President Nixon to President Medici depending on the Brazilian response.

The course of action outlined above has the advantage that, in the judgment of State and Defense, there is considerable likelihood that Brazil would find it acceptable and that Brazil might consider the announcement of negotiations in the fall as adequate justification for postponing any seizures in the interim period. Meanwhile, we would have time to formulate a negotiating position consistent with our overall oceans policy review. Our agreement to discuss fisheries matters at a specific time could be used to impress the Brazilians with our reasonableness and should avert vessel seizures in the interim.

As a fall back position, we should also be prepared to enter into earlier and even immediate discussions with the Brazilians if they insist that negotiations cannot wait until this fall. In such a case, however, we would stress the exploratory nature of these discussions, emphasize to the Brazilians that we are currently seeking to formulate a position on these very matters within our own government, and thus draw out the discussions until at least after the completion of NSSM 125.

We believe the course of action favored by the Defense Department involves unnecessary risks of confrontation with Brazil with potentially adverse consequences for our bilateral and hemispheric relations. Moreover, although we understand the reasoning behind its position, Defense has advanced little solid evidence to support its view that any move to negotiate with Brazil will have a decisive impact on the positions of other nations. Lastly, a confrontation with Brazil and the ensuing crisis atmosphere would certainly do more damage to the chances for broad international agreement on a Law of the Sea Conference than would the mere fact of entering into negotiations with Brazil on the fisheries matter. In effect, our Law of the Sea interest and our bilateral interest are probably identical in this instance to avoid crisis.

We have prepared a draft NSDM along the lines of our suggestion as well as a memorandum for the President outlining the problem and seeking his approval of the NSDM.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you sign the memorandum to the President at Tab 1.

Approve

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. Sent for action. Sent under a May 27 covering note from Nachmanoff to Haig that reads: “The Brazilian Navy is drawing up rules of engagement for June 1 on the fishing regulations which are due to go into effect. This means we must make our approach-if the President approves our recommendation-no later than Monday.” Nachmanoff urged Kissinger to take the issue up with the President the next day. Nachmanoff also noted that the Department of Commerce had just endorsed the Department of State’s position. There is no indication of approval or disapproval by Kissinger, but Document 395 indicates he brought the matter to the attention of the President. In the penultimate sentence of the penultimate paragraph, the correction “negotiations with” is written between “entering into” and “Brazil.” For Tab 1, see Document 397. Tab B is a May 25 memorandum from Rogers to Nixon.

395. Conversation Between President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 395. Conversation Between President Nixon and his Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 29, 1971.

Kissinger: We have one other technical [unclear] connected with Latin America. The Brazilians have established a 200 mile limit, and they want to start enforcing it as of June 1st.

Nixon: [unclear]

Kissinger: Now, our problem is that unless we get them—unless we tell them that we’re willing to negotiate the fisheries issue with them, they will have to start enforcing it. We’ve already agreed to negotiate, but we don’t have a formal position yet. And so there’s some debate. The State Department wants to negotiate now, but the Defense Department wants to have a showdown. They’re not so concerned about fisheries, but they’re concerned about law of the seas. I would recommend that we tell them we’re willing to negotiate in the fall. That if we—because if we don’t do it on fisheries, the Latin Americans will oppose us on the more important issue of navigation, which comes up on the law of the seas conference later this year. While if we can settle Brazil, it’s not basically a hostile country to us. [unclear]

Nixon: I don’t give a damn about the fisheries anyway. Let everybody have 200 miles to fish. They’re all poverty-stricken down there anyway.

Kissinger: If we dig in on the fisheries, we’ll lose on navigation—

Nixon: Navigation we want. Let them fish if they want. That’s my view.

Kissinger: Well, that’s my recommendation, Mr. President.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Tapes, Recording of conversation between Nixon and Kissinger, Oval Office, Conversation No. 507-4. No classification marking. The portion of the discussion transcribed was part of a conversation covering a variety of subjects that began at 8:13 a.m. and concluded at 10:32 a.m. The editor transcribed the portion of the conversation printed here specifically for this volume. Assistant to the President H. R. Haldeman was also present at the meeting but did not speak during the portion of the conversation transcribed.

396. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 396. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, May 29, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Brazil

In my memorandum to you of May 20, I outlined our efforts to persuade Brazil to defer implementation of its fishing regulations from June 1 until this fall without consenting to bargain with Brazil on fisheries matters. On May 24, the Brazilian Foreign Minister informed our Ambassador that the regulations were now a matter of law and the Brazilian Government could not agree to delay their implementation.

The Departments of State and Defense have prepared several contingency options for dealing with the present situation. Essentially, Defense favors further efforts to persuade Brazil to postpone enforcement without agreeing to fisheries negotiations. State, on the other hand, recommends that at the very least we agree to fisheries negotiations with Brazil this fall and, that we be prepared to enter into immediate negotiations for a modus vivendi if that proves necessary.

I believe that the course of action favored by the Defense Department involves unnecessary risks of confrontation with Brazil. Moreover, the ensuing crisis atmosphere would probably do more damage to the chances for a broad international agreement on a Law of the Sea Conference than would the mere fact of entering into negotiations on the fisheries matter. A confrontation on fisheries would harden the Brazilian and Latin attitudes on navigation rights, which are of paramount importance to us. In effect, our Law of the Sea interest and our bilateral interest are probably identical in this instance: to avoid a fisheries crisis.

I think, therefore, that we should consent now to enter into negotiations with Brazil this fall on fisheries matters. This course of action will meet the principal concern of the Brazilians, i.e., that we agree to talk about fisheries, but will allow us time to formulate a negotiating posture consistent with our overall oceans policy review now underway in NSSM 125 and possibly to try out a new multilateral approach at the UN preparatory law of the sea meeting in Geneva this summer. An expressed willingness to negotiate on our part should convince the Brazilians of our reasonableness and is likely though not certain to avert seizures of U.S. fishing vessels operating in the contested waters in the interim.

I also believe that as a fall back position, we should be prepared to enter into immediate exploratory discussions with the Brazilians, if they insist that negotiations cannot wait until this fall. We would, however, draw these discussions out so as to permit us time to formulate an overall approach.

Depending on the Brazilians response to the foregoing approach, we are also considering the usefulness of a letter from you to President Medici to stress your personal interest in these matters, particularly as they relate to the ultimate success of multilateral law of the sea negotiations.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the NSDM at Tab A.

Approve [Signed RN]

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. Sent for action. Nixon initialed his approval of the recommendation. For the text of the NSDM attached at Tab A, see Document 397.

397. National Security Decision Memorandum 111 397. National Security Decision Memorandum 1111

Washington, May 29, 1971.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT:

Brazilian Territorial Sea Claims and Related Fisheries Problems

The President has reviewed the options paper on the subject of Brazilian territorial sea claims and related fisheries problems.

He has decided that in the interest of minimizing the risk of confrontation with Brazil, the Department of State should inform the highest level of the Brazilian Government of the President’s decision that we are prepared to enter into fisheries negotiations this fall after the completion of the preparatory law of the sea negotiations to be held in Geneva beginning July 19.

In conveying this message to the Brazilian Government, the Department of State should stress that we are currently engaged in a comprehensive review of oceans policy matters and that we believe our agreement to hold fisheries negotiations this fall to be a fair and reasonable position. The Brazilians may also be informed that we have no objection to their publicizing our willingness to negotiate this fall.

We should also express the hope to the Brazilians that this action on our part will permit them to exercise restraint in the enforcement of their fishing regulations. If the matter of fines and vessel seizures is raised, the Brazilians should be reminded of existing U.S. statutory provisions governing such questions.

Appropriate soundings should also be taken with other nations whose fishing vessels might be affected by Brazil’s fishing regulations to explore the possibility of (a) coordinating efforts to persuade Brazil to exercise restraint in implementing its fishing regulations pending the outcome of negotiations and (b) developing a concerted negotiating position for the fall.

The President is prepared to consider earlier entry into exploratory discussions if the Brazilians insist that negotiations cannot wait until fall. A specific request for such authorization should be submitted to the President if our initial approach appears to be unsuccessful.

Depending on the Brazilian response, consideration will be given to a Presidential letter to President Medici stressing the importance we attach to these matters, particularly as they affect the successful outcome of the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled for 1973.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-224, NSDM Files, NSDM 111. Secret. A copy was sent to the Secretary of Commerce. Another copy was sent to Haig.

398. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 398. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, June 2, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Ecuadorean Initiative on Fisheries Dispute

Ecuadorean Ambassador Mantilla met Wednesday on his return from Ecuador with Assistant Secretary Charles Meyer. He brought a message from President Velasco Ibarra to the effect that Velasco personally has ordered there be no seizures of US fishing vessels in Ecuadorean waters through September 30. Velasco hopes this gesture will make possible the lifting of the suspension on US Foreign Military Sales (FMS) to Ecuador which was imposed during the spate of tuna boat seizures early this year (January-February). He believes lifting the suspension on FMS is the key to breaking the pattern of deteriorating US-Ecuadorean relations and to beginning to reestablish more normal relations.

Lifting the suspension would enable Ecuador to enter into negotiations aimed at reaching a practical solution on the fisheries problem. Ecuador would prefer to try to work out a new and realistic agreement within the framework of tripartite negotiations with Peru and Chile, then resuming quadripartite talks with the US. However, Ecuador would be prepared to consider bilateral negotiations with the US if this fails. Velasco reportedly has also said that Ecuador’s claim to 200 miles is directed toward control of resources, including the seabed, but not toward a claim to the full jurisdiction of territorial seas. The President reportedly said he had directed an immediate review of Ecuador’s laws to make sure they are consistent with this position.

State has directed our Ambassador to confirm the substance of this conversation between Ambassador Mantilla and President Velasco with the Foreign Minister, who was also present. If confirmed, this initiative represents the first major break in the impasse which has deeply disturbed our relations with Ecuador. If it is true that the GCE is willing to consider something less than full sovereignty in the 200 mile zone and settle for control over resources this change also has promising implications for the whole Law of the Sea problem. We will keep you informed of future developments.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret;Exdis. Sent for information. Published from an uninitialed copy. Carlos Mantilla-Ortega was the Ecuadorian Ambassador to the United States.

399. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 399. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, June 22, 1971.

Subject:

Policy on AID Loans to Ecuador in Light of the Fishing Vessel Controversy and Law of the Sea Considerations

Since Ecuador began its large scale seizure of U.S. fishing vessels on January 11, 1971, we have held new U.S. AID commitments for Ecuador under review in accordance with Section 620(o) of the Foreign Assistance Act. This Section requires that such vessel seizures be taken into consideration in determining whether to furnish assistance to the seizing country (text attached).

The initiation of vessel seizures by Ecuador caught four AID loans totaling $25.9 million between authorization and signature of loan agreements. These loans include $7.2 million for Agricultural Diversification, $5.1 million for Small Enterprise Assistance, $3.6 million for Rural Electrification and a $10 million Program Loan.

These loans have been developed over a considerable period of time and have important economic development implications. The delay in their consummation has jeopardized their utility and threatens to frustrate an excellent development program in Ecuador. It is therefore with considerable reluctance that we have delayed going forward with the signature of the loans.

We have felt it necessary to do so, however, because of the strong emotions generated by the fishing boat seizures and the evident extreme sensitivity of Congress on this issue. We have furthermore been concerned that proceeding with lending in the face of Ecuadorean vessel seizures might jeopardize the proposal we put forward on April 28 to resolve the dispute with Ecuador by obtaining legislative authority to reimburse fishermen for licenses purchased in anticipation of seizure.

It now appears that we have a significant opportunity to break the impasse on fishing and law of the sea questions with Ecuador. On June 2 the Ambassador of Ecuador brought to Assistant Secretary Meyer a message from Ecuadorean President Velasco Ibarra which represents a significant shift in the Ecuadorean attitude. The main points of President Velasco’s message are: --The GOE believes that its relations with the United States are caught up in a vicious circle. The key to breaking the circle and to establishment of more normal relations would be a lifting by the United States of the suspension of Ecuador from eligibility under the Foreign Military Sales Act imposed on January 18.

--In order to remove the obvious obstacles to lifting the suspension, President Velasco personally ordered that there be no seizures of U.S. fishing vessels from now through September 30.

--The GOE hopes that knowledge of this decision will make it possible for the United States to lift the Foreign Military Sales suspension. If the suspension is lifted, Ecuador would take the initiative with its partners, Peru and Chile, to obtain agreement on a proposal to be considered at a new session of the tripartite fishing conference. If Peru and Chile are not prepared to resume negotiations, Ecuador would consider bilateral negotiations.

--President Velasco has directed an immediate review of Ecuadorean law with respect to maritime jurisdiction in order to clarify that the basic Ecuadorean claim is to a resource jurisdiction as contrasted with a form of territorial sea claim which would interfere with fundamental operating rights of U.S. security forces.

We cannot at this date be sure that President Velasco will follow up on the position reported by the Ecuadorean Ambassador, but we see the possibility of an important advance towards a solution of these longstanding and intractable vessel seizure problems. We intend to pursue this possibility vigorously.

The message from President Velasco could entail extremely serious political risks for him. If he is to fulfill his stated intentions, it is essential that we be in a position to make suitable responses and suitable U.S. compromises. The lifting of the Foreign Military Sales suspension is clearly important in Ecuadorean eyes, and if we wish to resume negotiations, we will have to face up to lifting the suspension.

Prior to that, however, I believe it would be most appropriate for us to begin to release the stalled AID loans as an indication of our desire to return to normal relationships with Ecuador. Therefore, I am instructing the Embassy in Quito to proceed with signature of the Agricultural Development loan at the earliest convenient moment. We will then consider on their technical merits negotiation and signature of the additional authorized loans as Ecuadorean intentions on the fishing and law of the sea considerations become apparent. We will also be proposing such other steps toward normalization of relations with Ecuador as our assessment of progress on these issues appears to warrant.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [2 of 2]. Secret. Attached was Section 620(o) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (as amended), which reads: “In determining whether or not to furnish assistance under this Act, consideration shall be given to excluding from such assistance any country which hereafter seizes, or imposes any penalty or sanction against, any United States fishing vessel on account of its fishing activities in international waters. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable in any case governed by international agreement to which the United States is a party.” (Ibid.)

400. Analytical Summary Prepared by John Negroponte of the National Security Council Staff 400. Analytical Summary Prepared by John Negroponte of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, undated.

ANALYTICAL SUMMARY
NSSM 125: U.S. Oceans Policy

I. INTRODUCTION

NSSM 125 requested that a study be undertaken on measures for the achievement of U.S. ocean policy objectives as outlined in NSDM 62 and the President’s statement of May 23, 1970.

A study has now been completed by the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force chaired by State. It is summarized below with our own comments in brackets.

If you have time to read any portion of the actual NSSM response, we suggest you read the section dealing with issues and options (pages 44-70), with particular reference to the options for substantive proposals. (pages 57-68). The options for decision are dealt with in this summary from page 16 onwards.

II. OUR OCEANS POLICY OBJECTIVES

[These have been most succinctly stated in a separate draft prepared by DOD. Our objectives are: --To insure sufficient tactical and strategic mobility of our military forces to assure the credibility of our deterrent [2 lines not declassified].

-- To protect and enhance the economic and environmental interests of U.S. investments, U.S. labor, and U.S. consumers regarding the exploration, development, and marketing of ocean products, including petroleum, minerals, living resources, transportation, communication, and recreation.

--To avoid political and armed conflict over rights to use ocean space.]

III. PRESENT U.S. LAW OF THE SEA PROPOSALS

NSDM 62 and the President’s statement of May 23, 1970, outlined the following U.S. Oceans Policy: 1. Territorial Sea: We proposed agreement on a 12 mile breadth of sea, the narrowest breadth on which we believe multilateral agreement can be reached.

2. Straits: We proposed a new right of free transit through international straits, which would include aircraft and submerged submarines. This would eliminate the old criterion of “innocent passage” which gives the coastal state some discretionary authority with respect to transiting foreign vessels. The right of free transit is essential to our strategic mobility since a 12 mile territorial sea would eliminate all free high seas in straits less than 24 miles wide, including Gibraltar.

3. Fisheries: We proposed accommodating interests of coastal states in fisheries beyond the territorial sea by giving them carefully defined preferential rights. [Our present fisheries position is apparently a non-starter. Few people understand it; and agencies even disagree as to what it is. The proposal is in the form of a draft fisheries article we have informally circulated bilaterally. This NSSM exercise is in large measure due to the need for a new and better defined fisheries position.]

4. Seabeds: We proposed a seaward boundary for the legal continental shelf where the high seas reach a depth of two hundred meters. Beyond the two hundred meter, limit, we proposed a new international regime for the seabeds under which the coastal state would license exploitation and exploration of seabed resources in a trusteeship zone extending from the depth of 200 meters seaward to embrace the remainder of the continental margin. Beyond the trusteeship zone, a new international organization would itself license exploration and exploitation of seabed resources. Pursuant to NSDM 62, a detailed draft convention was submitted by the U.S. to the UN Seabeds Cornmittee as a working paper in August 1970.

5. Pollution: Our draft Seabeds Convention contains strict and comprehensive provisions designed to prevent pollution from seabed exploration or exploitation. The Law of the Sea Task Force is consulting CEQ, EPA, and other experts regarding other aspects of marine pollution that might usefully be dealt with at the Law of the Sea Conference.

6. Scientific Research: Although not specifically mentioned, we support the maximum freedom for scientific research.

IV. THE LAW OF THE SEA CONFERENCE

The UNGA has decided to convene in 1973 a comprehensive Conference on the Law of the Sea. This results from the following three factors: -- A U.S. Soviet decision in 1967 to explore the possibility of a new conference limited to establishing the maximum breadth of the territorial sea, guaranteeing free transit through and over straits and providing preferential fishing rights for coastal states on the high seas.

-- The simultaneous establishment of a UN Seabed Committee to deal with the possibility of a new international regime for the seabeds, with an equitable sharing of benefits.

--Interest by many newly independent countries in questioning traditional law of the sea which was developed without their participation and which they feel is heavily weighted in the interests of traditional maritime powers.

Developments thus far have not given rise to serious negotiations: -- Our seabeds proposal has been neglected by most countries.

-- It lacks appeal to some countries, notably the Latin Americans who are engaged in delaying tactics to enhance their own 200-mile thesis.

-- States without maritime or naval interests may perceive our policy as not meeting the desire of coastal state control over ocean space as a future source of income.

-- Neither we nor others have officially presented a fisheries proposal to accommodate the conflicting concerns of coastal and distant-water fishing states.

-- The UN Committee preparing for the Law of the Sea Conference is divided into blocs. African and Asian countries, in order to maintain developing country solidarity, frequently support the Latin position. Meanwhile, developed countries themselves are divided by virtue of their diverse interests and geographic locations.

V. U.S. INTERESTS IN THE LAW OF THE SEA

Generally, the U.S. has three types of interests with respect to the oceans: -- High seas

-- Coastal

-- International

The focal point for satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the current law of the sea is the doctrine of the freedom of the high seas, which permits each nation to conduct activities on the high seas freely with “reasonable regard” for the interests of others. The classic method for regulating the high seas is to enter into treaties on specific subjects (e.g., oil pollution) which must have the adherence of the users to be effective.

Coastal interests are best served by the broadest possible territorial sea or coastal state control for a specialized purpose (e.g., Continental Shelf minerals). Depending on their concern, states may be interested in exclusive control of fisheries or seabed resources, in preventing pollution near their shores, or in expanding national territory for essentially the same reasons as on land.

International interests relate to concern for regulating the ocean as a whole for one or more purposes such as standardization of ship construction, universal observation of minimum standards with respect to pollution or fisheries conservation, and prevention of conflict between states with coastal interests and high seas interests or between coastal states in the same region.

More specifically, U.S. interests with respect to the oceans are: — U.S. National Security Interests. The major U.S. military [less than 1 line not declassified] interest in the seas is a maximum mobility for our operations, free of interference by others. Our mobility depends on freedom to navigate on and under the high seas and to fly over them. If navigation and overflight fall under broadly extended coastal state jurisdiction, only in the North Atlantic and northeastern Pacific could we be reasonably assured of coastal state acquiescence in our military use of the area at all.

Our seaborne nuclear deterrent is also dependent on secrecy and, in the absence of a new rule regarding straits, even a modest extension of the territorial sea from 3 to 12 miles would force us to choose in many international straits, including Gibraltar, between operating illegally or striking the best possible bilateral bargain for consent to transit submerged. Also, our ASW operations involve surface and air units that cannot conduct such operations in foreign territorial seas without consent.

Expansion of coastal state control over important ocean areas increases the geopolitical importance of the state concerned, such as the case of states bordering strategic straits. The possibility of international conflict increases as more states believe they have the right to close important ocean areas—as the UAR did in the Strait of Tiran.

[1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

Just as the U.S. has an interest in preventing unilateral coastal state claims of jurisdiction over the oceans that can lead to controls over navigation and overflight, its military interest is served by seeking to solve the economic and environmental problems that lead other countries, particularly developing ones, to make such claims.

—U.S. Economic Interests. These fall into a number of categories:

Trade and Commerce: About 80 percent of U.S. foreign trade moves by ship. We have an interest in maximum freedom of movement at minimum possible cost.

Oil and Gas: Continental margins around the world (submerged extensions of the continents) probably contain more petroleum and gas than exist on land. The margin off the U.S. is 8 percent of the world total. The U.S. has a coastal interest in the exclusive right to oil and gas of the continental margin off its coast. We also have an interest in the access of U.S. oil companies to the continental margins off other countries’ coasts. Our petroleum and gas industry, has been opposed to our seabed proposal for a trusteeship zone and international machinery beyond that zone. It would also prefer to leave companies to bargain on their own with other coastal countries for access to their continental margins. [This question was thrashed out extensively in the deliberations leading to NSDM 62. There is occasional pressure to reopen that decision from industry sources, though perhaps less now than before. Sensitivities to these pressures are variously and occasionally reflected within the USG. It was understood as a part of this NSSM exercise, however, that our intention was not to reopen any element of NSDM 62.]

— U.S. Fisheries Interests: The U.S. has coastal, high seas, and international interests in fisheries.

The largest interest is coastal, particularly off Alaska and New England. Our coastal fisherman—just like Brazil’s, for example—desire the most exclusive rights possible to fish off our coastal waters.

Our highly modernized tuna and shrimp fishermen, on the other hand, have a high seas interest in the closest possible access to the coastal waters of other states (e.g., Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil).

— U.S. Environmental Interests. Our coastal interest is to protect our coastline from pollution. Our international interest stems from the difficulty of localizing the effects of ocean pollution.

Three international forums are, or will be, concerned with various aspects of ocean pollution: --The 1972 Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment,

-- An IMCO Conference on Marine Pollution in 1973,

-- The Law of the Sea Conference.

Different aspects of ocean pollution (e.g., dumping, oil spills, pollution from seabed exploration, effluents from rivers, etc.) can, and in some cases will, continue to be dealt with in different forums. However, any comprehensive international machinery to deal with these problems could better be considered in the context of the law of the sea negotiations, if establishing. such machinery is the course we or other nations eventually elect to pursue. [Our own bureaucracy first has to rationalize which elements of our own government should deal with the problem. At the moment, lines of authority within our own government are unclear.]

-- U.S. Scientific Interests rest with the broadest possible freedom of scientific research in the oceans.

-- Conflict Resolution Interests: A traditional source of conflict over the oceans has concerned navigation. Expanding competition for fisheries, and the lure of petroleum and mineral wealth from the seabed, are expanding the potential for conflict. As a major military and economic power with allies, commitments and interests around the world, we have an international interest in the resolution of conflict over the oceans. The East and South China Sea, the Gulf of Venezuela, and the Plate River estuary are examples of areas where maritime boundary issues have a serious potential of conflict.

-- U.S. Bilateral and Regional Foreign Relations Interests: When a country makes a claim or takes a position that is contrary to our interests, we are consistently faced with a choice between undesirable alternatives. The more vigorously we defend our oceans interests, the more we endanger our relations with the country concerned. On the other hand, the more relaxed our response, the more we prejudice our interests with respect to other countries that may follow its example. Bilateral negotiation with the country concerned may simply persuade others that claims can be made without undesirable consequences. A very widely accepted law of the sea treaty or treaties would eliminate or substantially reduce the potential for conflict with these countries as well as with others.

VI. THE PROBLEM OF UNILATERAL CLAIMS

— High Seas Interests and Coastal State Claims:

Only developed countries generally perceive that they have important high seas interests which must greatly influence their decisions.

All perceive navigational interests. Only the U.S., U.K., and the USSR are likely to give greatest attention to high seas security interests. Japan, the USSR, the U.K., and West Germany have important high seas fisheries interests. (Distant-water fisheries are vitally important sources of protein for Japan and the USSR.) Unilateral claims protect one or more coastal interests. The most comprehensive of these are absolute claims of sovereignty—claims of internal waters or territorial seas. Coastal states may make lesser claims of jurisdiction for a variety of reasons. They may, for example, have high seas interests they want to protect. Thus in 1945 the U.S. unilaterally claimed the resources of the continental shelf off its coast, explicitly stating that it was not claiming the waters above in order to protect U.S. high seas, security, navigational, and fishing interests off the coasts of other countries.

Another reason for making a claim short of full sovereignty is to bolster the respectability of their claims and lay the foundation for broader assertions at a later time.

— Territorial Sea Claims:

These are the most adverse to U.S. interests. At best, U.S. vessels on the surface - not aircraft or submerged submarines - have a right of “innocent passage” through such waters.

In 1930, the majority of states adhered to the traditional 3-mile limit for the territorial sea. Today, 51 countries claim a 12-mile territorial sea, and an additional 14 claim over 12 miles and up to 200 miles. Great Britain, while adhering to the 3-mile rule, no longer protests 12-mile claims. The U.S. continues the practice of protesting any territorial claim beyond 3 miles.

We have refused to accept the move to 12 miles for two basic reasons: -- If we admit the validity of any unilateral change from three miles, it is difficult to oppose claims beyond even 12 miles.

-- More importantly, with a three mile territorial sea, straits wider than six miles have free high seas running through them. A 12-mile territorial sea would overlap straits less than 24 miles wide and over 100 straits would be affected, including Gibraltar.

Territorial sea claims beyond 12 miles would merely compound these problems. A 200-mile territorial sea would encompass 25 percent of the oceans, and close the major seas of the world, including the Mediterranean and Caribbean, to all but innocent passage.

From a national security point of view, the U.S. could not merely live with 200-mile territorial seas. In certain areas, we would be forced to negotiate, at a high potential price, rights for navigation and overflight. Should navigation in practice become a matter of coastal state consent, both the U.S. and its rivals might be expected not only to engage in a campaign to secure consent for themselves but to assure that consent is denied or restricted for the other. Sooner or later, we or another major power would face a critical situation in which consent is denied or too high a price is demanded.

— Archipelago Claims:

The Philippines and Indonesia have elected unilaterally to enclose their islands by drawing straight lines which connext the outermost points of the islands and to declare the waters inside to be internal. Indonesia recognizes a right of innocent passage through such waters by warships subject to prior notification. The Philippines recognizes no right of innocent passage for warships.

We have drafted our proposal on free transit through and over international straits in such a way that archipelago nations could accept it if they are willing to provide for free passage through some of the straits between their islands. Thus far no such state has indicated willingness to accept our proposal although it is possible that the promise of recognition of some type of archipelago claim might move some island nations toward support of a version of our straits proposal.

— Claims of Special Jurisdiction Affecting Navigation:

These are the most potentially dangerous limited jurisdiction claims. Recently Canada has claimed a 100 mile exclusive pollution zone over Arctic waters. Most attention has thus far been devoted to oil tankers; but there are clear warning signals that nuclear-powered vessels and vessels carrying nuclear materials and weapons are next on the horizon. In the worst of circumstances, coastal states could use their pollution control jurisdiction as the equivalent of a consent requirement.

Claims to Resources:

The most important reason for U.S. opposition to unilateral claims limited to natural resources of the seas and seabeds relates to the assumption that unilateral claims of jurisdiction for one purpose tend to expand into, stimulate, or provide a justification for claims for other purposes. This phenomenon is known as “creeping jurisdiction.”

[In our judgment, the ultimate success of our law of the sea strategy will rest on the reconciliation of other states’ coastal interests, particularly for resources, with the high seas interests of the U.S. and other major maritime powers. The real question is at what point can developing countries’ coastal state interests really be satisfied. Are they just interested in resources, or are they interested in complete sovereignty affecting freedom of navigation as well?

One could make a plausible case that total jurisdictional claims, such as those of Brazil, are tactically designed to elicit resource concessions from the maritime powers in exchange for ultimately granting navigational freedom beyond 12 miles. Pursuing this logic, a plausible, and by no means undesirable from our point of view, outcome of the Law of the Sea Conference would be the granting of exclusive resource jurisdiction to coastal states up to, say, 200 miles, in exchange for acceptance of a 12-mile territorial sea.

The question then arises as to why we don’t offer an exclusive resource package of this kind now to preclude further unwelcome territorial claims in the interim, to avoid hardening of positions already taken, and to isolate proponents of full 200 mile territorial jurisdiction from other more reasonable states.

Believers in the phenomenon of creeping jurisdiction would argue that for the U.S. to advance such a position now would stimulate rather than preclude large territorial claims and that as a tactical matter we should avoid laying all our cards on the table at this stage.]

VII. THE LATIN AMERICAN PROBLEM

Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and several other Latin American nations have claimed either territorial seas or exclusive fisheries zones of 200 miles. Enforcement of such claims against our fishermen creates political difficulties; it also represents a severe threat to the continued mobility of our sea and air forces.

Peru prohibits overflight in her 200 mile zone by foreign military aircraft without her prior permission.

Brazil has recently promulgated regulations which restrict the passage of nuclear-powered vessels in her claimed 200 mile territorial sea and is now considering new regulations which would control all navigation and impair the traditional right of freedom of innocent passage.

Ecuador has enacted but does not enforce legislation which impairs the right of innocent passage.

All Latin American countries which have made broad claims say that they will be generous with U.S. military interests and that they would not wish to impair our strategic mobility. However, our security cannot be allowed to depend on the generosity of coastal states. The hard line Latins will probably not be satisfied with any result from a Law of the Sea Conference which doesn’t recognize their jurisdictional competence, at least for resources, out to 200 miles. Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil have all indicated they might be willing to bargain over military uses within the 200 mile area.

To the extent that these countries. expansive claims are designed to protect interests in fisheries or offshore mineral exploitation, U.S. oceans policy will accommodate many of their interests. The value of any new fisheries proposal expanding coastal states rights lies in getting support from Africans, Asians, and moderate Latin Americans and isolating or bringing along the hard line Latin Americans.

In responding to Latin American claims, we have never used force to protect our rights—as we see them—nor have we entered into agreements implying acceptance of coastal state rights—as certain coastal states see them.

III. OTHER FOREIGN INTERESTS AND ATTITUDES

1. States Bordering on Straits:

Except for Singapore, France, the U.K., and the USSR, straits states reaction to our proposal for free transit for vessels and aircraft varies from unhappiness (e.g., Greece) to active and vigorous opposition (e.g., Spain).

A. Spain: In March the Spanish representative at the LOS Committee took issue publicly with all of the objectives behind the U.S. proposal for free transit through and over international straits and he supported many Latin American positions. Spain can be expected to continue her efforts in opposition to the U.S. straits proposal so long as she feels it will gain her other political goals without directly endangering U.S./Spanish relations. Convincing Spain of the importance of the straits proposal to the U.S. and the possible adverse effect of continued Spanish opposition to it on U.S./Spanish relations is a paramount goal in the near future.

B. Denmark, Greece, and Italy:

Denmark has so far rejected our straits proposal primarily because she is concerned by traffic safety and pollution hazards in the Danish straits. She does not wish to deny free transit to the U.S.; she does, however, have a fear of submerged transit by Soviet submaries—a fear which the NSSM paper considers unfounded because the straits are so shallow.

Greece and Italy are opposed to free transit. The paper adds, however, that Greece may ultimately be satisfied by whatever accommodation we make with the Philippines and Indonesia. If Greece and Denmark ultimately accept our position, then it is doubtful Italy will want to stand alone in NATO in opposition.

C. [text not declassified]

The study judges that public rejection of our straits proposal by Japan, a close all, would place that proposal in jeopardy.

2. Landlocked States

Landlocked states have an interest in access to the sea. To the extent they achieve such access, they have an interest in: --High seas with the narrowed possible limits of the territorial sea and jurisdiction over fisheries.

-- A narrow limit of national jurisdiction over seabeds, thus sharing in revenues and participating in an international organization that regulates the broadest possible area of the seabeds subject to an international regime.

3. Shelf-Locked States

There are 23 states that cannot expand their jurisdiction over the seabeds beyond 200 meters, usually because they border on enclosed or semi-closed seas that are less than 200 meters deep. Austria and Singapore are trying to organize a bloc of landlocked and shelf-locked states, basically in support of U.S. proposals. Such a bloc would have close to 1/3 voting strength at a conference and would be of concern to the Latin American states.

4. States with Broad Continental Shelves are likely to favor depth of the sea or geological criteria for determining the limits of national jurisdiction over the seabeds.

5. Coastal States with Narrow Continental Shelves

Such states are likely to oppose the use of depth or geological criteria for determining the limits of national jurisdiction over the seabeds and would prefer the use of a fixed distance from shore either for the shelf, the trusteeship zone, or both.

6. The USSR and Eastern Europe

This group will most vigorously support classic high seas interests across the board. It favors a 12 mile territorial sea, free transit through straits, and the minimum possible concessions to coastal state interests in fisheries beyond 12 miles. It can be expected to regard the U.S. seabeds as far too international and too specifically geared to insure Western domination of the area.

7. Western Europe, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan

All these states agree on support for a maximum limit of 12 miles for the territorial sea.

A. Straits

Denmark, Italy, Spain, Greece, Japan, and probably Canada oppose our straits proposal. The rest of the group can be expected to support it, some very vigorously.

B. Fisheries

Iceland, Canada, and Australia are interested in broad coastal states rights for fisheries. France is willing to concede such rights. Japan is interested in the narrowest possible rights for coastal states because of the vital role distant-water fishing plays in supplying protein to the Japanese people.

The U.K., the FRG, and other continental countries can be expected to oppose a U.S. move to broaden coastal state rights beyond our current approach.

C. Seabeds

Our seabeds proposal has support from the U.K. and some continental Western European countries. Canada and Norway prefer broader limits on national jurisdiction. France supports broad coastal state jurisdiction over the seabeds—probably to 200 miles—and a weak international regime and machinery for the area beyond. France is more willing to yield to Latin American pressure for broad limits than to Afro-Asian pressure for a strong regime and machinery.

8. Latin America

In preparatory negotiations thus far, the group has been highly disciplined and dominated by the nine 200-mile states. Mexico and Venezuela support a 12-mile territorial sea, but broad coastal state rights over seabed resources and fisheries. Among the 200-mile states, Chile also tells us privately that it could support a 12-mile territorial sea coupled with a 200-mile exclusive resource (or if forced to, a trusteeship) zone.

Brazil, Ecuador, and Peru support a 200-mile territorial sea, with a possibility of flexibility in Peru’s or Ecuador’s position on navigation and overflight if its symbolic “sovereignty” over a 200- mile zone is confirmed. Chile (were it willing to take an active position different from that of Peru and Ecuador) could probably muster the support of the other 200-milers for its more “moderate” position if it is willing to break with Peru and Ecuador, its Andean Group partners. Argentina desires jurisdiction over its extremely broad continental margin even beyond 200 miles.

Because of their fears of interference with navigation and overflight by their northern neighbors, Chile and Argentina might be willing to move quite far (provided the symbolic figure of 200 miles is used) toward a compromise with the U.S., and could conceivably carry the entire Latin American group except Brazil, Peru, and perhaps Ecuador. The 200-mile states are currently supporting a very extreme international regime for the seabeds beyond 200 miles, not out of conviction, but as a tactic to radicalize the demands of the Afro-Asians beyond the point where the U.S. would be able to come to terms with them. However, the Latin Americans—while maintaining a leadership role—have been unable to get solid developing country support for their procedural maneuvers since the U.S. presented its seabeds proposal.

9. Asia

There is general support for a 12-mile territorial sea.

Most Asian nations are impressed by our seabeds proposal and appear at least prepared to negotiate on its basis.

In addition to the particular straits situation with respect to Indonesia, the Philippines, and Japan referred to earlier, some states such as India, Ceylon, and Pakistan have ideological difficulties with supporting the free movement of warships.

The PRC, in its propaganda, supports the 200-mile claim of Latin American countries but has been quite careful in not asserting the 200-mile claim for itself.

10. Africa

The UAR is likely to support a 12-mile territorial sea and moderate coastal state fishing rights. Its position on straits will be determined by its decisions regarding the Strait of Tiran and its reaction to Soviet pressure to support free transit through straits.

Sub-Saharan Africa frequently in league with Trinidad, Jamaica, Guyana, and Barbados has an ideological approach to the Law of the Sea which is the antithesis of the Soviet position.

It is black Africa that most desires a strong international regime for the seabeds, and most demands more equitable treatment for developing country interests. There is also widespread support for extensive coastal state rights over fisheries.

IX. ISSUES AND OPTIONS

The paper offers five general options which could be pursued separately or in combination. It then offers sub-options for substantive initiatives. Only Options 1 and 5 are mutually exclusive. The options are:

Option 1: Hold firm at this summer’s session to our position as already stated and indicate that we will make no important new proposals or changes in our position unless other countries indicate a willingness to support positions that are important to us.

Pro: New substantive proposals by the U.S. could involve the risk of complicating and possibly delaying the Conference by causing other countries to delay serious negotiations until they are convinced the U.S. has revealed as much of its position as it will before negotiations begin.

Con: This option risks encouraging further unilateral claims by failing to convince coastal developing countries that they can achieve protection of their resource interests through multilateral negotiation. The hard line Latin Americans can be expected to exploit the situation in their efforts to halt progress towards a Law of the Sea and to encourage unilateral claims.

Option 2: Exercise our rights of navigation and overflight by military units on the high seas, including international straits wider than six miles, in accordance with freedom of the seas.

[This option was included at Defense insistence. In working level interagency consultations, we stressed that while this was clearly an option available to us, we could not visualize its application except on a case-by-case basis. We, therefore, suggested illustrative examples for consideration. They are discussed below.

[2 pages not declassified]

Option 3: Exert positive and negative pressure by Executive Branch action bilaterally on countries that make or may make claims that are contrary to our interests.

Examples of the type of pressure that would be employed are the extension or withholding of trade and tariff preferences, the granting or cessation of military sales and aid loans and the reversal of a decision to offer to supply a country such as Brazil with naval vessels that could be used to patrol her 200-mile zone.

Pros: This would cause affected countries to moderate their position and seek accommodation in earnest at LOS negotiations.

Cons: Pressures of these kinds could harden LOS attitudes and could have adverse effects on our bilateral relations. Other U.S. interests (investments, etc.) could be adversely affected in some countries. A uniform policy of pressure might not work in all cases; a selective policy would open us to charges of discrimination.

[Application of such pressures is not unthinkable and at some point might be a useful negotiating lever. We do not, however, believe such tactics should be considered now. We must first appraise the substantive flexibility in our LOS position and decide what, if any, substantive initiatives we wish to take. To decide on the use of pressure tactics before we have decided and refined our LOS negotiating strategy is putting the cart before the horse.]

Option 4: Undertake a high level diplomatic offensive to demonstrate to other governments the importance to the United States of the President’s Oceans Policy.

[This is essentially a tactical and non-controversial option.]

Option 5: Take new substantive initiatives at this summer’s meeting of the LOS Preparatory Conference calculated to appeal to the developing countries and the developed countries that seek greater coastal state jurisdiction, either by making proposals ourselves or actively seeking to persuade someone else to make such proposals.

[This is the guts of this exercise. The substantive options are summarized and discussed below.]

Substantive Proposal Option 1: Propose a 200-mile limit for the seabeds trusteeship zone

Our draft treaty now defines the outer limit of the seabed trusteeship zone by a complex geological formula whereby a line is drawn at that point beyond the continental slope where the downward inclination of the surface of the seabed declines to an as yet unspecified gradient. This proposed change would not appreciably affect the net extent of U.S. jurisdiction with respect to area and resources off U.S. coasts.

Pro: A 200-mile limit for the seabeds trusteeship zone would be a strong psychological signal of U.S. willingness to accommodate other interests. The formula is less complex than our present proposal, and therefore a more appealing basis for negotiation. Developing countries, including moderate Latin Americans, would see that we are not engaged in rigid, symbolic opposition to the 200-mile figure per se. What concerns us is rights with respect to various oceans activities within that limit.

Con: Such a move by the U.S. might be interpreted as the first move toward broader rights out to 200 miles on the seabed or in the waters. Extreme Latin American states would probably urge this interpretation and counsel inflexibility.

Substantive Proposal Option 2: Fisheries

There are three fisheries options. The first is intended to be used with a standfast position. The other two would involve the introduction of new substantive proposals containing major concessions to coastal states’ fisheries control.

Fisheries Option 1: This option would refine our current fisheries proposal to eliminate certain cumbersome restrictions on coastal states’ preferential rights over fisheries stocks adjacent to coastal areas. Coastal state preference would be based on the amount of fish it can utilize rather than on the criteria of economic need and degree of investment in the coastal fishing industry now included in our fisheries proposal. The option would, however, continue explicit protection for distant water fisheries, i.e., the provision that the coastal state reservation may not include the percentage of stock historically taken by distant-water fishermen.

Pro: This would be the most expected next move from the U.S. by coastal states. We would retain maximum flexibility for moving to Fisheries Option 2 or 3. If combined with a move to a 200-mile seabed limit, it might provide sufficient political and psychological momentum towards fruitful LOS negotiations.

Con: Coastal states would probably not regard this as enough. They may view it as taking insufficient account of their views and opt for unilateral extension of jurisdiction as a result. It would probably not be a sufficient step to drive a wedge between the hard line and moderate Latin Americans.

Fisheries Option 2: Revise our present proposal to grant greater economic preferences for the coastal state and give the coastal state control for management (e.g., conservation control) purposes of stocks in adjacent waters. Exercise of management control would be limited geographically by the distribution of the stocks rather than by arbitrary outer limits. In reserving fisheries for their own use, coastal states would have to take into account historic distant-water fisheries. This language with respect to historic fisheries is purposely vague and imprecise. The idea, however, would be to safeguard, existing distant-water fishing interests as much as possible within the framework of coastal state preferences. Coastal states would have no preference over migratory stocks (tuna, herring, mackerel, and some others).

Pro: This option is tailored to fit the problem based on biological and technical complexities rather than artificial geographic boundaries. It is responsive to developing countries’ desire for control over coastal fish stocks and accommodates U.S. fishing interests except distant-water shrimp operations. Since it does not involve a specific mileage limit, it provides a less obvious basis for extension of coastal state jurisdiction.

Con: Distant-water fishing states, particularly the USSR and Japan, would object because too much preference would be given to the coastal state. Some coastal states would object because it doesn’t give them total jurisdiction over the high seas migratory species which they want. The proposal is too complex to gain acceptance among many developing countries. This proposal could lead to demand for exclusive coastal state jurisdiction over fisheries.

Fisheries Option 3: Establish a 200-mile trusteeship zone in which control would be exercised through regional and international organizations in which coastal states and distant-water states participate. The emphasis would be on regional rather than central organization, and the coastal state would have preferences and allocation roughly similar to Option 2. Special arrangements would be made for migratory species. Coastal states would have authority to exercise conservation unilaterally in the absence of regional organizations and would license fishing in the trusteeship zone.

Pro: A successful conference will necessarily give coastal states very substantial fishing rights to a great distance from the shore. By eliminating the symbolic fight over 200 miles, we can better encourage negotiation on the real substantive issue, which is a balance of coastal and international rights between 12 and 200 miles. The trusteeship concept is specifically designed to avert pressure for exclusive jurisdiction and, unless we move soon, it will be far more difficult to negotiate restraints on coastal states’ rights.

Con: Such a zone would be arbitrary and bears no relationship to characteristics of fish. It would represent a significant change in direction on our part and would antagonize conservative fishing states - e.g., Japan, the USSR, and the U.K. Using the 200-mile figure in connection with uses of the waters at this early stage of the negotiation creates too great a risk of creeping jurisdiction.

Fisheries Option 4: In the event Fisheries Option 2 or 3 is adopted, provide absolute protection for traditional distant-water fisheries subject to reasonable license fees.

[This option is designed to achieve what may be impossible—e.g., to retrieve for the distant-water fishing states what they might lose under Option 2 or 3. Its purpose would be to assuage Japan, the U.K., and the USSR, who have the most to lose in expanding coastal states fishing rights, and to retain their interest in negotiating a multilateral law of the sea. Developing coastal states’ opposition to protection for distant water fishing would, according to the rationale of this option, be mollified by the provision for reasonable license fees.

The problem with the option as phrased is that absolute guarantees would likely be a red flag for many developing coastal countries even if the sweetener of license fees is thrown in. We do not think this option should be so rigidly phrased. It may be more appropriate to talk of reasonable safeguards for existing distant-water fisheries subject to reasonable licensing arrangement. By presenting the problem in this fashion we would be signalling our willingness to respect historic distant-water fisheries off our own coast—which is important to countries like the USSR and Japan—and we would expect other coastal states to do the same.

Discussions with DOD officials who are interested in this option subsequent to the submission of the NSSM response indicate that, they might be prepared to go along with the modified language outlined above.]

Substantive Proposal Option 3: Straits

This section simply states we will maintain our present position on straits. It does not, therefore, involve any policy decision.

Substantive Proposal Option 4: A comprehensive approach to ocean resources by adopting Seabeds Option 1 and Fisheries Option 3 simultaneously, both containing a 200-mile trusteeship zone

State favors this option—and it is clearly one of the serious choices before us, the other being selection of the seabeds option and Fisheries Option 1 or 2.

Pro: This proposal should capture the imagination of other countries, disarm the Latin Americans, and would lead to an agreement that protects our vital security interests because coastal states would be offered means to satisfy their interest in resources off their coast without resorting to unilateral assertions of territorial jurisdiction.

Con: The cons separately advanced previously for these options would apply. In essence, the argument against is that it would be too much too soon. It could lead other states to conclude we were prepared to conclude agreements containing wide coastal state jurisdictional limits on other issues before the Committee—e.g., pollution and scientific research; and it would be a dramatic step without yet having a true appreciation of the extent of international support for our present U.S. seabed trusteeship proposal.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-055, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125) 7/12/71 [1 of 2]. Top Secret. A draft dated June 22, 1971 is ibid., Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume III, 1971. The summary was prepared to provide information for an upcoming SRG meeting on the topic (see Document 403). The summary drew upon a lengthy study, dated June 26, submitted to Kissinger in his capacity as Chairman of the NSC SRG by Stevenson in his capacity as Chairman of the Interdepartmental Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Group to Prepare a NSSM 125 Study (ibid.)

401. Memorandum From John Hedley of the Office of the Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency to Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff 401. Memorandum From John Hedley of the Office of the Deputy Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency to Jeanne Davis of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, June 29, 1971.

SUBJECT:

NSSM 125, “U.S. Oceans Policy”

REFERENCE: NSC Memorandum of 29 June 1971

1. The Central Intelligence Agency has reviewed the study on U.S. Oceans Policy prepared by an Inter-departmental Ad Hoc Group in response to NSSM 125. We have no problems with it from an intelligence standpoint, and consider it a valuable and useful study.

2. We agree that the need for strategic mobility requires maximum freedom for navigation in the foreseeable future, as discussed on pages 9 and 10. We suggest, however, that thought also be given to the more distant future when new weapons systems might to some degree alter the strategic needs for use of the oceans. For example, an Underwater Long Range Missile System would enable U.S. nuclear submarines to deploy in mid-ocean areas, thus negating some of the need for U.S. forces to operate in foreign coastal waters.

3. Part IV, Issues and Options—beginning on page 41 of the study—presents the most practical alternatives available to the U.S. at this time. The pros and cons with respect to the general options are fairly stated. The CIA wishes to make no comment on Options Nos. 1, 4, and 5, which concern diplomatic tactics for the U.S. negotiating position at the forthcoming July─August session of the UN Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee.

4. We consider it advisable to have additional interagency, and perhaps Presidential, review of the more venturesome Options: No. 2 on the exercise of U.S. rights, and No. 3 on the application of bilateral pressures on countries making contrary claims. In general, such measures involve a strong risk of being counterproductive. In Latin America, where feelings run high over the question of sea sovereignty and related nationalistic issues, any moves which could be interpreted as pressure in this field will tend to reinforce Latin solidarity on all Law of the Sea issues and thwart U.S. attempts to woo away the more moderate states. In the case of Peru, where specific consideration is being given to the resumption of routine U.S. military overflights of the claimed 200 mile territorial sea, a hardening of Peru’s Law of the Sea position could result.

John H. Hedley
Special Assistant for NSC Affairs
O/DDI

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-55, SRG Meeting, Oceans Policy (NSSM 125), 7/12/71 [1 of 2]. Top Secret. John H. Hedley was a member of the Office of the Deputy Director for Intelligence.

402. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 402. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, July 6, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Brazilian Territorial Sea Claims and Related Fisheries Problems

We have received separate memos from Secretary of State Rogers and Deputy Secretary of Defense Packard taking opposing views on our fisheries dispute with Brazil (Tabs A and B). The issue is whether we should enter into immediate negotiations with the Brazilians or whether we should negotiate only in the fall following completion of the Geneva Law of the Sea Preparatory Negotiations which begin on July 19. In raising this issue, Secretary Rogers reopens a question decided by NSDM 111 (Tab C) which determined that we should negotiate with Brazil only in the fall.

Secretary Rogers strongly favors immediate negotiations on grounds that: -American fishermen off Brazil are being subjected to harassment by Brazilian Naval and Air Forces and, though serious incidents have not thus far occurred, such incidents are possible.

-The adverse reaction in Congress has already imperiled the International Coffee Agreement (which affects 61 countries besides Brazil), and may lead to other attempts by the Congress to bring pressure to bear on Brazil by means of sanctions.

-Some countries (including France) have already begun negotiations with Brazil or are about to do so.

Secretary Rogers believes our first objective should be to try to obtain necessary assurances that Brazil will exercise the restraint necessary to avoid confrontation. He sees two options: -That we begin immediate negotiations contingent on Brazilian commitment that restraint will be exercised while negotiations are in process.

-That we enter into immediate negotiations even in the absence of a commitment to restraint with the understanding that negotiations will be broken off if a serious incident occurs.

In either case, our initial discussions would be merely exploratory. Secretary Rogers favors the second option. The Department of Commerce shares his position.

The Department of Defense argues strongly against immediate negotiations on the grounds that: -Brazil has not asked for immediate negotiations and did not demur when we offered negotiations in the fall.

-We have not yet taken soundings with other nations affected by Brazil’s regulations as required by NSDM 111. (It is not clear why these soundings have not been taken since NSDM 111 was issued May 29, 1971).

-We do not have a negotiating position yet.

-Brazil may interpret an offer of immediate negotiations, coming unsolicited and on the heels of a Presidential Mission and an offer to negotiate in the fall, as a sign of weakness on our part.

-It is unlikely that Brazil will seek a confrontation before the UN Law of the Sea Preparatory Conference on July 19.

-Thus far Brazil has been able to pursue its oceans policy without serious consideration to its effects for its other interests and there may be some value in allowing Brazil to contemplate this dilemma for several months.

-There is a fissure in the facade of the 200-mile club in the form of Ecuador’s willingness to consider a revision of its basic position on Law of the Sea. Exploitation of this fissure is more promising than immediate negotiations with Brazil.

The difference between State and DOD’s positions arises from the fact that they are addressing different goals. State is concerned primarily about the possibility that our bilateral relationship with Brazil will be seriously and adversely affected over the next several months if we do not enter into negotiations now. DOD is primarily interested in maintaining the viability of our overall oceans policy.

The problem with the State proposal is that there is no reason to believe that it will achieve the objectives State is principally concerned about. The Brazilians have told us that they intend to treat fishing vessels from countries which negotiate no differently than they treat fishing vessels from countries which do not negotiate. Brazil might agree not to seize fishing vessels as part of a substantive agreement on fisheries, but as Secretary Rogers’ memo concedes, we have not yet determined our own position and hence could not reach a substantive agreement. It is difficult to see, therefore, how an offer to enter into exploratory negotiations now would either reduce the risk of incidents occurring or result in any more assurances from the GOB which would give the Congress a basis for shaking loose the International Coffee Agreement.

I recommend, therefore, that we continue to take no initiative to enter into negotiations with Brazil (beyond our already-expressed willingness to talk this fall) until (a) we have completed our review of NSSM 125, which should lead to the establishment of a multilateral fisheries position which would provide a viable basis for bilateral negotiations in the fall, and (b) we have tried out our multilateral approach in the UN Preparatory Conference on Law of the Sea in Geneva later this month. In any event, Secretary Rogers’ proposal should be discussed more appropriately at the end of the Senior Review Group Meeting on NSSM 125, which is scheduled for July 14 in San Clemente.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you defer action on Secretary Rogers’ recommendation to offer immediate negotiations with Brazil for a fisheries agreement pending SRG review of NSSM 125 (U.S. Ocean Policy).

Approve [Signed RN]

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-183, NSSM Files, NSSM 125 [3 of 3]. Secret. A stamped notation reads: The President has seen."

403. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting 403. Minutes of Senior Review Group Meeting1

Washington, July 12, 1971, 4:30-6:45 p.m.

Subject:

Oceans Policy

Participation:

Chairman: Mr. John N. Irwin, State

State:

Mr. John R. Stevenson

Mr. Donald McKernan

Defense:

Mr. David Packard

Mr. John W. Warner

Mr. Jared Carter

Mr. Leigh Retiner

JCS:

Adm. Thomas H. Moorer

Capt. James S. Brunson

NSC Staff:

Col. Richard T. Kennedy

Mr. Melvin H. Levine

Mr. ARNOLD NACHMANOFF

Mr. John Negroponte

Mr. Denis A. Clift

Adm. Robert O. Welander

Mr. Marshall Wright

Mr. Mark Wandler

CIA.:

Mr. Richard Helms

[name not declassified]

Commerce:

Mr. James T. Lynn

Mr. Howard Pollock

Interior:

Dr. William T. Pecora

Transp:

Rear Adm. Roderick Y. Edwards

Capt. G. H. Patrick Bursley

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

It was agreed that: -At the prepatory conference of the Law of the Sea in Geneva, the U.S. should firmly maintain its position on territorial seas and international straits.

-Agencies agreed to comment on the State Department/DOD draft instructions to the delegation at the Geneva conference. Mr. Stevenson would coordinate responses.

Mr. Irwin: Today we are going to review NSSM 125. I think we should talk about our oceans policy and not get to the problems we have with Brazil, Ecuador. and Peru. The memos from the interested agencies say that we should wait until we finish the NSSM 125 Study before we take up those problems. If anybody wants to raise these issues at the end of the meeting, however, he could do so. (to Col. Kennedy) Do you agree this is the way we should run the meeting?

Col. Kennedy: Yes.

Mr. Irwin: I think it would be a good idea if Jack Stevenson starts out by giving us some background on the Law of the Sea Conference. Then he could move into the various options on fisheries and seabeds. (to Stevenson) Jack, why don’t you go ahead.

Mr. Stevenson: Briefly, let me say that the reason we’re here is that we’re facing the greatest Law of the Seas crisis in three and a half centuries. Nine Latin American countries and one African country have already claimed continental shelf rights for 200 miles. Five other African countries have claims beyond 12 miles. Canada claims a 100-mile pollution zone, and this involves controls on navigation.

Certain Latin American countries have been actively soliciting support for their 200-mile claims. There is some evidence that they have been successful. If 200 miles is accepted, our geographers say that 25 percent of the oceans will cease to be high seas—and this includes all straits. According to the Soviet geographers, 50 percent of the oceans will cease to be high seas. This would mean that non-coastal States would have only the right of innocent passage left. And this, in turn, would mean no right for submarines to navigate submerged, and no right for aerial overflight. Surface transit would be subjected to control. In addition, there would be [less than 1 line not declassified] no right to exploit oil or other resources without coastal-State consent, no right to fish and no right to conduct research. In the light of all of this, the General Assembly, with U.S. encouragement, called a general conference on the Law of the Sea for 1973.

This development is a break with three and a half centuries, when freedom of the sea prevailed. During this time, no State established sovereignty on the oceans. This was a stable principle. The only disputes before World War II were between States who claimed three-mile territorial seas and those who claimed 12 miles. All States agreed, however, that the high sea began beyond the 12 miles point.

The situation is different today, largely as a result of our technical capability to use the oceans. We have developed off-shore sources of petroleum and minerals. We have developed supertankers and mechanized fishing ships and new methods of research. In fact, we now have the capability of destroying the ocean by pollution or over-fishing.

There’s also the matter of unilateral claims, the counterpart of technical development. In the absence of an international means of handling law of the sea problems, the coastal States feel that they have a right to take unilateral steps. In addition, there is economic nationalism and the distrust the developing countries have of a law of the sea which was designed, they feel, to protect colonial powers.

Let me give you a brief run-down of the present U.S. law of the sea proposals, as outlined in NSDM 62 and the President’s statement of May 23, 1970.

-In regard to territorial seas and straits, we proposed agreement on a maximum limit of 12 miles for the territorial seas. We proposed a new right of free transit through international straits as a condition to our agreement to a 12-mile territorial sea.

-In regard to fisheries, we proposed accommodating the coastal States by giving them preferences in fishing beyond the 12-mile territorial sea. We circulated draft articles on fisheries to other nations.

-In regard to seabeds, we proposed a seaward boundary for the continental shelf where the high seas reach a depth of 200 meters. Beyond the 200-meter depth, an international regime, administered as a trusteeship zone by the coastal State would license exploration and exploitation of seabed resources out to the remainder of the continental margin. Beyond this trusteeship zone, the resources would be governed by a new international authority.

That is the basic summary of where we are at the moment.

Mr. Irwin: Does anyone have any questions or comments? (to Mr. Stevenson) Jack, can quickly summarize the options for us, I think it would be more pertinent to go right to the fisheries and seabeds options.

Col. Kennedy: (to Mr. Stevenson) Before we go to the options, can you give us a feel about what happened to the proposal?

Mr. Stevenson: The proposal for a 12-mile territorial sea has general support, in numerical terms, at least. Over 90 countries support it. Most of the countries which in the past have supported a territorial sea of less than 12 miles are ready to move to 12 miles. On fisheries, we haven’t yet surfaced our detailed proposal. There seems to be general agreement, though, that we have to do something beyond 12 miles for the coastal countries.

Mr. Irwin: Have we circulated the text of this proposal?

Mr. Stevenson: Yes, but it didn’t surface at the General Assembly meeting last March. It would give the coastal States more preferences in waters beyond 12 miles. These preferences would be dependent on two factors (1) local fishing in small boats and (2) coastal State investment. The proposal provides complete protection for distant-water fishing States.

We have been criticized, however, for not going far enough. Several of the developing countries say that the proposal would condemn them to a “canoe-type” fishing industry. The U.K., the Soviet Union and Japan will be reluctant to support this proposal.

On seabeds, we submitted a detailed draft treaty. The U.K. has publicly endorsed the concept. A number of NATO allies, after they are given a presentation of the defense aspects of the draft treaty, will be sympathetic. The treaty will, of course, be attacked by the 200- milers, This is a compromise, and it’s difficult to know when it will attract support. We’re just beginning to reach the multi-lateral stage.

Mr. Irwin: What about the status of the straits article?

Mr. Stevenson: The straits article involves a limited number of States. The States bordering the Straits of Magellan in southern Latin America are committed to the principle of free transit through the straits. Worldwide there aren’t too many States bordering on straits. We’re engaged with bi-lateral negotiations with these countries. There is, of course, a general reluctance to give up control and move to free transit.

On pollution, Spain, for example, is very concerned, and she seized upon the straits as a way of getting control of this problem. In short, we have a long way to go on the straits article. Other countries want to keep it as a bargaining lever. The clear course for us to follow seems to be to continue with bi-lateral negotiations while adhering to multi-lateral negotiations.

Mr. Irwin: Are there any questions? Can we move now to the options?

Mr. Stevenson: In talking this over with the Under Secretary, and in light of the Agency responses, we feel that general option 1 (stand fast position) and general option 5 (substantive initiatives) don’t help us very much in deciding what we should do this summer. We thought it would be more practical to go to the individual options.

The first is the territorial sea and straits option. There is inter-agency agreement for support of a 12-mile territorial sea and free transit through international straits, as set forth by the President. At Geneva we would make clear our support for this proposal.

On seabeds we should agree to support our trusteeship proposal, particularly in its essential parts. We could, however, consider changes proposed by other countries and various domestic industries. The only substantive option available to us is to propose that we move from a geological definition of the outer boundary to a 200-mile barrier. There would be two reasons for doing this. The first is that it would help the seabed proposal because the complexities of the present formulation make it difficult to explain and sell the proposal. The second is that it would seem to avoid discriminating against countries with narrow continental margins. A 200-mile limit would not be significantly different in its overall effect on U.S. seabed interests than our current continental margin definition of the zone. Such a move would in fact, indicate the willingness of the U.S. to accommodate the interests of other States.

The argument against proposing a 200-mile limit for the seabed trusteeship zone is the fear that such a move would lead to a 200-mile fishing zone and ultimately to a 200-mile zone for all purposes. In addition, some maritime countries, the Soviet Union, for example, will be against such a proposal. We don’t think it would be a good negotiating tactic to propose a 200-mile seabed limit during this summer’s session.

Mr. Irwin: What about if we start out by holding firm and then, depending on the negotiations, move to a trusteeship zone—possibly one with a 200-mile outer barrier.

Mr. Stevenson: This came up in our discussions with DOD. It might be a compromise we could make if three of the four agencies on the delegations thought it would be useful to support a boundary in miles. We could authorize the delegation to do so. I think that Commerce opposes this proposal.

Mr. Lynn: I have a couple of points I would like to make. For one thing, a 200-mile trusteeship zone would unnecessarily complicate the management of the seabed resources. Any given resource could be partly within and partly outside the zone.

As a substantive matter, a 200-mile trusteeship zone would not really give most countries with broad continental shelves any more than they would get with 200 meter depth as the outer boundary of the zone. On the contrary, a 200-mile zone would very likely raise the expectations of some countries. These countries could then set up other 200-mile goals.

As an ultimate result, a 200-mile limit for the seabeds trusteeship zone isn’t a bad thing. As a negotiating strategy now, however, it’s a “scary thing.” I also wonder if it really gets us anywhere. We feel that most of the coastal States are more concerned with fish than seabeds. A strong change in our fishing proposal would make more of an impression on these States’ than our support of the 200-mile limit for the seabed trusteeship zone.

Mr. Irwin: What is Interior’s view?

Dr. Pecora: In general, we endorse what Jack (Stevenson) said. It’s more precise, if that really means anything, to go with the 200-mile limit. Will we introduce the proposal to go to a 200-mile limit for the seabeds trusteeship zone? That point has to be taken into consideration. In general, I think that the position of distance from the shore is the primary issue.

Mr. Irwin: What is your position?

Dr. Pecora: We can hold the wider position (200-mile limit) Peru and Chile would gain by going out to 200 miles.

Mr. Irwin: You think it’s clearer to say 200 miles.

Dr. Pecora: If precision is our goal, we should say 200 miles.

Mr. Irwin: Do you have any comment on Commerce’s views?

Dr. Pecora: No. We agree with the fall-back position of State. We also think we should be prepared for a second fall-back position. The concept of “creeping jurisdiction” is what bothers us most about going to 200-miles. This is the potential danger. Our position is that we should keep the two issues of seabeds and fisheries separate.

Mr. Lynn : The more viable way of keeping our momentum is by strengthening our fishing proposal.

Dr. Pecora: We have no sharp feeling on that.

Mr. Packard: The most important issue that we have to constantly keep in mind is the 12-mile territorial sea and the freedom of transit through international straits. We recognize the great difficulty of defining the outer boundary of the seabeds trusteeship zone. It’s desirable to have an easily defined limit of 200 miles, but with everyone focused on 200 miles it will be difficult to get off it.

We think it’s unwise to move in with a new proposal (200-mile outer limit) now. This should be studied more. One approach we can use is to give the negotiating team authority to discuss the issue if it comes up. The team will of course be required to come back to Washington for further instructions. We think it would be difficult to ask the delegation to start the negotiations by proposing the 200 mile limit and then come back to us for instructions.

We’re willing to rely on the negotiating team, with a majority vote of three out of the four agencies. Our interests (DOD’s) are no different from the other agencies’. During the first couple of weeks of the session, the delegation could get the views of other nations on a 200-mile limit for the seabeds zone. If they decided that they should table a 200-mile proposal—or any other proposal, for that matter—they would come back to us so that we could give them more specific guidance.

We think it’s very important to discuss the original proposal at the meeting. We could use the 200-mile proposal to make progress to what we ultimately want to achieve. It’s important to establish the principle of the trusteeship zone.

Mr. Lynn: This is what we would propose to do (introduce trustee ship concept) with the fisheries option 2. It’s the only sound option from the point of view of management of stock. Our people want to start with the trusteeship zone concept. We are sensitive to your problem (the 200-mile limit), and that’s the reason we put in option 2—to get away from the mileage problem. We have the scientific basis for staying away from this problem.

Mr. Packard: That’s possible. We feel we should stay with the original proposal and not move far away from it.

Mr. Lynn: Getting the feel of the situation during the first couple of weeks of the meeting isn’t a bad idea. We want to leave open which proposal we will go with. It also seems to me that we have to realize most of the noise will be for a fishing proposal. At this point, I think we should aim for a trusteeship zone on fish before seabeds.

Mr. Packard: We want to keep focused on the main issue. We have faith in the delegation, and we know that it won’t get carried away. There’s pretty good balance on the delegation. We’re willing to give it our confidence. The question is how do we get to where we want to be. In doing so, we must be careful not to give away any details.

Mr. Irwin: (to Adm. Moorer) How do you feel about this, Tom?

Adm. Moorer: We have no significant disagreement with what’s been expressed so far. We think it’s’ important to test the water initially and to see what the general attitude will be. Our number one objective is to maintain the freedom of the seas—on and over. Whether to go for 200 miles or 100 miles or for a fishing agreement first or for a trusteeship zone first will become apparent once we find out what the general attitudes are.

Mr. Lynn: What is the agenda at the meeting?

Mr. Irwin: Before we get to that, let me ask Transportation for its views.

Adm. Edwards: We are in general agreement with the assessment presented by Mr. Stevenson. We have rejected option 1, but we feel that we have to come up with something this summer. There’s no reason to think that what has been presented so far will be accepted at Geneva. We feel the delegation should be authorized to take positive action.

Mr. Irwin: The consensus of this meeting, as I see it, is that the delegation should give it the good old college try on our first position. The delegation should try to keep this position—with no mileage factor. However, if the delegation decides by consensus that it should table a mileage proposal, it should have the general authorization to do so. But they would have to come back here saying, “‘this is what we plan to do and why.” We would then react and give the delegation guidance. This would give flexibility ahead of time to the team, subject to our veto.

Mr. Packard: That’s right. The team would have the flexibility it needs.

Mr. Irwin: There’s another variation. The delegation could be instructed not to table any proposal until it came back here for specific guidance.

Col.. Kennedy: In the first case (tabling the 200-mile proposal at the start of the negotiations), we would be asking the President to revise his earlier position, the one he took last May. In the second and third cases (giving the delegation some flexabilty), we would not have to put that issue before the President right now. That would depend on what the delegation suggests.

Mr.. Packard: (to Col. Kennedy) It would depend on how you handle it.

Col. Kennedy: Speaking as the Devil’s Advocate, let me ask what would happen if we come forward with a mileage proposal early on in the negotiations—that is, if we move from the President’s position. Wouldn’t we be opening ourselves up to real problems with nations that support mileage proposals. Will we have lost the ball game we’re trying to save?

Mr. Packard: We might not want to come forward with such a proposal. That’s why I feel we should take time initially to find out where we stand.

Mr. Lynn: Substantially, the 200-mile limit does not offer much to any country. Why do we believe this will get us off dead center? Why do we feel this way?

Mr. Stevenson: This has been favorably discussed very much in the African and Asian Consultative Committee for Seabeds. I think it’s also appealing because it is precise and because it avoids discrimination against countries that don’t have wide continental shelves—for example, Chile, Ecuador and Peru. On the face of it, equal mileage for everyone is appealing. This seems to be a political fact of life that we have to live with. Realistically, the U.S. should not make a 200-mile proposal, but we should indicate that we are willing to consider it. We want countries to focus on a mix of rights. Some countries won’t even listen to us unless they hear a mileage factor. The only way we can get a hearing for the trusteeship zone concept is to talk mileage—and have alternatives.

Still another important factor is the attitude of the U.K. The U.K. is now, so to speak, in bed with us on seabeds.

Mr. Irwin: (to Mr. Stevenson) Jack, do you want to go on to the fisheries-options?

Mr. Stevenson: I think we all had some difficulty in separating out the elements of each proposal. Let me, therefore, go through them, one by one.

The first option eliminates the two most criticized features of the proposal we informally circulated. These two particular features are, as you recall, (1) small boats and (2) investment. Instead, the coastal States would now have a preference based on the amount of fish it can utilize rather than on the demonstration of economic need or investment. This option also provides explicit protection for traditional distant-water fisheries. There would be special non-discriminatory regulations for migratory high seas stocks and emphasis on regional and international cooperation.

The PRO arguments for this option are: -- This is probably the most expected “next move” from the U.S. The U.K. and the Soviet Union will not like it, but they could accept it.

-- This would preserve a necessary measure against “creeping jurisdiction.”

The CON arguments for this option are: -- Does not meet coastal State requirements. The coastal States will say that the U.S. is not serious and these States could move to more drastic proposals. This initiative could perhaps be accompanied by a statement saying that coastal States and distant-water fishing States should negotiate directly. We should also make clear that we would consider proposals made by other nations.

The second fisheries option is basically the Commerce proposal. This option would revise our existing proposal to provide for greater economic preferences for the coastal States and would give the coastal State control for management purposes of stocks in adjacent waters. Exercise of management control would be limited geographically by the distribution of the stocks rather than by arbitrary outer limits. There would be no absolute protection for distant-water fisheries, as in option 1, but rather the coastal States would have to take into account the distant-water fisheries. The coastal State would have to provide compensation if it decided to terminate distant-water fisheries.

The PRO arguments for this option are: -- The experts feel it would provide a rational, scientific program.

-- It would be a logical further step for the U.S. to propose.

-- It is responsive to the developing countries.

-- It protects U.S. coastal and distant-water fisheries, but does not however, protect U.S. distant-water shrimp operations.

The CON arguments for this option are: -- It creates a breech between the U.S., U.K., the Soviet Union and Japan.

-- The lack of an international element could lead the coastal States to press for creeping jurisdiction. The Commerce response suggested that we introduce a trusteeship concept into the option.

There is some indication the coastal States could accept this approach.

The third fisheries option is the 200-mile concept. This would be the establishment of a 200-mile trusteeship zone in which control would be exercised through regional and international organizations in which coastal States would be about the same as in options 2. The emphasis would be on regional organization. Coastal States would have authority to exercise conservation unilaterally in the absence of regional organizations and would license fishing in the trusteeship zone.

The PRO arguments for this option are: -- It protects national security.

-- By eliminating the battle of the 200-mile figure, we can bargain better for a mix of rights.

-- The momentum is so great for 200 miles, that unless the proposal is considered, it will be impossible to head it off.

The CON arguments for this option are: -- It is similar to the 200-mile trusteeship concept for seabeds in that once the 200 mile figure is accepted for resources and fish, it will be difficult to head off 200 miles for all purposes.

No agency says that we should present this proposal at the upcoming session in Geneva.

Basically, we have the three options I just outlined. There is an additional proposal which, in the event fisheries option 2 or 3 is adopted, would provide absolute protection for traditional distant-water fisheries subject to reasonable license fees. This would be an attempt to modify the developing nations. Commerce feels it is a non-option. State and DOD feel that the best thing would be to let the coastal States and the distant-water States negotiate among themselves.

Mr. Lynn: That was an accurate presentation of the options. Option doesn’t satisfy the coastal States or the distant-water States. In order to keep the negotiations going, we think it would be necessary to add a stronger, substantive initiative to this option. Option 2 could cause a breach with the U.K. We must test the water and explore this a little more. We view option 3 With a good deal of apprehension. For example, what does “central international fisheries organization” mean? We would choose between options 1 and 2.

Mr. Irwin: Under these options, would some percentage of the catch to go to distant-water fisheries?

Mr. Lynn: That’s possible.

Adm. Moorer: If the coastal States exercise management control over certain species, how would this be policed? What would happen if there were a dispute?

Mr. Pollock: If the coastal State can utilize the whole stock, it is authorized to do so. In the case of a dispute, how would it be settled?

Mr. Lynn: It would go the UN, under Article 33 of the Charter. We are going out on uncharted waters here, no pun intended, but scientists say this is the right way.

Mr. Irwin: Article 33 is not compulsory.

Mr. Lynn: That’s right.

Mr. Wright: I would like to get back to the subject of policing. How would a coastal State exercise control over a stock without policing—without going on somebody’s boat. This leads to the question of when do you board the boat. You’re right back at the zonal approach.

Mr. Lynn: It might be possible to avoid the problem of boarding boats because the fish can be identified. There are three kinds: coastal stock, high seas stock and anadromous stock.

Adm. Moorer: Let’s just take one example. What would you do about the tuna boats?

Mr. Lynn: That’s a bad example, because the coastal State would have no preference to migratory oceanic stocks such as tuna.

Mr. Pollock: If we take coastal stock as the example, it won’t be necessary to police if the coastal State can utilize the entire stock. If not, the State will have to let other nations fish.

Mr. McKernan: There will be different kinds of boats, too.

Mr. Lynn: Enforcement should be easier with migratory species. With salmon, for example, you should be able to say that this fish is mine. And you can’t catch salmon with tuna gear. The idea of starting out with a trusteeship zone appeals to me.

Mr. Packard: How can you tell if a salmon comes from Canada or Alaska?

Mr. McKernan: The fish could only be taken in coastal waters, not on the high seas.

Mr. Packard: That still doesn’t answer the question. If the salmon is off San Francisco, how do you tell if it came from Canada or Alaska?

Mr. Negroponte: The question on policing is focused on a practical matter, and we shouldn’t get bogged down on it. We have to define what control there would be beyond 12 miles.

Mr. Irwin: (to Adm. Edwards) Do you have any comments to make?

Adm. Edwards: No.

Mr. Packard: I’m still firmly with option 1. I don’t know, perhaps I don’t fully understand option 2.

Mr. Irwin: Col. Kennedy?

Col. Kennedy: What is the likelihood of option 1 flying?

Mr. Lynn: Our people say that option 1 won’t move.

Col. Kennedy: Then where do we go?

Mr. Stevenson: The question is what do you do with the distant-water States. We hope the coastal States and the distant-water States can work out a compromise in the context of the LOS conference. The delegation should be able to discuss further modifications of option 1 as necessary. The option is not that bad. Instead of absolute protection for distant-water States, it could provide some kind of percentage protection. The delegation should also be authorized to discuss the trusteeship concept for the fisheries option.

Col. Kennedy: As I see it, we are heading somewhere between options 1 and 2.

Mr. Lynn: It depends on what rules are in force.

Mr. Irwin: If option 1 will not go, should we refine option 2 rather than option 3?

Mr. Lynn: I think we should start with the trusteeship concept.

Mr. Stevenson: Option 3 has two parts: the trusteeship zone and 200 miles. We could try to link the trusteeship concept with the species control of option 2.

Mr. Irwin: I take it then that the consensus is that we should start with option 1, but that this option can be modified. We should try to avoid the mileage factor.

Mr. Lynn: If we give the delegation authorization to discuss 200 miles on seabeds—subject to our last look—I strongly feel that we need something more on fisheries. We should give the delegation authority to do something on fisheries as well.

Col. Kennedy: On fisheries, aren’t we already there? (the 200-mile zone) We said we would talk to Brazil in the fall. How long can we stand on our position?

Mr. Lynn: That’s right. This is our problem.

Mr. Packard: Our objective is not to have a meeting on fisheries. We must avoid this to the extent we can.

Col. Kennedy: I think we should now take a look at both of these options together.

Mr. Lynn: How much flexibility do we have?

Mr. Packard: We should concentrate on the trusteeship zone concept. If we talk of other things, this will get off the track. We want to establish the trusteeship zone.

Mr. Lynn: Or perhaps abandon it in part, but still come out where we want on security.

Mr. Irwin: If we get a trusteeship zone, it will help lessen the danger of “creeping jurisdiction.” But we have to get it in a convention.

Mr. Lynn: I worry about putting something on the table now, with a year and a half to go.

Mr. Irwin: What is the agenda for the Geneva meeting?

Mr. Stevenson: This won’t be decided until we arrive in Geneva. There are three sub-committees. One of them, dealing with seabeds, starts work early. Another, dealing with fisheries, territorial seas and straits, must decide what subjects to deal with. We must anticipate maneuvering by the Latinos. It’s conceivable that a work group on fisheries could be set up in two or three weeks. Nevertheless, the delegation should have discretion because we can’t be sure about the procedural situation.

We would like to avoid the extreme Latin Americans who don’t want a successful conference. Yet we don’t want to be tied up in procedure too Iong. A fisheries work group would be useful, and we hope one will be set up. We anticipate that one second sub-committee wil be set up early to work on fisheries. We will stick to our position on territorial seas and straits.

Mr. Irwin: (to Mr. Stevenson) Do you think the seabeds will come before fisheries?

Mr. Stevenson: Yes. There’s an agreement among the developing countries to give this precedence.

Mr. Irwin: How does this group feel about transfering the trusteeship zone concept to our fisheries proposal?

Mr. Lynn: Why do we want to do that?

Mr. Irwin: I’m just asking.

Col. Kennedy: Let’s say the subcommittee on seabeds gets to work first and we put forth a vague mileage figure. Then the other subcommittee on fisheries starts. Since we are already discussing a mileage-. trusteeship zone concept on seabeds, are we not also committed to this on fisheries?

Mr. Packard: It does not necessarily follow that we have to keep the trusteeship concept out of the fisheries proposal.

Dr. Pecora: The Commerce proposal also gives us a way out.

Mr. Irwin: On seabeds, as I understand it, we should start with the present option, not yet modified to include mileage. One factor to consider before we do so, however, is the status of the fisheries proposal. On fisheries, should we start out with the trusteeship zone concept?

Mr. Lynn: If we move to a trusteeship concept on fisheries, how much are we moving to option 3 at the expense of option 2. We need to see what happens on the seabeds proposal first. How will these proposals be sequenced?

Col. Kennedy: The Latin American problem is already with us. We are committed to talk about something by the end of the summer with Brazil. If we discuss the seabeds first in Geneva, aren’t we going to be locked in on the fisheries?

Mr. Irwin: That’s the way the conference is organized. We will have to try to shift the focus to fisheries later.

Mr. Stevenson: In meetings last March we attempted to separate the discussions on boundaries and regimes. In Geneva we can try to talk about regimes first and boundaries later. This may happen, but it’s a very uncertain procedure.

Mr. Irwin: What about fisheries and a trusteeship zone?

Mr. Lynn: Fisheries option 1 is weak to begin with. If we super-impose a trusteeship zone concept on it, we make it even weaker. Option 2 appeals to the coastal States. We can start out with a trusteeship concept with this option.

Col. Kennedy: We can talk about the trusteeship concept in a general sense.

Mr. Irwin: In option 1, as I understand it, you still follow the fish around.

Mr. Lynn: Yes, but it’s not as strong as option 2.

Mr. McKernan: The first thing we want is to establish strong preferences for the coastal States. We lose this if we surface the trusteeship zone concept immediately.

Mr. Negroponte: But this is one way of giving preferences to the coastal States.

Mr. McKernan: They want total control.

Mr. Irwin: (to Col. Kennedy) What is the point of view of the NSC? How do you want this written up?

Col. Kennedy: We will do a paper for the President, laying out all the options, just as we have done here. We will also indicate those points on which there is a consensus. Which other positions support our territorial sea and straits proposals? We started out this meeting by saying that our territorial sea and straits positions should remain firm. What proposals that we talked about today support this position?

Mr. Stevenson: On the one hand, we feel that any proposal giving coastal States jurisdiction over fishing beyond 12 miles is a potential threat to freedom of navigation. Yet we have to accommodate the coastal States without hurting ourselves.

Col. Kennedy: What do we give on—fisheries or seabeds?

Mr. Stevenson: We are prepared to give the coastal States effective control on resources. We don’t feel that this will prejudice our security.

Mr. Irwin: We have prepared a draft of instructions to the delegation, and you all have copies of it. Why don’t I read it aloud. (copy attached) (Reads Section 1: Territorial Sea and Straits Proposals) We think there is an element of flexibility in it. Any comments ?

Mr. Lynn: Where is the give in this ? I don’t see any flexibility. It says we will negotiate this.

Mr. Packard: We have to remain firm on this proposal, without any flexibility.

Mr. Lynn: (to Mr. Irwin) But you said this gives us some flexibility.M

Mr. Stevenson: We’re only talking about accommodating objectives.

Mr. Irwin: Let me continue.

(Reads Section 2: Seabeds Proposals)

Mr. Packard: The only trouble I have with this proposal is in the next to last sentence. What do we mean by a mileage alternative to our present formulation. I’d rather we keep it as a trusteeship zone. I think we should stay hard on this.

Mr. Stevenson: We’re talking about an intermediate zone, or some other way of ensuring international elements in the zone. It would call for strong regional means.

Mr. Irwin: I have no particular problems with that.

Mr. Packard: I would like to see us stick to the trusteeship zone concept in the early stages of the negotiations. If you have other ideas, please tell me what they are. I don’t want to give you a blank check on this.

Mr. Irwin: (Reads Section 3: Fisheries)

Mr. Lynn: In what way does our draft of option 2 not comply with the requirements?

Mr. Stevenson: Our requirements state that the coastal State reservation of stock will be subject to third party review. Also, unlike option 1 where there is emphasis on a regional body, our draft gives the coastal State control over stocks and leaves it to the State to decide if it wants regional cooperation.

Mr. Lynn: This is inconsistent with what we did? I’ll have to read the papers again.

Mr. Packard: It seems to me that Page 3 gives the delegation some flexibility. Let’s nail it down, so we don’t get out of the trust concept.

Mr. Irwin: It says the delegation should stress the importance of a trusteeship proposal.

Mr. Packard: I think we should have something in three pages that you can understand.

Mr. Helms: It’s a good paper. You can’t dot all the “i”s and cross all the “t”s before you get to Geneva.

Mr. Lynn: The same principle used for the seabeds proposal could be applied to fisheries, with some safeguards. I think the same logic should apply.

Mr. Packard: The fisheries problem has so many variables, and it’s more complex than seabeds. If we want to deliniate an outer boundary, we will probably end up with 200 miles.

Mr. Irwin: Once we talk about 200 miles in connection with seabeds, we will probably have to do it in connection with fisheries. Even if we don’t talk about it, it is, as Col. Kennedy already mentioned, already there in fisheries.

Mr. Packard: We should wait a while before we get there. These instructions give the delegation enough flexibility to get along, and I wouldn’t object to taking out that last sentence.

Mr. Lynn: I’m glad it’s there. At least it got this issue out on the table.

Mr. Irwin: The delegation will, of course, have to remain in touch with Washington. (to Col. Kennedy) What do we do now?

Col. Kennedy: We’ll do a memo for the President.

Mr. Irwin: Is everyone in agreement with the draft instructions?

Mr. Lynn: I just received the paper, and I would like to reserve judgment until I have had a chance to study it a little more.

Mr. Irwin: Everyone should read the paper and submit his comments. This should be done in the next day or two because Jack (Stevenson) is leaving on Wednesday.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-112, SRG Minutes, Originals, 1971. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the White HOuse Situation Room. For the attached instrucitons to the U.S. delegation to the UN Law of the Sea Preparatory Committee, see Document 405.

404. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 404. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, July 22, 1971.

SUBJECT:

NSSM 125 - U.S. Oceans Policy

Introduction

The review of oceans policy in NSSM 125 has been completed and was discussed at a July 12, meeting of the Senior Review Group chaired by Under Secretary of State Irwin.

This memorandum describes the background which gave rise to a need for the study, the issues and options for your consideration, the various agency views, and my recommended course of action.

Background

Internationally we face a situation in which our interest in freedom of navigation is threatened by a trend toward extensive unilateral territorial sea claims. We have not found it practicable to resist these claims simply by military defense of our customary rights. We hope, instead, to hold the territorial sea line through the achievement of an international agreement on the oceans, hopefully to be nailed down at a Law of the Sea Conference in 1973.

As a result of NSDM 62 and your statement of May 23, 1970, we have proposed the following law of the sea arrangements: -- Territorial Sea—a maximum of 12 miles.

-- Straits—a new right of free transit through international straits to compensate for the fact that the 12-mile territorial sea would bring many key straits (including Gibraltar) under national jurisdiction.

-- Seabeds/Mineral Resources—dividing the ocean floor into three zones: 1. National jurisdiction over the seabeds out to the 200-meter depth line;

2. Beyond this point to the edge of the continental margin the coastal state would, under agreed rules, act as Trustee for the international community;

3. Beyond the continental margin, full control by an international regime.

-- Fisheries—some accommodation of the interests of coastal states in fisheries beyond the territorial sea by giving them carefully defined preferential rights. (We ourselves already claim a 12-mile coastal zone for fisheries. We do not now recognize more extensive claims.)

-- Pollution—international agreement on provisions to prevent pollution caused by seabed exploitation.

-- Scientific Research—maximum freedom for scientific research.

The proposal on territorial seas and international straits is of paramount importance to U.S. security. We have little or no give in regard thereto. Indeed, it was primarily to secure those interests that we got into the whole law of the sea operation. We do, however, have room for maneuver on seabeds, fisheries, pollution, and research issues.

The underlying negotiating problem is that very few countries care much about “freedom of navigation”, but very many want to maximize their claim to fisheries and seabeds resources.

Coastal states are the crucial group for a successful conference. They are numerous,, and they share a clear interest in as much control as they can get over the mineral and fish resources off their coasts. If they believe that this interest can be furthered only by a wide territorial sea, they will—in large numbers—support that principle. But if the interest in control over resources is satisfied without a wide territorial sea, then most of the coastal states may see no need to extend their territorial jurisdiction beyond 12 miles, and may be willing to accommodate us on that aspect. This is the key to gaining our major objective—maximum naval and air mobility.

In addition to the general situation described above, you are already aware of the strain in our bilateral relations, most notably with Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile resulting from their unilateral claims.

Issues and Options

Against this background, the principal issue for your consideration at this time is the stance the U.S. should take at the preparatory Law of the Sea Conference at Geneva beginning July 19.

There are essentially four options:

Option 1: Stand Fast: Hold firm at this summer’s session, indicating we will make no important changes in our position unless other countries indicate a willingness to support positions that are important to us.

The advantage of this option lies in what it would avoid. We would not create the impression of willingness to make concession after concession, so that other countries could wait to see what we had to offer next.

The disadvantage of this option is that it would jeopardize the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference and would risk encouraging further unilateral claims by failing to convince coastal developing countries that they can achieve protection of their resource interests through multilateral negotiation. In addition, we need to take at the Geneva L.O.S. meeting a fisheries position that gives us a basis for the bilateral negotiations with Brazil to which we are committed this fall.

Option 2: A Seabeds Initiative: Authorize our delegation to propose or inspire a proposal fixing the outer limit of the seabed trusteeship zone at 200 miles, instead of determining that limit by a geological formula as in our draft treaty tabled in accordance with your May 23, 1970 statement.

The advantage of this option is that it would be a clear signal of our willingness to accommodate other interests. It is simpler and therefore easier to negotiate. It would demonstrate to developing countries that we are not engaged in a symbolic battle against a 200-mile limit per se, but concerned instead about rights within that limit. Another advantage is that this formula would treat all coastal states alike and end the discrimination against those with narrow continental shelves.

The disadvantage of this option would be its focus on the 200-mile concept and the encouragement it might offer to states wishing the 200-mile concept applied to other forms of ocean activity, be it fishing, pollution control, scientific research, and perhaps eventually navigation itself.

Option 3: A Fisheries Initiative: Authorize our delegation to table at the Conference a proposal that recognizes coastal states preferences over offshore fisheries resources, limited by what the coastal state can catch and by the rights of distant-water fisheries interests. This proposal will not satisfy coastal states, since it retains absolute protection for the traditional operations of distant-water states. To further accommodate coastal states, our delegation would at the same time invite other nations to submit reasonable fisheries proposals formulated in such a way as to avoid encroachment by coastal states on freedom of navigation beyond a 12-mile territorial sea. In conjunction with this we would state our willingness to accept a fisheries solution containing the following elements: -- A trusteeship arrangement giving the coastal state substantial controls over fisheries, subject to certain limitations protecting international interests.

-- Modification of the principle of absolute protection for existing distant-water fisheries, subject to reasonable licensing fees. Our delegation would also be authorized to explore coastal state preferences for widely migratory species like tuna, if some other delegation raises the issue. However, our delegation would take no affirmative position without referring the matter to Washington. (The NSSM Study indicates that we would attempt to exclude these fish from coastal state control and the SRG did not address the point. However, facing this problem is essential to any accommodation of our bilateral fisheries disputes with the West Coast South American states.)

The advantage of this option is that it (1) applies to fisheries the same concept which we have already decided best protects our law of the sea interests with respect to seabeds; (2) it addresses the resource problem of most immediate concern to developing coastal states and thus may have the best chance of getting multilateral negotiations for a law of the sea headed in the direction we want; and (3) provides us with a multilateral position from which we may reasonably hope to negotiate a modus vivendi with Brazil and other countries with which we have current fisheries disputes.

The disadvantage of this option is that it would be resisted by states with important distant water fishing interests such as the USSR, Japan, and the U.K., whose support is important to us in other aspects of the law of the sea.

Option 4: A Seabed and Fisheries Initiative: Combine options 2 and 3 above, authorizing our delegation to pursue either or both with its own discretion as to timing.

The advantage of this option is that it would beyond any reasonable doubt demonstrate our willingness to accommodate other coastal states resources interest.

The disadvantage of this option is tactical. It is probably too much too soon at this stage of the negotiations. It might, therefore, destroy our chances to persuade other nations to accommodate our security interests as a quid pro quo for meeting their interest in offshore resources.

The Agency Views

All agencies agree that there must be no change in our position regarding the breadth of the territorial sea and free transit through international straits.

Commerce favors a fisheries initiative but no seabeds initiative.

Transportation could live with any consensus that is reached but is reluctant to see us associate the 200-mile figure with any regime at this time.

State and Interior favor granting our delegation authority to indicate a willingness to move on options 2 and 3 if, after an initial period, our standfast position is not producing serious negotiations. With respect to seabeds, the authority would permit the delegation to indicate a willingness to consider an indeterminate mileage limit for the trusteeship zone, or an explicit 200-mile figure.

Prior to the SRG meeting, JCS formally opposed any new initiative this summer and therefore flavored the standfast option. This was also the preferred position of DOD, although it was prepared to move to the State/Interior view if our standfast approach produced no results after an initial period.

As a result of the SRG meeting, both JCS and DOD are prepared to accept the State/Interior position based on a majority vote of agencies in the delegation, with the understanding that prior to moving away from our standfast position our delegation would notify Washington.

Other Elements of the NSSM 125 Review

The NSSM study raised three points not relating directly to this summer’s conference and not discussed at the Senior Review Group meeting:

First is the proposition that the U.S. assert Its claimed rights of navigation and overflight beyond 12 miles and through international straits when such actions contravene unilateral jurisdictional claims of others. Two specific examples were cited: (1) that an unarmed military flight be resumed over claimed Peruvian waters between 12 and 200 miles, and (2) that we discontinue the courtesy notification we have been giving to Indonesia before our warships cross through waters of the archipelago.

Although DOD initially urged this course of action in order to demonstrate the importance the U.S. attaches to our navigational interests, Secretary Packard agreed informally that the issue need not be decided before this summer’s conference.

The second point suggests that the U.S. use bilateral carrots and sticks to dissuade countries from advancing claims adverse to our interests. All agencies agree that a study of specific situations would be useful.

The third point is the suggestion that a high-level diplomatic initiative be undertaken in support of our L.O.S. objectives. This would involve suggesting that you, yourself and key Cabinet officers mention our L.O.S. concerns to foreign callers, as seems appropriate. The State Department has already sent instructions to our Ambassadors to involve themselves directly. All agencies support this idea.

My Views

I believe that the most important question facing us at this time is how to generate broad multilateral support for a law of the sea which protects those aspects of our position which are vital to us, namely a 12-mile territorial sea and free transit through straits. I think, therefore, we must select the initiative most likely to have broad appeal to coastal state interests.

I think that we should concentrate our initiative this summer, in the first instance, on the question of fisheries. This is the most pressing law of the sea issue for many less developed coastal countries at this time. It is the resource question on which we have thus far been the least forthcoming. By adopting a more accommodating stand on this question, we will have the best chance of generating serious multilateral talks.

A move on fisheries would build on the trusteeship concept which we have already applied to the seabed. Moreover, a fisheries initiative would give us the basis for interim bilateral talks with Brazil this fall. There is virtually unanimous agreement that our present fisheries position does not offer a basis for negotiating an end to our bilateral fisheries disputes, or for a successful Law of the Sea Conference.

At the same time, I think we should give our delegation sufficient authority to be sure that our seabeds initiative is not deadlocked. Many coastal countries have difficulty in understanding how far out their trusteeship zone would extend. Furthermore, since our current proposal is based on the shape of the continental shelf, it appears unfair to countries with narrow shelves. Accordingly, I think we should give our delegation authority to explore a different formula for the outer limit of the trusteeship zone. This entails the risk of our being pushed to the 200-mile trusteeship zone too early for maximum tactical advantage, but we have to balance that against the risk that otherwise we may lose our whole seabeds approach through inaction. I think we should rely on our delegation to assess these elements, subject to review in Washington.

I also recommend that our delegation be instructed to place more stress upon accommodation of our security interests as an indispensable element to an acceptable Law of the Sea agreement.

On the other questions put forward by the NSSM review, I see no objection to supporting the agencies’ consensus that (a) we initiate a study of what we can do through carrots and sticks to persuade individual countries to take more accommodating L.O.S. positions, and that (b) we approve a high-level diplomatic campaign in support of our oceans’ objectives. However, I do not think we should initiative blanket policy at this time of unilaterally asserting our rights of navigation where these contravene the claims of others. Such actions would be counter-productive when we are seeking to enhance multilateral support for our oceans policy. But we could, in the future, review the possibility of such actions, if our negotiations for a law of the sea do not appear to be succeeding.

A draft NSDM reflecting the foregoing recommendations has been prepared for your approval.

RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the draft NSDM at Tab A.

Approve

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122. Top Secret. Sent for action. For Tab A as approved, see Document 405. Nixon did not initial the recommendation, but the attached slip indicates that he approved the recommendation on July 22.

405. National Security Decision Memorandum 122 405. National Security Decision Memorandum 1221

Washington, July 22, 1971.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of the Interior

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of Transportation

The Director, Central Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT:

U.S. Oceans Policy

The President has reviewed the discussion and options set forth in the response to NSSM 125. He has made the following decisions with respect to positions to be taken by the U.S. Delegation to the Preparatory U.N. Law of the Sea session at Geneva beginning July 19.

1. Territorial Sea and Straits Proposals

The United States Representative will formally introduce draft Articles 1 and 2 with respect to a 12-mile territorial sea and free transit through and over international straits. These articles will be introduced in the form in which they have been previously discussed bilaterally with a number of countries. In introducing these proposals the U.S. Representative will make clear that they constitute basic elements of the Oceans’ policy announced by the President in May 1970 and that any treaty to which the United States could be expected to become a party would have to accommodate these objectives. The Delegation should indicate in discussions with other Delegations that U.S. willingness to accommodate other states’ resources interests will depend on their willingness to accommodate these U.S. objectives.

2. Seabeds Proposals

The Delegation will pursue the previously established positions, but will have authority to make alterations in our proposed treaty in response to points made by other nations and various other domestic interests that do not go to the substance of our position.

The Delegation will indicate our belief that this session of the committee should be devoted to determining the regime to be applied within the trusteeship zone and the area beyond, and that this can be done without determining the outer boundary. The United States will not at the outset of the meeting initiate or support any proposal for any change in the formulation of the outer boundary for the trusteeship area, but could indicate that the United States is not committed to the method of delineating the outer boundary of the trusteeship zone suggested in our draft treaty. If it appears necessary in the course of the negotiations, the Delegation may, with the approval of a majority of the Agencies represented on the Delegation, initiate or support a mileage definition of the outer limit of the seabeds trusteeship zone. Such a definition might, at the discretion of the Delegation, be couched either in general or specific terms, but in the latter event could not exceed two hundred miles in breadth. The Delegation should report its decision to take such action to Washington for final review prior to implementation.

3. Fisheries

The U.S. Representative will introduce the present Article 3 as modified in accordance with Fisheries Option 1 and with such further changes, not going to its substance, as the Delegation may approve. However, in introducing this Article the U.S. Representative will state that our consultations have indicated a need for further accommodation of coastal states by distant water fishing states. Our Delegation will express the view that an appropriate provision with respect to historical rights should be negotiated between the coastal and distant water states, and will invite other states to submit reasonable fisheries proposals, stressing that to be acceptable to the United States, they should be formulated in such a way as to avoid encroachment by coastal states on freedom of navigation beyond a 12-mile territorial sea. In plenary sessions or discussions with other Delegations, the Delegation is authorized to discuss modifications of the principle of absolute protection for traditional distant water fisheries including reasonable licensing proposals. Should another delegation raise the issue of widely migratory species, the Delegation is authorized to explore proposals for accommodation, including reasonable licensing arrangements, but should not take any affirmative position without referral to Washington. In its discussions of fisheries the Delegation should stress the importance of a substantive trusteeship proposal limiting coastal state control and the necessity of any agreed solution having sufficient international elements to avoid expansion of coastal state jurisdiction.

With regard to general option 2 of the NSSM 125 response, the President does not believe pressures of this kind should be applied at a time when we are seeking to enhance multilateral support for our oceans proposals. This option may, however, be reviewed at some future time if it appears that our negotiations for a law of the sea are not succeeding.

With regard to general option 3, the President has requested a study by the Ad Hoc Group of those situations in which the application of bilateral sanctions can be contemplated. The study should identify the countries, the possible sanctions, the probable consequences of taking such actions, and recommendations. Important differences should be clearly presented, and not submerged in the interest of a consensus. The study should be presented to the Chairman of the Senior Review Group not later than October 30.

With regard to general option 4, the President approves a high level diplomatic campaign in support of our law of the sea policy.

The Secretary of State is responsible for the implementation of this NSDM with appropriate interagency coordination through the Ad Hoc Group designated to prepare the response to NSSM 125. In addition to leading our negotiating Delegation, the chairman of the Ad Hoc Group is responsible for coordinating the substance of all public affairs guidance for interagency use in dealing with the press, the public, and Congress on matters affecting Law of the Sea negotiations.

The Ad Hoc Group is requested to forward a report to the Chairman of the Senior Review Group on the implementation of this NSDM and on progress of our Law of the Sea negotiations not later than three weeks after the return of our Delegation from the Preparatory Law of the Sea negotiations to be held in Geneva beginning July 19.

The Ad Hoc Group should also submit, not later than September 10, scenarios and negotiating positions for dealing with outstanding fisheries disputes with Brazil and West Coast South American countries which are consistent with the multilateral fisheries posture outlined above. The Secretary of State is authorized to establish a date for bilateral negotiations with Brazil subsequent to September 20, 1971.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122-7/22/71-US Oceans Policy. Top Secret. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The document, as published, incorporates an amended second page that was circulated to all addressees on July 27. Haig initialed the document, indicating that he had seen it.

406. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon 406. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon1

Washington, August 4, 1971.

Subject:

Lifting of Foreign Military Sales Act Suspension and Resumption of Fishing Negotiations with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

The Government of Ecuador, in conversations here between the Ecuadorean Ambassador and Assistant Secretary Meyer, and in Quito between Ambassador Burns and the Foreign Ministry, has made it clear that it is prepared to resume negotiations on fisheries with the United States if a way can be found to lift the Foreign Military Sales Act sanction applied to Ecuador on January 11. The Government of Ecuador is further prepared to seek the concurrence of Chile and Peru to resume the quadripartite negotiations. If Peru and Chile do not concur, Ecuador is ready to consider bilateral negotiations with the United States. There are indications that the Government of Ecuador (as well as Peru and Chile) may have a considerably more flexible negotiating position on substantive issues than they had during the last quadripartite talks in Buenos Aires in September 1970. President Velasco of Ecuador has unilaterally ordered a moratorium on vessel seizures through September 30 in order to create a proper atmosphere for resolution of the problem.

The Departments of State, Defense and Commerce have agreed on a proposed scenario for a return to negotiations with Ecuador, beginning with the lifting of the Foreign Military Sales Act suspension.

Proposed Scenario

The Departments concerned wish to move quickly through the following scenario in order to obtain an early public commitment to negotiations from Ecuador, and possibly Peru and Chile. For reasons associated with our Law of the Sea negotiations, we want to be able to announce negotiations with Ecuador, Peru and Chile before our offer to negotiate with Brazil is announced. Since we told the Brazilians in June that they may announce the negotiations, we are not able to control completely the timing of such an announcement.

If you agree, I propose the following course of action, subject to changes which may be required as we proceed but which would, of course, be concurred in by all three Departments: 1. We will seek the firm concurrence of the Government of Ecuador in a scenario involving the U.S. lifting the Foreign Military Sales Act suspension and a prompt GOE response in the form of a commitment to negotiate on fishery matters. Ecuador will give assurances that it will conduct bilateral negotiations with the U.S. if Chile and Peru do not agree to do so. The GOE will announce that in view of the fact that the ban on FMS is lifted, it is considered appropriate to resume discussions concerning the fisheries and related vessel seizure problem off Ecuador’s coast. Any arrangement resulting from such discussions would not be intended to prejudice the juridical position of either party or either party’s position in negotiations leading to the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

2. Upon confirmation of the GOE’s willingness to proceed, we will brief key members of Congress on the plan.

3. We will lift the suspension just before the first weekend after completion of all arrangements in order to take full advantage of the weekend to minimize publicity.

4. Ambassador Burns will be instructed to emphasize that the United States is prepared to proceed in this fashion on the basis that it is mutually understood that: a. There will be no seizures pending or during negotiations;

b. Before negotiations begin the GOE will make known publicly its appreciation of the importance to many nations of the right of free navigation in and over ocean space beyond a narrow distance from shore.

c. The United States and Ecuador will both work toward a constructive resource-oriented solution to LOS problems in the context of the Law of the Sea Conference.

Foreign Military Sales Act

The scenario requires that you waive suspension of Ecuador from eligibility for sales and credits under the Foreign Military Sales Act. This suspension was imposed on January 11, 1971, following seizure of U.S. tuna vessels by Ecuador. Section 3(b) of the Act provides for a mandatory 12 months suspension, which you may waive either on a finding that the waiver is required in the interests of national security or that we have received reasonable assurance from the seizing government that there will be no further seizures. In our judgment, an agreement by the Government of Ecuador to the scenario above would be a reasonable assurance “from the country involved that future violations (seizures) will not occur…” On this basis, you could, therefore, waive the provisions of Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act.

Brazil and Peru

As I have indicated, this course of action with respect to Ecuador and possibly Peru and Chile will be closely coordinated with our negotiations with Brazil.

Peru seized a U.S. fishing vessel on March 30; the only Peruvian seizure this year. In accordance with instructions to defer application of any sanctions against Peru, we have not yet applied the suspension of FMS eligibility called for in the statute. Neither has it been formally waived. However, we have held up processing any new FMS cases for Peru. If Peru cooperates in the resumption of quadripartite fisheries negotiations, I will propose that this be construed as reasonable assurance against further vessel seizures and request that you waive application of the sanction to Peru as of that date.

Recommendations:

1. That you approve the initiation of steps to return to negotiations with Ecuador and possibly Peru and Chile;

2. That you agree to waive the provisions of Section 3(b) at the appropriate time under the scenario, permitting the resumption of sales, credits or guaranties to Ecuador and Peru under the Foreign Military Sales Act.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. For the text of Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act, see the source note to Document 387.

407. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 407. Memorandum From Arnold Nachmanoff of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, August 5, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Lifting of Foreign Military Sales Act (FMS) Suspension and Resumption of Fishing Negotiations with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

Attached at Tab I is a memorandum from you to the President covering a memorandum from Secretary Rogers indicating that the Ecuadorean Government may be willing to resume fisheries negotiations with us, and to move away from strict adherence to their position on Law of the Sea. Secretary Rogers proposes a scenario for removing impediments to fisheries negotiations with Ecuador and perhaps Chile and Peru as well. The scenario has the concurrence of the Departments of Defense and Commerce. It requires that the President lift the Foreign Military Sales Suspension imposed on Ecuador last January for seizing US fishing vessels, and your memorandum recommends that he do so.

The willingness of Ecuador to negotiate and to take another look at its Law of the Sea position would be a major breakthrough not only from the viewpoint of resolving the fisheries dispute with the Latin Americans, but also for our overall Law of the Sea goals. However, there is a timing problem arising from the fact that we have already told the Brazilians we are prepared to negotiate on fisheries with them in the fall. As you know, the Brazilians have been asserting their leadership of the 200 mile club and trying to act as its spokesman at the Preparatory Conference on the Law of the Sea presently underway at Geneva. The willingness of Ecuador and the other CEP countries to negotiate in the near future, and the possibility that they may be willing to back off from the hardline 200 mile territorial waters position presently held by Brazil, means that we are within range of isolating and neutralizing Brazil on fisheries and Law of the Sea. Brazil may try to head off this danger by announcing its agreement with us to go to negotiations in the fall and persuading the CEP countries to let it have a shot at us before they agree to separate negotiations. (We have already told Brazil it can announce pending negotiations with us at any time.) Accordingly, we must move quickly by putting the scenario for returning to negotiations with the CEP countries into effect as soon as possible in order to get them committed before our agreement to negotiate with Brazil becomes public knowledge.

RECOMMENDATION: That you sign the memorandum to the President at Tab I.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. Sent to Kissinger through Haig. Haig’s handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “If no reply in 48 hours approve for President.” Concurred in by Levine, Clift, and Kennedy. Haig initialed for Levine and Clift. The attached memorandum is published as Document 408.

408. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 408. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, August 9, 1971.

SUBJECT:

Lifting of Foreign Military Sales Act (FMS) Suspension and Resumption of Fishing Negotiations with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

Attached at Tab A is a memo to you from Secretary Rogers which reports that the Government of Ecuador has indicated its willingness to resume negotiations with us on the fisheries question if we first lift our “sanctions”. Ecuador will further seek concurrence from the other CEP powers (Chile and Peru) to resume quadripartite negotiations with us on the fisheries dispute. Should the other CEP powers fail to agree, Ecuador will negotiate bilaterally with us.

There are indications that the CEP powers are now willing to consider a major modification to their present claim of unlimited sovereignty over adjacent waters to a distance of 200 miles, and settle for a formula containing the following elements: -- full sovereignty over adjacent waters for a narrow distance (e.g.,12 miles);

-- exclusive or preferential access to natural resources out to a distance of 200 miles;

-- guarantee to all nations of free passage on, in or over seas beyond the narrow distance over which sovereignty is exercised.

The willingness of Ecuador and the other CEP powers to reconsider their classic position in favor of territorial waters to a distance of 200 miles, and to substitute a resource-oriented approach would constitute a major breakthrough both for our Law of the Sea negotiations and our efforts to solve fishing disputes with the Latin Americans.

This breakthrough would come at an opportune moment when the Preparatory Conference on the Law of the Sea is being held at Geneva, and also when Brazil is attempting to assert its leadership of the 200 mile club and act as its spokesman at the Geneva conference. The willingness of the CEP powers to negotiate separately gives us a chance to isolate and neutralize Brazil.

However, there is a problem which must be eliminated before we can move to take advantage of this opportunity. Ecuador will not negotiate while the Foreign Military Sales Act suspension we imposed last January continues in force. They consider the FMS suspension to be a “sanction”. Under the terms of the FMS Act, you may waive the suspension if you receive assurances that ”…future violations (seizures) will not occur…” While the Government of Ecuador has already told us that no further seizures will take place through September 30, and indicated that it is willing to negotiate, it feels it cannot provide public assurances that no seizures will take place since this would be tantamount to promising not to enforce its own laws.

State, Defense and Commerce have agreed on the following proposed scenario for getting out of this procedural box and moving towards our major Law of the Sea goals: -- if the Government of Ecuador confirms privately that it is willing to go to negotiations with us and that no further fishing boat seizures will take place pending or during negotiations;

-- State will brief key Congressmen and we will announce that the FMS suspension has been lifted;

-- the Government of Ecuador then announces that in view of the FMS suspension’s being lifted, it is considered appropriate to resume negotiations with the US, and that any arrangement made with the US is not intended to prejudice the Law of the Sea position of either party;

-- the Government of Ecuador would also make a public statement that it appreciates the importance of the right of free navigation in and over ocean space beyond a narrow distance from the shore;

-- The US and Ecuador would agree to work towards a constructive resource-oriented solution to Law of the Sea problems within the context of the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled for 1973.

An ancillary problem is posed by Peru, which seized one US fishing vessel this year. While we did not formally impose the FMS suspension on Peru, we did suspend military sales in fact. If Peru concurs in quadripartite talks, and provides appropriate assurances on seizures, I recommend we interpret your waiver of FMS suspension as applying to Peru as well as Ecuador and resume sales programs there.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the scenario for returning to fisheries negotiations with Ecuador, and possibly Peru and Chile, including agreement to waive the provisions of Section 3 (b) at the appropriate time permitting a resumption of sales, credits, or guarantees to Ecuador and Peru under the Foreign Military Sales Act.

[Approve]

Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 799, Country Files, Latin America, LA Gen., Vol. VI, Jul 71-1974. Secret; Exdis. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it. Nixon initialed approval of the recommendation on August 11 and wrote, “K inform Connally,” indicating he wished Kissinger to inform Treasury Secretary John B. Connally. Tab A is published as Document 406.

409. Memorandum of Conversation 409. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 7, 1971, 10:00 a.m.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea

PARTICIPANTS:

His Excellency Jaime Arguelles, Ambassador of Spain;

Acting Secretary, U. Alexis Johnson;

George W. Landau, Country Director, Spain and Portugal

Ambassador Arguelles said that he had just returned from New York where he had a long conversation with Foreign Minister Lopez Bravo on the Law of the Sea. The Ambassador said he had informed the Foreign Minister of the deep U.S. concern over Spain’s attitude which Ambassador Johnson had outlined to him at the Stevenson dinner October 4.

As a result of the talk between Arguelles and the Foreign Minister, the latter had asked that the following message be passed by Arguelles to Ambassador Johnson with the request that this information remain most restricted and not be distributed.

Lopez Bravo’s position on Law of the Sea is not directed against any country in particular and was not intentionally intended to be harmful to the U.S. or anyone else. It was only a repetition of traditional policy of Spain and other strait countries to support the idea of “innocent passage.”

Lopez Bravo had not planned anything harmful against the U.S. and as a matter of fact he indicated that Project Darlington might well be approved by him if it is of interest to the U.S. in exchange for a suitable quid pro quo.

Lopez Bravo does not yet have a definite idea how to deal with the Law of the Sea question. The major problem affecting the Spanish position is that he has not as yet decided how to play the Gibraltar angle. The question of Gibraltar is connected with the Law of the Sea problem but Lopez Bravo has not quite figured out how. His tentative thinking is that free passage through the Straits increases Gibraltar’s importance. However restricted passage restricts the value of Gibraltar. There is no question that the Gibraltar question will be the major ingredient in forming Spain’s position on Law of the Sea. Lopez Bravo wanted Ambassador Johnson to understand that he did not invent the Spanish position but that he solely supported the existing Spanish thesis of “innocent passage,” which moreover is the traditional policy of most Straits countries.

Lopez Bravo also found that the countries with which Spain desires particularly close relations (Latin America and Arab states) look with favor on Spain’s Law of the Sea pronouncements and this policy has been helpful to him in his relations with these countries. As Spain is not among the great powers it does not quite understand all of the U.S. strategic concerns and Lopez Bravo thinks that our strategy could be more flexible and that there might be other ways, even if more costly, to carry out our strategic aims. However because Lopez Bravo does not understand all of the U.S. concerns he is prepared to sit down and discuss with high-level U.S. representatives the whole range of Law of the Sea problems. He would be able to do so by the end of November after he returns from his next Latin American trip. On this forthcoming trip he will be more careful about what he says on Law of the Sea but will not change his basic pitch for “innocent passage.”

Meanwhile, he has asked Ambassador Arguelles to be thoroughly briefed on the U.S. position and obtain as much information as possible so that he becomes conversant with our concerns.

Arguelles stressed again that not being a great power Spain does not fully understand our concerns. He requested that Ambassador Johnson not divulge the Foreign Minister’s message to other officials.

Ambassador Johnson said he would respect the Foreign Minister’s confidence and restrict the information to the most interested U.S. officials. Ambassador Johnson thanked Ambassador Arguelles for the Foreign Minister’s message and said that he would be happy to arrange high-level conversations between State and DOD officials with him at an early date.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Landau. The conversation was held in Johnson’s office at the Department of State.

410. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon 410. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Nixon1

Washington, October 8, 1971.

Subject:

U.S. Oceans Policy: Spanish Opposition to the U.S. Straits Proposal

For the past several months, Spain has actively and publicly opposed the major objective of your Oceans Policy which is to assure the continued mobility of our strategic deterrent forces. Spain, which abuts the Strait of Gibraltar, the most important strait in the world, has worked against our goal of achieving international agreement on a right of free transit through and overflight of international straits, which we consider essential if we are to accept a twelve mile territorial sea. Instead, Spain supports a twelve mile territorial sea but has advocated adhering to the present right of innocent passage which does not allow for overflight of territorial waters. Spain has even stated that the right of innocent passage does not extend to nuclear powered ships, giant tankers, and ships carrying dangerous cargoes, i.e., nuclear weapons. If the territorial sea is expanded beyond three miles, transit through the Strait of Gibraltar, if limited by the Spanish version of innocent passage, would be unacceptably restricted. The principal proponent of the Spanish position is Foreign Minister Lopez Bravo, who most recently condemned the principle of free transit in his speech at the U.N. General Assembly on October 1.

On October 4, I chaired a meeting to consider the Spanish opposition to our straits proposal and the status of our discussions with Spain on Project Darlington, an undersea detection system designed for installation in the Strait of Gibraltar. Among those attending the meeting were Deputy Secretary Packard, Admiral Moorer, Admiral Zumwalt, Navy Under Secretary Warner, Legal Adviser Stevenson and Ambassador Hill.

The participants agreed that our proposal for free transit is essential to maintain the strategic mobility upon which the Western defense posture depends and that persistent Spanish opposition to our proposal is seriously damaging to U.S. and Western security interests.

In order to emphasize to the highest level of the Spanish Government our vital interest in achieving international agreement on a right of free transit, Ambassador Hill suggested that Vice President Agnew deliver a message to this effect from you to President Franco during his stop at Torrejon on October 22 enroute to Washington from Iran. I fully endorse this suggestion and am prepared to ask Legal Adviser Stevenson and Ambassador Hill to accompany the Vice President and provide the necessary background information on this matter.

Recommendation:

That you instruct Vice President Agnew, accompanied by the Legal Adviser and the Ambassador, to call on President Franco and deliver the attached letter from you.

U Alexis Johnson
Acting Secretary

Attachment
Draft Letter From President Nixon to Spanish Head of State Franco

Washington, October 19, 1971

Dear General Franco:

As you know, the United States has put forward a law of the sea proposal which would provide for a right of free transit through and overflight of international straits. The successful negotiation of this right and of our proposal for a twelve mile territorial sea at the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled for 1973 is of the highest importance to the United States and, we believe, to the security of the West. I was disturbed, therefore, to learn that Spanish officials have expressed opposition to this proposal at various international gatherings, including the General Assembly of the United Nations.

We believe that the right of free transit is essential for preserving the mobility of both our general purpose and nuclear deterrent forces, not only in meeting our commitments in Western Europe, but in fulfilling our responsibilities in other parts of the world as well. This right would be an objective one, established by international agreement and applicable to all straits used for international navigation. We do not think that the present international law right of innocent passage is sufficient for Western security requirements because it is a subjective standard, does not include the right of overflight, and carries a requirement that submarines must navigate on the surface.

Your Government has closely identified itself with the Western defense effort and we are pleased to know that you anticipate an even more active role in the future. I am confident, too, that Spain shares the concern of many Western nations over the recent increase in Soviet naval strength in the Mediterranean. It is to counter this potential threat by maintaining the maximum strategic flexibility for our own forces and those of our allies that we have proposed a right of free transit through and over international straits. We have concluded that an international agreement recognizing this right would benefit all countries interested in maintaining the political and military balance on which world stability is presently based.

We have discussed these issues with officials of your Government and will continue to do so, but I wanted you to know of my deep personal concern. I will welcome your views on this subject and have therefore asked Ambassador Hill to deliver this letter personally to you and to provide you with any additional information on this issue which you may require.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,
Richard Nixon

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret.

411. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 411. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, October 8, 1971.

SUBJECT:

1973 Law of the Sea Conference

At Tab A is a memo from Secretary Rogers summarizing the current position on our oceans policy leading up to the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

The Secretary makes the following points: -- At the recently concluded Geneva Preparatory Committee, we found widespread support for our proposed 12-mile territorial sea.

-- Other countries often linked this support with a demand for satisfying coastal state interests in fisheries and minerals in adjacent waters beyond 12 miles.

-- Some countries have been directly opposing us. Spain (because of Gibraltar) is attacking our proposal for free transit through international straits. Brazil and Peru are fighting to protect their unilateral claims to a 200-mile territorial sea.

-- The Soviets strongly support us on straits and territorial seas, but think we’re offering coastal states too much on fisheries at this time (the Soviets have important long-distance fishing interests which conflict with coastal state interests).

-- The Secretary’s Prognosis: good on the 12-mile territorial sea. Less favorable on such other key objectives as free transit through straits and limiting coastal state controls over offshore resources.

COMMENT: We are, of course, still at an early and fluid state in these negotiations.

Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, September 15, 1971

Subject:

1973 Law of the Sea Conference

On May 23, 1970, you announced new proposals aimed at ensuring that the oceans are used for the benefit of mankind and not become an arena for unrestrained exploitation and conflicting claims. These were designed to accommodate specific U.S. security and resource interests, particularly U.S. mobility at sea.

The UN subsequently decided to convene a 1973 Law of the Sea Conference with preparations in an 86 member Committee. However, unilateral claims over ocean space continue. The Organization of African Unity recently called on Africans to extend their jurisdiction over fisheries.

Your 1970 proposals call for 12-mile territorial seas, free transit through international straits, mixed coastal State and international authority over fisheries and sea-bed resources in a fairly broad coastal area (“trusteeship zone” in our seabeds proposal), and international regulation of seabed resource development seaward of that zone. The coastal State would retain exclusive sovereign rights over seabed resources to a depth of 200 meters.

At the just completed Geneva session of the UN Preparatory Committee, State Department Legal Adviser, John R. Stevenson, introduced draft Articles on territorial seas, straits, and fisheries. He stressed the connection between solutions on territorial seas and straits and U.S. accommodation of coastal State interests in fisheries. He indicated flexibility on the outer boundary of the seabed trusteeship zone.

A 12-mile territorial sea is widely supported, but frequently linked to satisfying coastal State interests beyond 12-miles in fisheries, seabed resources and pollution. We link a 12-mile territorial sea with free transit through straits. Spain is engaged in a diplomatic offensive against our straits proposal, and other States bordering straits have difficulties with it. There may be room for compromise, and we plan to continue private talks with important straits States in an attempt to solve their particular problems.

Some Latin American countries, such as Brazil and Peru, are seeking to stimulate other countries to make extensive unilateral claims and to delay the 1973 Conference since they fear rejection there of their unilateral approach.

The Geneva talks made clear that if we are to lead countries away from a unilateral approach it will be necessary to find some way within a multilateral context to give adequate satisfaction to coastal States with respect to adjacent resources in the water (fish) and under the sea (oil, gas, and hard minerals). Although Brazil, Peru and Ecuador appear to be the only States actively supporting a 200-mile territorial sea, many coastal States express support for a 200-mile zone in which they would have exclusive control over all resources. We must find a way to balance coastal, international and maritime (military and shipping) interests in coastal areas. Our proposals seek to accomplish this through the international community delegating specific authority over resources to coastal States, subject to international standards and review.

The Soviet delegation, with which we have good working relations, strongly supported us on territorial seas and straits, but felt our fisheries proposal too coastal State oriented at this time. We will continue private conversations with them, at which they may stress the Arab problems with free transit in the Strait of Tiran. The Soviets presented a skeletal seabeds treaty, but remain interested in our trusteeship proposal.

Many developing countries favor making the Conference and treaty universal, to include the PRC among others. Hard-line Latins could use this issue to delay the Conference.

We have a good chance of achieving a 12-mile territorial sea, but will have a more difficult time achieving our other security-related objectives: free transit through straits and mixed coastal/international controls over offshore resources. Between now and the Spring Committee meeting, we will review our approach while pursuing the high-level diplomatic campaign you authorized in support of our policy.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 382, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume III, 1971. Secret. Sent for information. The attached document is not published. Notations on the memorandum and the attachment indicate that Nixon saw them.

412. Memorandum Prepared by the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) 412. Memorandum Prepared by the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson)1

Washington, undated.

MEMORANDUM ON IMPLEMENTATION OF U.S. OCEANS POLICY AND PROGRESS OF LAW OF THE SEA NEGOTIATIONS

This memorandum reports on measures taken in implementation of NSDM-122 at the 1971 July/August session of the expanded Seabeds Committee, acting as preparatory committee for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference, and on the progress in our Law of the Sea negotiations.

I. Implementation of NSDM-122

A. Territorial Sea and Straits

On August 3rd, in Geneva, the U.S. Delegation introduced draft Articles I and II on a 12-mile territorial sea and on free transit through and over all straits used for international navigation. The introduction of the Articles (which were in the form previously discussed bilaterally with a number of countries) was pursuant to paragraph 1 of NSDM-122. The two Articles were presented as basic elements of the oceans policy announced by the President last year and the U.S. Representative, State Department Legal Adviser Stevenson, stated that the United States “would be unable to conceive of a successful Law of the Sea Conference that did not accommodate the objectives of these Articles.”

In explaining these proposals, the U.S. stressed the importance to all states of facilitating navigation and the dependence of security interests on free transit through and over straits. We stated that the real concerns of those states making jurisdictional claims broader than 12 miles for resource purposes could be accommodated in a manner that protected freedom of navigation and overflight.

B. Seabeds

At the July/August session, the U.S. continued to press for the basic proposals contained in the draft seabeds convention submitted as a working paper the prior year.

In the course of the general debate it became apparent that the following two misconceptions regarding the United States proposals had led a number of delegations to oppose the trusteeship approach as reflected in the draft convention: first, an identification of this concept with the particular limits the U.S. had proposed for the outer boundary of the trusteeship area and, secondly, a failure to recognize, the adaptability of this concept to achieve a number of different balances between coastal and international interests.

In order to maintain the viability of the trusteeship concept as an alternative to an exclusive resource zone, the U.S. Representative indicated that the United States was not committed to the geological method of delineating the outer boundary of the trusteeship zone suggested in the draft treaty and that the U.S. would consider other methods including a mileage method or combination of methods in determining the outer boundary. In addition the U.S. Delegation stressed that the efficacy and applicability of the trusteeship concept did not depend upon particular limits, but was a flexible means of reaching equitable accommodations within several possible sets of limits, provided substantially all marine resources were not placed within an area of exclusive coastal State jurisdiction.

The Delegation stressed throughout the debate that the particular mixture of coastal and international rights proposed in the U.S. draft convention was not required by our trusteeship concept. There was, rather, a core of principles which we regarded as essential which would distinguish a meaningful trusteeship approach from a zone of exclusive coastal State jurisdiction. These included certain international standards, impartial third party dispute settlement, protection of other uses of the marine environment and provision for some sharing of benefits. However, the particular mixture of coastal and international rights and duties was clearly negotiable. The threat to freedom of navigation and other uses of the sea represented by an exclusive coastal State economic jurisdiction beyond 12 miles was emphasized.

C. Fisheries

The U.S. also introduced on August 3rd, a draft Article III on fisheries, modified in accordance with fisheries option 1 in NSSM-125, and with other nonsubstantive changes approved by the Delegation. The U.S. Representative stated that the text was a revision of that circulated to many governments and reflected many of the comments we had received. Our consultations had indicated a need for further accommodation of coastal states interests by distant-water states.

The U.S. welcomed discussion and negotiation on all aspects of the fisheries problem, particularly in connection with the traditional fishing rights of distant-water fishing states. In the U.S. view, negotiations between coastal and distant-water fishing states were especially suitable for arriving at an appropriate treaty text on traditional fishing rights. Fisheries proposals by other states would be welcomed, and sympathetic consideration would be given to any proposal which precluded the potential for encroachment on freedom of navigation and overflight beyond a 12-mile territorial sea.

The relationship between a solution to resource problems and freedom of navigation and overflight was stressed. Particular emphasis was placed on accommodation of coastal state fishing interests, in the area beyond 12 miles, by a mixed coastal-international regime with certain delegated authority to the coastal state but subject to international standards and dispute settlement.

The formal statements of the U.S. Delegation are annexed hereto.

II. Progress of Law of the Sea Negotiations

A. Status of U.S. Proposals

(1) Territorial Sea

Broad support was expressed for a 12-mile territorial sea. However, acceptance of this limit was conditioned by most developing countries on obtaining exclusive coastal state jurisdiction over living and non-living resources in a broad zone beyond 12 miles.

While most states, including all the major maritime powers, supported the principle of freedom of navigation beyond 12 miles, Brazil (publicly supported by Spain, Peru and Ecuador) did not. Brazil stressed the need for coastal state control over navigation of super-tankers and warships beyond 12 miles.

Uruguay also demonstrated a degree of support for the Brazilian position, but, along with Peru and Ecuador, privately indicated a willingness to recognize free navigation beyond 12 miles.

(2) Straits

The U.S. proposal for free transit through and over international straits received only limited public support (Australia and the U.K. and, in some respects, Ethiopia and Singapore) and considerable public opposition. Some states (e.g., Denmark, Greece and Italy) acknowledged the importance of free transit but cited special circumstances which should exempt their own straits from the general rule. Italy and Denmark suggested that straits less than six miles wide, which are presently generally acknowledged to be completely overlapped by territorial seas and subject only to “innocent passage”, should not be subject to the Article II free transit provisions since they are unaffected by the movement from a three mile to twelve mile territorial sea.

In general, states which did not support free transit either took the position that “innocent passage”, as understood under international law, was adequate, or that the term “innocent” could be suitably redefined. Some States sought more objective definitional criteria of “innocent passage”, e.g., over nuclear powered or armed vessels and control was sometimes phrased in terms of the potential pollution hazards posed by mammoth oil tankers or nuclear vessels. Also, certain island states, such as Indonesia, espoused the ‘archipelago theory’ of describing territorial waters by baselines drawn around the outer islands of the state, consequently closing the straits between the islands.

Spain was certainly the most adamant advocate of greater coastal state control and was particularly active behind the scenes to exclude any possibility of overflight from the straits discussion. Several Delegations indicated privately that there was stronger opposition to freedom of overflight than to freedom of transit, even including submerged transit by submarines. The Arab states were particularly concerned with the applicability of the free transit principle to the Straits of Tiran and Gulf of Aqaba. Non-straits states opposing our straits proposal appeared to be doing so principally to strengthen their bargaining position.

Although the majority of states which spoke publicly expressed reservations or opposition to the concept of free transit, there is a possibility from publicly expressed reservations or private discussions, that accommodation with Denmark, Indonesia, Italy, Greece and the Philippines can be found if their special interests are satisfied. Some developing countries are aware of the importance attached to free transit by the U.S. and have privately indicated a willingness to go along with the U.S. straits article if their economic demands are fulfilled.

Private discussions indicated that several states, including some with whom we have defense commitments such as Japan, and important straits states such as Malaysia, are not convinced of the importance of a right of free transit to their overall security interests. We have explained how such a right bears upon our overall defense effort, but Delegates here have seemingly not been persuaded.

The Soviets apparently have not decided upon the priority between their navigational interest regarding straits and their interest in distant-water fisheries. In discussions on straits, they have expressed the desire to limit the number of straits to be subject to any new regime by defining or specifying those used for international navigation. They have stated that negotiations will have to determine whether straits leading to enclosed or semi-enclosed seas (such as the straits of Tiran) are “straits used for international navigation.” They also say that they desire a right of overflight.

(3) Seabeds

(a) Trusteeship Zone

The U.K. specifically endorsed “trusteeship”, and several land-locked and shelf-locked countries expressed support for an intermediate zone approach. Canada proposed the idea of a “custodianship” under which the coastal state would exercise powers delegated by the international community in a zone adjacent to the coastal state with coastal state authority to enforce agreed international standards. Australia, Italy, Japan, the Soviet Bloc and a few other countries indicated that some sort of an intermediate zone approach could be given further consideration.

Most coastal developing countries, which expressed an opinion, opposed the trusteeship concept. However, a number of states, particularly Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and Chile, stated in private discussions that they would consider including certain international elements in a coastal state resource zone but that they did not want a full trusteeship created.

(b) Exclusive Economic Zone

Many countries stated a strong preference for a 200-mile exclusive resource (living and mineral) zone. Perhaps as many as 30 states indicated publicly or privately, that they favored, were inclined toward, or could support, a 200-mile exclusive resource zone. Nevertheless, approximately half of the delegates did not take a specific stand on precise limits to such a zone, though many did mention a preference for “uniform distance”, or “depth and distance”, criteria for determining the seabed boundary.

(c) International Machinery

Broad agreement existed on the need for some kind of international machinery. Many proposals called for the creation of an assembly, council and secretariat. There was considerable disagreement over the composition of the council and whether or not a veto, consensus, weighted, or equality system of voting should be included. Of particular note was the strong expression of support among LDC’s for a “one nation - one vote” system within the governing structure. Although most proposals made by the LDC’s called for a council of manageable size, they made it clear that they are opposed to developed country control of this organ. The developed countries strongly supported weighted voting in the governing body. The Soviet Union proposed a bloc-consensus system.

The LDC’s also supported establishment of an international agency which would have the power (exclusive in the case of some proposals) to engage directly in exploitation of the seabed, either by itself or through joint ventures or profit-sharing contracts. Both the Latin American draft and the land-locked/shelf-locked paper envisioned such activity. India and several African states also favored such a development. France, supported by the U.S. and U.K., spoke out forcefully against this idea and in favor of a licensing system. The Soviet Bloc opposed the concept of an operating agency as well.

(d) Economic Implications

The question of the possible impact from exploitation of seabed minerals on the economies of developing exporting countries received considerable attention. The U.N. SYG Report on the subject indicated that there probably would not be reason for concern, but this conclusion was challenged by a number of states, led by the Latin American and certain Persian Gulf states, who emphasized the sections of a preliminary report prepared by UNCTAD indicating there was a basis for concern. The U.S. presented a predominately factual statement on this question which, while well received, did not allay the fears of some states regarding the economic implications of deep seabed exploitation and did not suit the political objectives of the Latin Americans.

(e) Benefit Sharing

The question of benefit sharing was not discussed in detail at this session. The U.K. did propose the creation of a Distribution Agency and several States suggested that “reserve areas” be set aside for development by the international community. A significant number of LDC’s stressed the need for direct participation through training of LDC nationals and the sharing of technology and indicated that monetary benefits alone were insufficient.

(4) Fisheries

Discussion of fisheries jurisdiction revolved around extreme positions of (1) exclusive coastal state fishing rights over a broad zone, often expressed as a 200-mile exclusive resource jurisdiction, and (2) freedom of fishing on the high seas and the continuation of existing international and regional fisheries commissions,

Exclusive coastal State jurisdiction took the form of either zones of economic jurisdiction governing mineral and living resources or exclusive fisheries zones. The Latin American states presently claiming 200 miles and some African States (e.g., Kenya, Mauritania, Gabon and Algeria) stressed the necessity of coastal State exclusive economic jurisdiction within a zone of 200 miles. Several other States, including some developed States such as Australia and France, were thinking affirmatively about a 200-mile exclusive resource zone. Other States, such as Mexico, Venezuela, India and Tanzania, indicated a willingness to support such a zone but also were disposed toward the inclusion of international elements. The dominant theme expressed by the developing countries was the idea that the developing coastal States needed a zone of jurisdiction to conserve adequately the living resources off their coasts from over-exploitation by the modern factory fleets of developed countries. The LDC’s were critical of existing conservation efforts by international and regional arrangements, partly because such arrangements have lacked authority and have been largely ineffective. They upheld the right of coastal States to use and manage living resources adjacent to their coasts.

The primary supporters of the principle of freedom of fishing on the high seas were the U.K., Japan, the USSR and its Eastern European Bloc, and land-locked States. They stressed that only through international and regional agreements could measures be established to (1) ensure adequate conservation measures, (2) prevent underutilization of stocks and (3) preserve rights of freedom of fishing for all countries. The U.K. was inclined to provide some flexibility for the preferential rights of coastal States, but not to the extent of damaging distant-water fishing interests. Their Delegation stressed the role of regional fisheries organizations and indicated the acceptability of some form of weighted voting favoring coastal States. This view was influenced to some extent by their conflict with Iceland over Iceland’s intent to claim a 50-mile exclusive fisheries zone around Iceland. Japan would provide preferential fishing rights only for developing coastal States and stressed privately to us that her primary interest was in continuing to fish offshore from the U.S., Canada and the USSR, where she took approximately 60 percent of her distant-water catch. Japan, the U.K., and the USSR viewed our Article III as providing much greater coastal State control than in prior drafts and expressed concern that we are proceeding too rapidly to recognize coastal State fishing rights. They expressed doubt that we could maintain our present position, without going further in the direction of coastal State rights, until they were able to negotiate in the LOS context a satisfactory arrangement with the coastal States.

While these two extreme positions received most of the attention, some support did emerge for a more middle position. Although the U.S. draft fisheries Article was not the subject of much specific discussion, several delegations did refer to it as forming a basis of discussion. Some countries (such as Canada, Mexico and Australia), while indicating a preference for greater coastal States’ rights, suggested that these rights be delegated to the coastal State as a result of international treaties. Canada suggested the term “custodian” to describe the delegated coastal State rights. A number of countries, even some which favored exclusive control, expressed a willingness to regulate highly migratory species through regional or international arrangements.

Many of the views so far expressed by African and Asian states regarding an economic zone for fisheries are apparently opening negotiating positions. This has been indicated in private discussion and public statements expressing a willingness to explore alternative approaches. Moreover, a number of LDC’s are still to be heard from, especially those in Africa.

B. Other Significant Developments

(1) Marine Pollution

Little progress was made during this session on the issue of marine pollution. The U.S. stressed the work of the U.N. specialized agencies and various intergovernmental groups dealing with ocean pollution, and the desirability of internationally agreed standards on the subject. We stated that Subcommittee III should first assess the ongoing efforts of these groups and insure that items not adequately dealt with by the Stockholm and IMCO Conferences are identified and dealt with by the Subcommittee. The LOS Conference should draft such articles as were thought necessary to provide a broad international legal framework for dealing with marine pollution, while leaving detailed technical considerations to appropriate specialized bodies. We suggested that the Conference begin drafting at the Spring meeting Articles which would deal with marine pollution caused by seabed exploration and exploitation activities. In the course of our speech, we outlined steps being taken by the USG to combat pollution.

Spain and Australia proposed marine pollution control zones in high seas adjacent to the coast, and were supported by several other delegations. Japan and France criticized unilateral establishment of such zones. Canada took an aggressive stance on the question of pollution and expressed the view that the rights of coastal States to establish broad anti-pollution zones adjacent to the territorial sea, within the framework of a “custodianship” concept and the related delegation of powers, should be acknowledged. Japan thought that the most one could achieve at this time would be a new legal instrument for control of oil pollution. A number of other delegations favored regional arrangements, but most apparently favored basing such regional arrangements on internationally agreed principles. Norway, Spain, Mexico and Malta specifically suggested formulation of international guidelines. Spain and Mexico both pointed out their fear of possible pollution from nuclear transport.

(2) Scientific Research

Developed countries generally supported freedom of scientific research, while many LDC’s wanted it controlled by coastal State restrictions or supervised by some supranational body. The demands for such control became louder and more numerous at this session and will probably increase in the period ahead. LDC’s expressed strong interest in participating in scientific research and in obtaining access to the information resulting from such research. At least some LDC’s seemed to view participation in scientific research as encompassing desired technological assistance rather than being limited to joining a pure research effort. Argentina stated it intends to present a draft treaty regarding scientific research. The Latin American seabeds regime paper includes strong restrictions on scientific research.

(3) Seabeds Proposals

Draft treaty Articles on the seabeds were formally introduced by the Soviets, Malta and a group of thirteen Latin American States at this session. A group of seven landlocked/shelf-locked States presented a working paper on specific matters to be regulated in an international seabed convention.

The U.K. offered written proposals for elements of a convention and Canada introduced a working paper on the seabeds regime and machinery. Poland submitted a document dealing with international machinery. In general, none of the seabeds proposals introduced at this session, nor the earlier drafts by the U.S., the U.K., France and Tanzania, received systematic attention. However, each will undoubtedly be closely scrutinized when the Committee shifts from general to specific debate. This effort may be assisted by an analysis and comparison of the various proposals being prepared by the U.N. Secretariat for this Committee’s use next year.

(4) Procedure

Latin American States, led by Brazil and Peru, have persisted, with some effectiveness, in their efforts to delay the substantive preparatory work of the 1973 Conference until a comprehensive list of items to be considered by the Conference is developed. They have taken a very hard-line in negotiations with respect to agreement on a list. This has resulted in no agreement thus far. In private discussions, some Latin American Representatives have freely admitted that this is part of the Latin American delaying tactics; other Latins have criticized these tactics but have nevertheless continued to observe solidarity on procedural questions.

Several draft lists were introduced: A Latin American list, an Afro-Asian list, a Norwegian list and a Bulgarian list, among others. The Latin American and Afro-Asian lists were quite comprehensive. The United States was not opposed to a list per se. But we opposed the principal lists submitted because they either failed to include appropriate items or described other items in a manner which would pre-condition consideration thereof adversely to our objectives. Efforts to reach agreement on a list were not successful because of several factors: (1) Spanish and LA insistence that the section on straits not expressly recognize that free transit through and over straits is an appropriate item for discussion; (2) Latin American, and to some extent African, insistence upon reference to a zone of economic jurisdiction beyond the territorial sea as an “exclusive” zone; and (3) a dispute between shelf-locked States and other coastal States over the question of whether shelf-locked States are entitled to special rights. Discussion of the “List” was, and could in the future be, a major impediment to substantive progress.

Up to now, delaying tactics have not prevented the introduction and some discussion of the U.S. proposals and a wide-ranging general debate in which almost all delegations have participated actively. These public statements showed that almost all countries had analyzed their national and international interests and sought to articulate them. It was encouraging that many Asian and African countries indicated during this session that they were interested in proceeding more promptly with the substantive work.

(5) Delegation Representation

Some 20 representatives of the petroleum, oil and fishing industries, interested lawyers and professors, came to Geneva for varying periods of time to observe the proceedings. The fishing industry alone had nine representatives. None of these men were on the U.S. Delegation. Many of the industry representatives, particularly from fisheries, raised the issue of accreditation on the Delegation before, during and after the July/August session. Several Congressmen are currently communicating with the Department recommending accreditation of industry representatives to the Delegation for the next session. The primary reason for not having included industry representatives on the Delegation has been the question of the classified nature of national security interests. This question is under study by the various Departments at the present time.

III. Future Action

Future action should be directed primarily to the following areas:

First, regarding straits, we should actively seek to pick up the firm support of those non-straits’ States which have no compelling reasons not to support us, while at the same time pursuing direct diplomatic contacts with the major straits’ States.

Second, we should concentrate our efforts on achieving greater support for and more detailed discussions of our concept of mixed coastal and international controls over resources, particularly with States which seem attracted to the exclusive resource zone concept. At the same time, we must be careful to prevent a deterioration in the fairly broad consensus on a 12-mile territorial sea, particularly in Africa.

Third, relating to access to seabed minerals and Council representation, we should press for equal access to deep seabed minerals for all nations under terms conducive to investment and to continue to argue for acceptance of our proposal for weighted voting in the Council in favor of developed nations.

In light of the developments at the July/August meeting, we are implementing certain actions pursuant to NSDM 122, as stated below.

A. Study of Positive and Negative Incentives

The study of positive and negative incentives, levers, and sanctions pursuant to general Option 3 of NSSM 124 has begun. Particular emphasis is being placed upon straits’ States, States advocating 200-mile territorial seas or exclusive resource zones, other States that have extended their territorial sea beyond 12 miles, and certain opinion leader States.

B. Diplomatic Efforts

We intend to concentrate our diplomatic efforts on straits’ States, including in particular Spain, Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia. We believe efforts should be made to bring our NATO allies more into line with our own thinking, particularly on straits. Emphasis will be placed on France in light of her recent decision to extend her territorial sea to 12 miles and in view of her inclination toward a 200-mile exclusive resource zone. We also plan to make demarches or other diplomatic approaches to the Caribbean States prior to their planned meeting in November. Contact with African and Asian States will be made prior to the January meeting of the Afro-Asian Legal Consultative Committee at which many Afro-Asians may begin to take definitive positions. As a result of recent extensions of coastal jurisdiction in Africa, the OAU resolution calling for extension of fisheries jurisdiction, and the large number of votes in that continent, we plan to devote particular attention to Africa and bilateral consultations with the Ivory Coast, Ghana, Nigeria and Sierra Leone are being planned,

In all consultations we shall be concentrating on policy makers who will be making decisions which will determine whether or not the Conference will be successful.

C. People’s Republic of China

We also intend to initiate a study of the possible effects of participation by the People’s Republic of China in these negotiations, and to develop contingency plans.

D. Policy Review

We plan a substantive review of our positions as well. This review will be carefully coordinated with our diplomatic demarches to ensure that any reformulated positions are compatible with both efforts. With respect to straits, we will particularly wish to examine how we can respond to the concerns of straits States regarding traffic control and pollution.

We are also developing a coordinated position for handling pollution and scientific research in the context of the LOS preparatory negotiations, and this in turn will involve the further development of a coordinated USG position regarding our pollution objectives for the Stockholm Conference and in IMCO as well.

We intend to redraft our seabeds treaty in the light of international as well as domestic comments we have received. We hope in this connection to produce a shorter and simpler draft which will be more appealing to Afro-Asian countries. We have not decided whether this draft would, in fact, be introduced by us, or whether it would function as a guide for our negotiating position. We intend to invite the assistance of interested members of the public, particularly industry, in this redrafting project.

For internal purposes, we intend to develop alternate fisheries positions. In this connection, we intend to consult with members of the fishing industry and, perhaps, with foreign governments in determining the future direction we will take.

John R. Stevenson
The Legal Adviser
Chairman, NSDM-122
Ad Hoc Group

Note: This memorandum has been cleared with other interested agencies as appropriate.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122. Secret. Sent under an October 14 covering memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. For NSDM 122, see Document 405. A typed notation at the end of the memorandum reads, “This memorandum has been cleared with other agencies as appropriate.” The formal statements of the U.S. delegation at the Seabeds Committee meeting were not annexed but are printed in United States Congress, Senate, Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 92nd Congress, 1st Session, December 1971, Part 1, The Law of the Sea Crisis: A Staff Report on the United Nations Seabed Committee, the Outer Continental Shelf and Marine Mineral Development (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1972). The Department sent a summary report containing similar information as circular telegram CA-4763 to all diplomatic posts on October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8)

413. Telegram 4815 From the Embassy in Spain to the Department of State 413. Telegram 4815 From the Embassy in Spain to the Department of State1

Madrid, October 22, 1971, 1205Z.

Ref:

State 192158, Madrid 4808

1. At 10:00 am Friday, October 22, I personally presented President Nixon’s letter regarding the US position on the Law of the Sea to the Chief of State, General Franco.

2. In a brief cordial conversation with General Franco and FonMin Lopez Bravo, I explained to them the great importance the President of the United States attaches to this problem and said I hoped Spain would give the US position its full consideration.

3. General Franco, upon receiving the letter, stated Spain would seriously consider the matter but he stressed that public opinion in his country would have to be taken into account, in view of the Gibraltar problem.

4. General Franco looked well and appeared alert and was most friendly. I also conveyed to him the President’s best personal regards and he asked to have his friendly best wishes extended to President Nixon.

Hill

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

414. Telegram 194015 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain 414. Telegram 194015 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain1

Washington, October 22, 1971, 1629Z.

Subject:

Law of the Sea (LOS)

Refs:

A. State 157100

B. State 191161

C. Madrid 4706

For Ambassador Hill

1. The following information is for your background for discussions in Stuttgart with Spanish on straits issue. We do not anticipate that you will get into this much detail, and the NSSM and NSDM extracts are of course unsuitable for discussion with the GOS.

2. The following are slightly edited excerpts from the study prepared in response to NSSM 125:

The mobility of our strategic and general purpose forces has become a more important factor in our security as the presence of our forces on foreign territory is reduced, if the U.S. is to maintain an actual or potential military deterrent to localized aggression that is credible. Worldwide commitments and long lines of communications place additional emphasis on mobility requirements. Furthermore, our deterrent mobility forces must be capable of carrying out their missions without the support of others.

Strategic forces are essential to the maintenance of a stable political environment within which the threat of aggression or coercion against the U.S. or its allies is minimized. Thus, the survivability of our strategic forces is essential. As an indispensable element of our strategic forces, the U.S. seaborne nuclear deterrent is dependent not only upon freedom of mobility in the oceans and through certain international straits but upon secrecy. In the territorial sea, submarines are required to navigate on the surface. In the absence of free passage through straits, even a modest extension of the territorial sea from three to 12-miles would force us to choose in many international straits, including Gibraltar (the waters of which would be under Spanish control), between operating illegally, or striking the best possible bilateral bargain for consent to transit submerged (the cost of which could be expected to increase with the magnitude of the U.S. interest involved).

Our general purpose forces now play a larger role in deterring attacks than at any time since the nuclear era began. Like our strategic seaborne forces, our general purpose naval and air forces depend upon the maximum mobility for their operations, free of interference by others. Our mobility currently depends upon freedom to navigate on and under the high seas and through certain international straits and freedom to fly over the high seas and certain international straits. Regulatory authority regarding these activities over which the U.S. does not have effective control—whether exercised by a coastal State or an international agency—degrades our mobility.

About 80% of the value of U.S. foreign trade moves by ship. In addition, while the U.S. ranks only fifth in the world in deadweight tonnage of merchant ships under its flag, the inclusion of vessels owned by U.S. firms but registered under foreign flags would make the U.S. the leading merchant marine power in the world. Our economic interest is in maximum freedom of movement for merchant vessels at minimum possible cost, and is thus quite similar to our military high seas interest in freedom of navigation. The security and economic interests of our major allies are perhaps even more important to them in this respect, particularly with respect to the movement of raw materials and petroleum. Many coastal States share this interest whether or not they have large merchant fleets of their own, but it is unclear whether all of them fully understand their economic interest in avoiding undue restraints on merchant shipping.

As a major military and economic power with allies, commitments, and interests around the world, the U.S. has an international interest in the resolution of conflict over the oceans. Since the U.S. and its nationals use the oceans globally, there is always a significant danger that U.S. interests will be affected by a local conflict or that its direct interests in using the ocean will be involved, or its political, military, and economic interests in maintaining good relations with one or more of the parties to the dispute, will be prejudiced. A traditional source of conflict over the oceans has concerned navigation; the use and control of international straits has been a contributing factor to wars as recently as the 1967 Middle East War. Expanding competition for fisheries, and the lure of petroleum and mineral wealth from the seabed, are expanding the potential for clash of interests.

Expansion of coastal State control over important ocean areas increases the geopolitical importance of the coastal State concerned. The case of States bordering strategic straits is one example of this. Accordingly, both the U.S. and its rivals will be forced to pay increased attention to States that acquire such control. The chance of conflict, directly or indirectly involving the U.S., will increase as more and more coastal States believe they have a right to “close” important ocean areas (as the UAR did in the Strait of Tiran prior to the June 1967 war in the Middle East). The U.S. could be in a difficult military position if the coastal State had the power or the allies to make this effective, or in a difficult political position even in the absence of such power.

3. It was decided (NSDM 122) that the U.S. Representative to the Seabed Committee meeting in July/August 1971 would formally introduce draft Articles I and II with respect to a 12-mile territorial sea and free transit through and over international straits. These Articles were to be introduced in the form in which they had been previously discussed bilaterally with a number of countries. In introducing these proposals the U.S. Representative was instructed to make clear that they constitute basic elements of the Oceans Policy announced by the President in May 1970 and that any treaty to which the U.S. could be expected to become a party would have to accommodate these objectives. The delegation was instructed to indicate in discussions with other delegations that U.S. willingness to accommodate other States’ resources interests will depend on their willingness to accommodate these U.S. objectives. It also was directed that a high level diplomatic offensive in support of LOS policies be undertaken.

4. The following are excerpts from Mr. Stevenson’s August 3 speech to the U.N. Seabed Committee in Geneva.

[Omitted here are the excerpts from Stevenson’s speech in which he argued the case for the U.S. position on the law of the sea.]

5. The Strait of Gibraltar is 7.75 miles wide at its narrowest point. With a territorial sea of six or 12 miles, one must enter claimed Spanish territorial waters in transiting the Strait because the Spanish enclave of Ceuta on the African coast is 8.8 miles from the Spanish mainland. Spain now claims a territorial sea of six miles. The U.S. does not recognize territorial sea claims beyond three miles; this leaves at least a one and three-fourths miles strip of high seas through the Straits of Gibraltar. Ref A, paras two and four outline Spanish position taken at meetings of Seabed Committee.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Cleared with L/OA, EUR/SPP, S/S, and the White House. Approved by Stevenson.

415. Telegram 3859 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 415. Telegram 3859 From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, October 26, 1971, 2230Z.

Dept pass DOD for Office Ocean Affairs.

Subj:

LOS Spanish Position on Straits

1. During recent meetings of Seabed Commttee to approve the report of main committee for the March and July/August sessions, Spain continued to take a very inflexible approach in opposition to US views on straits. This was visibly demonstrated on the first day when they were successful in having language in the draft report changed from “question of supplementing and clarifying existing rules on the right of transit through and over international straits” to the “question of international straits”.

2. Spanish Del had done its homework well and produced a well structured show of support. Altogether some thirteen Dels spoke out in support of Spanish position. Primary argument was that original language was prejudicial and should be changed to more neutral language. In spirit of accommodation and also against overwhelming odds US eventually went along with Spanish proposal. Privately US made it clear to Spanish and many other Dels that we noted very carefully the Spanish plea for neutral language on Straits and that when it came time to agree on the list of issues we would expect the same degree of neutrality on the part of Spain regarding Straits.

3. Following is list of countries who spoke in support of Spanish proposal: Morocco, Sweden, Brazil, Denmark, Malaysia, Algeria, Yugoslavia, Pakistan, Greece, Iran, Ethiopia, Ecuador and Mauritania. Exempt.

Bush

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Madrid and Defense. Sent with a request to pass to the Office of Ocean Affairs in the Department of Defense.

416. National Security Decision Memorandum 139 416. National Security Decision Memorandum 1391

Washington, November 5, 1971.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

SUBJECT:

Fishing Negotiations with Chile, Ecuador and Peru

The President has considered the Ad Hoc Group Report submitted pursuant to NSDM 122 and the accompanying memorandum from the Department of State and the memorandum from the Departments of Defense and Commerce of October 4, 1971. He has decided that an effort should be made to reach an interim agreement with Chile, Ecuador and Peru on U.S. tuna fishing off their coasts pending the results of the U.N. Law of the Sea Conference.

Accordingly, the President has directed that we seek to enter into negotiations with Chile, Ecuador and Peru for an interim agreement, reserving our positions until a fixed time after the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. Specifically: -- As a prelude to negotiations, we should seek to obtain assurances from Ecuador and Peru that they will refrain from seizing U.S. fishing boats pending or during negotiations. If assurances are obtained, we would lift the ban on Foreign Military Sales.

-- In the negotiations, the U.S. should work for an arrangement under which U.S. fishermen would purchase coastal state licenses under protest, with assurances regarding license availability, fees, and no additional restrictions, with license fees to be paid into an escrow fund. The interim arrangement would terminate within a fixed time after the Law of the Sea Conference, regardless of the Conference outcome, and the disposition of the escrow fund would be negotiated in light of the results of the Conference.

-- Efforts will be made during these negotiations to obtain a public statement or private assurances by Chile, Ecuador and Peru that they recognize and accept the importance of free navigation and overflight beyond 12 miles and free transit through and over straits, and their support for this position in the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

-- To initiate such discussions, the Department of State is authorized to take any appropriate measures, including an approach to the Ecuadorian President.

The President also has directed that the Department of State, in conjunction with the Departments of Defense and Commerce, consult with appropriate members of Congress and representatives of the fishing industry concerning our negotiating objectives in respect to fisheries and the assurances we will seek as a basis for a resumption of Foreign Military Sales.

If negotiations succeed, the Executive Branch will propose legislation to provide reimbursement for license fees.

Should the talks fail to be held, or the initial round of talks not succeed but appear promising, the President will consider further action or instructions.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 97-144. Secret. Copies were sent to the Departments of Interior and Transportation, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the JCS, and the Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. The Ad Hoc Group Report, authored by Stevenson, outlined scenarios and negotiating positions for dealing with South American fisheries disputes. Accompanying memorandum communicated the views of the Department of State concerning the various options proposed and recommended an interim licensing arrangement. Both are attached to an October 6 memorandum from Eliot to Kissinger. (Ibid., RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122, 7/22/71-U.S. Oceans Policy) A joint October 4 memorandum from the Departments of Defense and Commerce favored the status quo as long as South American governments made statements regarding freedom of navigation and free transit that did not contravene the U.S. position. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-226, NSDM Files, NSDM 122)

417. Telegram 224617 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain 417. Telegram 224617 From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain1

Washington, December 14, 1971, 2022Z.

Quito for Legal Adviser Stevenson

Subject:

Law of the Sea

1. Spanish Ambassador Arguelles met with President Nixon 3:30 p.m. December 9 to deliver personally letter from General Franco on Law of the Sea which is reply to President’s letter to Franco of October 19.

2. Following is text of translation of Franco letter:

Quote

Madrid, November 18, 1971,

Dear Mr. President:

As Ambassador Hill will have informed you, I received him promptly in order that he might deliver to me personally your letter of October 19 last on the subject of navigation and overflight through and over straits.

I have given the contents of your letter my fullest attention. You are aware of the sincerity of my feelings of friendship toward your country and toward you personally, and you know of my earnest desire always for the best of understanding between our two Governments, since there is so much that links the destinies of the American and Spanish peoples.

Nevertheless, I must tell you that the general proposal of the United States on freedom of navigation and overflight through and over straits particularly affects long-range Spanish interests. The Strait of Gibraltar, which as you know attains a breadth of seven and a half miles in some places and is partially situated inside Spanish territorial waters, is and has been throughout history a point of vital importance to Spain, both strategically and economically. Its importance has been accentuated by modern progress in all its aspects, and it is not conceivable that my country, or any other country in the same position, should renounce legal protection of its legitimate interests when a possible revision of the Law of the Sea is projected.

I wish to mention also that public opinion in my country and the thinking of my own Government attach great importance to all matters relating to the area of Gibraltar, which is the subject of the permanently maintained Spanish claim with which you are familiar.

According to the United States proposal, not only those forces assigned to defense of the West would have the unrestricted right of free navigation and overflight, but also those of any other power, including the Soviet Union and China. This situation would, in my judgment aggravate the potential threat to which you allude in your letter with a concern that I share.

In my opinion, our Agreement of Friendship and Cooperation with the United States, in its various clauses and in its implementation by the authorities of Our two countries, provides an adequate arrangement for ensuring the maneuverability of your forces in this area, without the need of modifying the legal regime of innocent passage through the Strait, which respects the sovereignty of the coastal States and their right of self-defense.

In expressing my position with all frankness, as you asked me to do, I wish once more to renew my sentiments of friendship and esteem for you and your country, and I am instructing my Minister of Foreign Affairs, Lopez-Bravo, to consider this matter carefully, but without losing sight of our limitations as long as the colonial situation continues to exist in Gibraltar.

Very cordially yours,

F. Franco

Unquote

Irwin

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Towell; cleared with L/OA, and in substance with the White House; and approved by Deputy Assistant Secretary Russell Fessenden (EUR). Repeated to Quito for Stevenson.

418. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 418. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, January 2, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

In the memorandum at Tab B, Under Secretary Irwin reports that our most recent proposals for a negotiated interim situation to the fisheries dispute with the West Coast South American countries were not acceptable to Ecuador. These proposals involved an arrangement for payment of license fees into an escrow fund, or a “running account” arrangement, with the disposition of the fees to be determined in light of the results of the 1973 Law-of-the-Sea Conference. Primarily because of domestic political instability, the Ecuadorean leaders were unwilling to agree to anything which could be construed as a deal with the U.S. Thus, the Ecuadoreans would not agree to: -- negotiate an escrow or running-account arrangement;

-- assure us that they would refrain from seizures in return for a waiver of the EMS suspension;

-- give us explicit assurances of support for our territorial seas and straits position.

At the same time, Ecuador continued to insist that we pay for necessary licenses and fees, if our tuna clippers fish within Ecuador’s claimed 200-mile limit.

State and Commerce believe that the risks of a continuing cycle of boat seizures and sanctions, both to our hemispheric and law-of-the-sea interests, are so high that we should proceed unilaterally to seek legislation which would authorize reimbursement to fishermen who buy licenses under protest in advance. State and Commerce anticipate removal of seizures after the yellow fin tuna season opens on January 1. They note that the seizures and sanctions will: -- cause economic losses to U.S. fishermen, carry the risks that some boats may be confiscated and American seamen imprisoned, and create political pressures in Congress to escalate retaliation against Ecuador;

-- lead Ecuador to charge us with economic aggression in the OAS, and possibly take action against the $300 million Texaco-Gulf oil investment

-- further polarize the hemisphere nations against us on the law-of-the-sea issue and hamper our efforts to isolate the extreme 200-mile Latin American countries.

State and Commerce, therefore, recommend that the Executive Branch seek legislative authority to amend the Fishermen’s Protective Act to provide for reimbursement of fees paid for licenses bought on or before January 1, 1972, because of the threat of seizure. Reimbursement would depend upon the fishermen filing a protest, and the Secretary of State would be required to make claims against the foreign government for the amounts expended by the U.S. The amount of funds would be taken into account by the Congress and the Executive Branch. The precise language of the proposed legislation is at Tab C. It is our understanding that U.S. tuna interests will go along with this arrangement. State and Commerce propose that we seek, but not absolutely require: -- Ecuadorean assurances of support for our territorial seas and straits position;

-- that they would not seize U.S. tuna boats pending passage of the amendment.

In return, we would waive the FMS suspension and send a team immediately to discuss their military equipment needs.

The Department of Defense believes that the adoption of the amendment would be viewed by many countries as tantamount to recognition of exclusive coastal state jurisdiction over fisheries within a 200-mile zone. It, therefore, believes that we should seek such legislation only if we obtain adequate assurance of support by the CEP countries for our territorial seas and straits positions.

I believe that our prime objective should continue to be to achieve an interim solution to the fisheries problem which (a) avoids further seizures, and (b) protects our vital national security positions for the 1973 Law-of-the-Sea Conference. I agree with the State and Commerce position that a continuing cycle of seizures and sanctions can only polarize hemisphere attitudes and harden the Latins around the more extreme 200-mile position. Continued seizures could also become an increasing domestic political problem during the coming year, particularly if injuries are experienced by crew members or vessels of the San Diego-based tuna fleet are damaged.

I believe it may be possible for us to get assurance’s from Ecuador—which is the key problem country—on our territorial seas and straits position. The Ecuadoreans have already indicated flexibility on the territorial seas issue. The straits issue is of no direct consequence for Ecuador, and hence they should be able to accommodate to our vital interests on this point.

I also believe that we should press very hard for assurance that there will be no seizures during the interim period pending passage of the new legislation. Although the Ecuadoreans refused to provide this kind of assurance previously, their Defense Minister indicated recently to our Ambassador that the military is very interested in receiving equipment under FMS. Our Ambassador believes that agreement might be reached if we offer the incentive of lifting the FMS suspension and responding quietly to their military requests. Although restraint from seizures during the interim period is not an absolute essential, it would undoubtedly enhance the chances for passage of the new legislation.

We have kept the Peruvian Government informed of our efforts to negotiate a solution with the Ecuadoreans, and the Peruvians have continued to exercise restraint while we try to work things out with Ecuador. It is not certain, however, that a new Peruvian Foreign Minister—who is scheduled to take over next month—will continue to maintain this constructive approach.

Attached at Tab A for your approval is a directive approving submission of the new legislation as recommended by State and Commerce, but conditioning it upon Ecuadorean support for our straits position. It also indicates a negotiating scenario which calls for the U.S. negotiators to make every effort to obtain assurances of Ecuadorean restraint pending passage of the legislation.

RECOMMENDATION:

That you approve the directive at Tab A. Bill Timmons concurs.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-229, NSDM Files, NSDM 139. Secret. Sent for action. There is no indication on the memorandum of Nixon’s approval or disapproval of the recommendation, but Tab A, published as Document 419, issued instructions that follow the recommendations advanced in this memorandum. Tab B is a December 24 memorandum to Kissinger from Irwin, in which he recommended a compromise with Ecuador that is encapsulated in NSDM 147 (Ibid.). At Tab C is an undated draft of proposed amendments to the Fisherman’s Protective Act. Tabs B and C are not published.

419. National Security Decision Memorandum 147 419. National Security Decision Memorandum 1471

Washington, January 4, 1972.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

The President has read Under Secretary Irwin’s memorandum of December 24 on the fisheries dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile. He has decided that we should continue our efforts to achieve a modus vivendi which would end our fisheries confrontation with the West Coast Latin American states, while at the same time protecting our juridical and negotiating position for the coming Law of the Sea Conference. He has, therefore, approved submission of the amendment to the Fishermen’s Protective Act proposed in Under Secretary Irwin’s memorandum, in accordance with the scenario set forth below.

The President has directed that a high-level team to be headed by a representative of the Department of State, and to include a representative of the Department of Defense, return to Ecuador to present a position as follows: (1) The President is seriously concerned, as he has been for some time, that harmonious relations with Ecuador and Peru have been seriously hampered by our differences over fisheries.

(2) We understand how strongly the Ecuadoreans feel. They in turn must understand that our position involves vital national security interests which we cannot jeopardize.

(3) The choice before us is either to seek a mutually acceptable compromise, with which we both can live, or to expect one party to yield completely. We do not believe the latter offers any prospect of success.

(4) The U.S. is prepared to make substantial concessions to meet Ecuador’s prime requirements. It is our hope that this forthcoming approach will be reciprocated, permitting us to renew our traditional warm relations. Specifically, we are prepared to accept the Foreign Minister’s suggestion that we submit legislation to Congress providing for reimbursement to U.S. fishermen for purchase of licenses under protest in advance where it is determined there is danger of seizures. We will propose that such legislation be retroactive to January 1, 1972.

(5) In return, we will need the following specific quid pro quo: (a) A public statement of Ecuadorean support for the freedom of transit through international straits position supported by the United States. This statement need not be specifically linked with resolution of the fisheries dispute (although we will privately tell Congressmen and others that this link exists). The statement should be made within the next four months, the precise form and date to be at Ecuadorean discretion.

(b) Public Ecuadorean support for freedom of navigation and over-flight beyond 12 miles. The qualifications about linking and timing in sub-paragraph (a) above apply here as well.

(c) No seizures during the interim period before the new legislation takes effect (as well, of course, as afterwards). In return for private assurances on this point, we would lift the FMS suspension.

(6) If a satisfactory modus vivendi on this basis can be agreed, we would expect reasonable assurances of no further seizures after our legislation enters into effect. On this basis, the President will be prepared to lift the Foreign Military Sales sanctions. At that point, or earlier if the Ecuadorean Government will simultaneously put into effect a provisional licensing system or otherwise give reasonable assurances against seizures in the interim period (sub-paragraph 5(c)), the U.S. Government will be prepared to send a State/Defense team immediately to consider Ecuador’s military equipment requirements.

In presenting our position, the President considers sub-paragraph 5(a) is essential. Sub-paragraphs 5(b) and (c) are very important and should only be surrendered if and when it becomes clear that the negotiations cannot otherwise succeed.

The President desires that the negotiating team leave as soon as possible. The team is authorized to speak with appropriate GOE officials including the Minister of Defense. The precise modalities for these talks will be left to the team’s discretion.

The President also wishes the Peruvian Government to be fully informed of the team’s discussions with the Ecuadoreans. The Peruvians should be informed that the President would be prepared at any time to make the same arrangements for lifting the FMS suspension to Peru as he is prepared to make with Ecuador.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. A note attached to a January 6 copy of this NSDM, which was addressed by McIntyre apparently to Samuel De Palma, reads: “Sam: Meyer, Stevenson and McKernan feel the emphasis placed on Ecuador’s straits position is wrong and are trying to get greater negotiating flexibility from the White House.” (Department of State Files, OES/OLP/OCEANS Files: Lot 90 D 180, Box 3, POL 33.14(c), CEP talks on fisheries).

420. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 420. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Irwin) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 6, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile—NSDM 147

Assistant Secretary Meyer, Legal Adviser Stevenson and the Coordinator of Ocean Affairs McKernan have reviewed at length with me the position which the high level negotiating team returning to Ecuador is directed to present.

It is their unanimous conclusion that obtaining, as a quid pro quo from the Ecuadoreans, a commitment to make public a statement of support for freedom of transit through international, straits (subparagraph 5a) has little chance of success. The specific question was raised by the team on several occasions in the course of the December 10-15 mission with the Foreign Minister who stated each time that he did not regard the Ecuadorean position on straits as an appropriate subject for interim agreement. He regarded his country’s position on straits as negotiable only in connection with satisfaction of Ecuadorean objectives at the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. The Foreign Minister was clear and explicit on this point.

Messrs. Meyer, Stevenson and McKernan believe the Foreign Minister will continue to reject any attempt to link the interim settlement to the straits question. It is their view that for the second mission to return to Ecuador and have the mission founder on this issue would be highly prejudicial to the possibility of damping down mutual escalation resulting from seizures in the event of no agreement. They also believe a failure of a second mission will reduce the possibility of obtaining positive Congressional action in the event of a determination to proceed unilaterally because of the severe prejudice to both our hemispheric relations and law of the sea position resulting from the seizure retaliation cycle.

Finally, they believe that there is virtually no possibility of the Peruvian Government giving an assurance on the straits question at this time in view of its public support of Spain at last summer’s Geneva meeting, at least until the U.S. is in a position publicly to indicate further accommodation of the Peruvian position with respect to resources jurisdiction beyond 12 miles.

Although the Department of Defense accepts and prefers the position laid down by NSDM 147, our judgment continues to be that, aside from other important foreign policy reasons for seeking an interim solution to the fishing problem, the risk to our overall law of the sea position at the 1973 conference is greater if no interim agreement is reached with Ecuador than if an agreement is reached without a commitment for support of our straits position. This is the critical issue. We also believe that an interim agreement, although not conditioned on obtaining a commitment at this time to support our straits position, would in fact facilitate such support at a later date.

Accordingly, we recommend that the mission be authorized not to insist upon subparagraph 5a in the event the negotiation cannot otherwise succeed and request that this authorization be granted before the mission departs. We are presently planning to make arrangements for the mission to leave late Sunday, January 9.

The mission would, of course, stress in the strongest terms the importance of obtaining Ecuadorean support for freedom of transit through international straits. In this connection it would in our view facilitate the achievement of an Ecuadorean commitment to make a public statement on straits if the Ecuadorean statement could be conditioned on accommodation at the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference of their objectives with respect to coastal state jurisdiction over resources of the sea.

In view of the restraint that the Peruvian Government has shown throughout 1971 in which it made only one seizure, we recommend that we be authorized to inform the Peruvians that we are prepared to lift the de facto Peruvian FMS suspension without any preconditions other than an indication that the Peruvian policy of restraint will be continued in the future. We recognize that this would result in different treatment of Peru and Ecuador, but we believe such differentiation is merited by the different policy that Ecuador and Peru have followed with respect to seizures throughout the last year.

John N. Irwin II
Under Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 147-1/4/72-Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru, and Chile. Secret. Drafted by Irwin and Stevenson and concurred in by Meyer and McKernan.

421. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 421. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, January 8, 1972.

Subject:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

In his memorandum to you of January 6, 1972, Under Secretary Irwin recommended that in view of the restraint the Peruvian Government had shown throughout 1971, in which it seized only one American fishing vessel, the United States Government be prepared to consider lifting the FMS suspension to Peru without any pre-conditions other than an indication that the Peruvian policy of restraint will be continued in the future. This memorandum is in response to the January 7 request of the NSC Staff that the Department elaborate its reasons for treating Peru and Ecuador differently with respect to the lifting of FMS, discuss the legal bases for such action, and comment on the tactical implications for the Ecuadorean discussions that different treatment of Peru might have.

The contrast between Ecuador and Peru when measured by numbers of vessels seized is quite stark. Ecuador has seized fifty-one to Peru’s one. That this difference merits different treatment has been recognized since March 31, when the Department was informed by the NSC Staff that any decision to suspend FMS as a result of the March 30 seizure was to be submitted to the President for decision. In accordance with these instructions to defer application of any sanctions against Peru, the Department has not yet formally applied the suspension of FMS eligibility called for in the FMS Act. Neither has it been formally waived. Since April 3, FMS to Peru has been held “under review”. The de facto result of the review has been that no new FMS letters of offer, sales agreements, related commitments, or price and availability data are being issued to Peru. Moreover, the claim submitted by the vessel seized on March 30 was certified by the State Department and paid by Treasury on December 23, 1971. In these circumstances, we believe that a formal waiver of the FMS suspension is necessary with respect to Peru. It should be noted that by the provisions of the Act, the suspension would cease to be effective as regards Peru on March 30, 1972, if there were no seizures between now and then.

The recommendation made in the Under Secretary’s memorandum is not significantly different from the recommendation we made to the President on August 4, 1971, when we proposed that, while Ecuador was to respond affirmatively on a number of items before FMS could be waived, application of the FMS sanction to Peru should be waived in return for “cooperation”. The President approved the Ecuadorean scenario with its more lenient treatment for Peru on August 12, 1971.

In the present scenario for resolving the fishing dispute with Ecuador and Peru, as in the August 1971 scenario, the Department has based its recommendations with respect to the lifting of FMS on the fact that Section 3(b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act, under which the suspension was applied, offers two avenues of relief. These are, a Presidential determination that a waiver of the suspension is “important to the security of the United States”, or receipt by the President of “reasonable assurances from the country involved that future violations will not occur…” On both occasions, the Department has recommended that the “reasonable assurances” route be utilized, believing that a national security waiver for Peru, but not Ecuador, places us in the position of having to make distinctions between countries which would be difficult, if not impossible, to explain and which, extended to the potential problem with Brazil, might seriously complicate our relations with that country if similar relief were not quickly forthcoming should that country begin to seize vessels in the absence of a solution to our fisheries problems on the East Coast of South America.

The recommendation that the President be prepared to waive the suspension of FMS to Peru on a “reasonable assurances” basis, more generous than that we are offering Ecuador, proceeds from our view that more generous treatment is warranted, and can be offered without serious effect on the negotiations with Ecuador. In addition, even if the negotiations with Ecuador should fail, there would still be some chance that Peru would not resort to seizures.

That Peru expects to be treated differently is demonstrated clearly by the record of Peruvian approaches at various levels of the USG throughout the last several months. In Lima, Peruvian military officials made clear to our Ambassador on several occasions in late 1971 that the denial of access to FMS was causing great strain to traditional service-to-service relationships with the Armed Forces of the United States. In addition, during November and December, as a background to the Finch Meyer and subsequent Meyer-Stevenson trips, the Peruvian Armed Forces, both in Lima and Washington, presented lists of substantial amounts of military equipment which they wished to obtain under the Foreign Military Sales Act. In Washington, the Peruvian Embassy began to indicate to the Department, starting in early October, that there was a link between Peruvian restraint with respect to seizures and renewed access to FMS. In December, the Peruvian Embassy warned that the policy of restraint was coming under increasing criticism within the Peruvian Government and that moderate elements responsible for it needed evidence of its effectiveness. The Embassy made clear that access to FMS was that evidence. Also in December, the Peruvian Foreign Minister told our Ambassador that Peruvian authorities had ignored the presence of American tuna boats in Peruvian waters but that, because of increasing pressures, further restraint with respect to seizures could no longer be guaranteed. Up to the present time, however, the Peruvian Embassy continues to make clear renewed access to FMS will encourage moderation and continued restraint in spite of the fact that the tuna fishing season has begun.

The Foreign Military Sales Act requires that the President report his waiver action to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate. Consequently, a waiver for Peru, and the basis on which it was made, would become public knowledge. The Peruvian Government may decide that, in the interest of solidarity with Ecuador and Peru’s acknowledged leadership of the 200-mile club, it cannot risk being the beneficiary of a “reasonable assurances” waiver. There is, therefore, no guarantee that Peru, even if it indicates its willingness to exercise restraint on seizures, will accept an offer to exchange FMS for restraint. There is no cost to the U.S. in making the offer. If it is accepted, we will have effectively demonstrated to both Ecuador and Peru that we are prepared to make distinctions between countries that seize 51 vessels, and those that seize one, we will have reduced the ability of Peru to join Ecuador in any repetition of the charges of economic aggression before the OAS, and we will have created the possibility that although there may be fishing vessel seizures off the coast of Ecuador if negotiations fail, there may be none off Peru.

The Department of Commerce, which supports the recommendation in the Under Secretary’s memorandum of January 6, intends to submit separate comments in response to the NSC Staff memorandum of January 7. The Department of Defense is submitting its views separately.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr
Executive Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-FISH US. Secret. Drafted in ARA/EP by R. L. Ridgway and cleared in ARA/EP by Deputy Director Richard F. Weber, and Executive Assistant B. Scott Custer, Jr., (U), in substance by McKernan, and in draft by Deputy Assistant Secretary John H. Crimmins (ARA) and Stevenson. Copies were sent to Carter (Defense) and Johnson (NOAA).

422. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, Secretary of Defense Laird, and Secretary of Commerce Stans 422. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to Secretary of State Rogers, Secretary of Defense Laird, and Secretary of Commerce Stans1

Washington, January 14, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Foreign Military Sales Suspension Affecting Peru

The President has studied the considerations and views set forth in your Departments’ memoranda and has approved an approach to the Peruvian Government including the following elements: 1. An expression of appreciation for the restraint shown by the Government of Peru during the past nine months.

2. The observation that the Foreign Military Sales suspension expires on March 30, 1972.

3. An invitation to the Government of Peru to begin immediate consultations with us on the type of military equipment they wish to acquire.

4. The observation that if the Government of Peru were pre-pared to indicate that the policy of restraint would be continued, the United States Government would lift the Foreign Military Sales suspension immediately.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, INCO-FISH US. Secret.

423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, February 22, 1972.

Subject:

Report on Implementation and Proposed Modifications of NSDM-62 and NSDM-122.

Enclosed herewith is a report submitted by the Ad Hoc Croup established pursuant to NSDM-122 which proposes certain modifications in the positions set forth in NSDM-62 and NSDM-122. This memorandum has been prepared by the Inter-Agency Law of the Sea Task Force acting as the Ad Hoc Croup established under NSDM-122. The report is being concurrently submitted to the various agencies for formal clearance.

John R. Stevenson
Chairman
Inter-Agency Task Force
On the Law of the Sea

Attachment
Report Prepared in the National Security Council

Washington, undated

Report on Implementation and Proposed Modifications of NSDM-62 and NSDM-122

This report is submitted by the Ad Hoc Group established pursuant to NSDM-122 and reports on measures which the U.S. Delegation plans to take at the February/March session of the expanded United Nations Seabed Committee, acting as the preparatory committee for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference, in implementation of NSDM-62 and NSDM-122. It also proposes certain modifications in the positions set forth in these NSDM’s. Further reports will be submitted in the future as necessary.

At the March session other Delegations may, if the U.S. Delegation is not in a position to act, move irreversibly toward positions which are damaging to our interests. Already some States have adopted positions which if widely accepted would seriously threaten these interests. The decision regarding the authority of the Delegation recommended in this report cannot be deferred until some time after March; this could well be too late to influence the course of negotiations on matters important to the U.S. or to maintain the possibility of holding a successful conference in 1973. Accordingly, the Delegation will need to have available at the March session the added authority recommended in this report if it is to have sufficient flexibility to advance, or to prevent serious impairment to, U.S. Law of the Sea objectives, including in particular our national security objectives.

General Approach

The U.S. Delegation should continue to indicate in discussions with other delegations that U.S. willingness to accommodate other States’ resource interests will depend on their willingness to accommodate U.S. objectives.

For the purpose of the March meeting, the Delegation should work from the tabled Seabed Treaty and Draft LOS Articles and seek to obtain support for U.S. LOS objectives, specified in NSDM 62 and NSDM 122, including in particular free transit through and over international straits. The authority requested herein to make changes in the U.S. position expressed thus far in the international negotiations should be used: (a) to obtain our LOS objectives, particularly national security objectives;

(b) to maintain the viability of the U.S. proposals as a part of an emerging LOS package acceptable to the U.S.;

(c) to increase the possibility that other States will conclude that a conference in 1973 is in their interest.

Major negotiating concessions, however, should be reserved for our overall national security objectives in freedom of navigation and free transit through and over international straits.

1. Territorial Sea and Straits

The positions set forth in NSDM-122 will continue to govern the Delegation’s action. The U.S. Representative will continue to make clear that Articles I (12-mile territorial sea), and II (free transit through and over international straits), constitute basic elements of the President’s Oceans Policy and that any treaty to which the United States could be expected to become a party would have to accommodate these objectives.

2. Seabed Proposals

As described in more detail in the report to you of October 14, 1971, on the implementation of NSDM-122, the U.S. trusteeship zone proposal for the coastal seabed area has not received much support and has been widely criticized by the developing coastal States. In order to achieve more general acceptance for the most essential aspects of the U.S. trusteeship proposal, particularly with respect to national security objectives, including the protection of freedom of navigation from “creeping jurisdiction” in the zone between the territorial sea and the fully international seabed area, it is recommended that the U.S. Representative be authorized to indicate that the U.S. would be willing to make the following modifications in the U.S. proposals: (a) Change name of international trusteeship area.

The United States would use a less controversial name not subject to so much misunderstanding as to its legal content or colonial overtones. Any generally acceptable term which would not imply exclusive coastal State controls would be acceptable.

(b) Limits of zone.

The U.S. Representative would continue to support the present U.S. proposal for an inner boundary of the zone of the outer limit of the territorial sea (which under the U.S. proposal would be 12-miles with free transit through and over international straits) or the 200 meter depth line, whichever is further seaward. Pursuant to NSDM-122, the U.S. Representative indicated at last summer’s session of the Seabed Committee, a willingness to consider a mileage outer boundary as well as an outer boundary with alternative formulations which would involve mileage, depth or geological limits. He should reiterate this position and may indicate that the mileage alternative could be as great as 200 miles. Some delegations may wish to have an alternative depth or geological limit for the outer boundary of the coastal zone because their continental margin extends substantially beyond 200 miles. There are only a few such countries, e.g., Argentina, Canada, India, New Zealand and the U.S.S.R. If it appears that it would be to the U.S. advantage in achieving its negotiating objectives, the U.S. Representative may indicate in private conversations that the U.S. is prepared to accept a 200 mile boundary with an alternative to include the continental margin either by a depth limit or a precise geological limit. The U.S. continental margin extends beyond 200 miles in some areas of the Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico and off Alaska and the U.S. would benefit, in terms of seabed resource control, from either a depth or geological alternative boundary formulation.

(c) Nature of coastal State jurisdiction in zone.

Coastal States would be delegated the exclusive right to explore and exploit seabed resources in the zone in accordance with treaty provisions. The rights of the coastal State would be exclusive in the sense that they would not depend on occupation, or on effective exploitation, and if the coastal State did not explore or exploit the seabed resources, no other State could explore or exploit them without the coastal State’s consent.

The principal change from the present U.S. proposal in the nature of the resource jurisdiction delegated to the coastal State in the zone is that this jurisdiction would not be subject to international resource development standards as such, i.e., there would be no mining code provision governing matters such as the length of the term, the size of areas licensed, and the licensing procedures. Thus each coastal State could, if it so desired, extend its national licensing procedures to this area. International limits on the coastal State would be restricted to standards such as those set forth in (d) which do not govern resource management as such but rather are included to protect other uses of the area and the marine environment.

Jurisdiction and control over all natural resources of the seabed and subsoil in the zone would be delegated to the coastal State. Living resources of the sedentary species would be included in the above category except that, consistent with the present U.S. draft seabed proposal, sedentary species would not be subject to revenue sharing. Sedentary species could alternatively be treated as non-migratory fisheries or as a separate fisheries category under the U.S. fisheries proposal.

Modifications of the U.S. position regarding the nature of coastal State seabed resource jurisdiction in the zone would be made in the context of explaining the continuing concern of the U.S. with creeping jurisdiction, i.e., the use of resource jurisdiction to exercise control over other uses of the area. Accordingly, the U.S. Delegation would stress the importance of the basic concept of our draft convention—that coastal State rights in the zone are delegated by the treaty and are limited to what is delegated and not merely by the express international elements set forth in (d); there would be no residual coastal State sovereignty in the zone. In this connection, the U.S. Delegation should point out that compulsory dispute settlement is a necessary concomitant of coastal State delegated rights.

(d) International standards and compulsory dispute settlement in the zone.

The Delegation should stress that the following international standards are to be applicable in the zone as express treaty limitations on the resource jurisdiction delegated to the coastal State. Coastal State compliance with these standards would be subject to compulsory adjudication: 1. Openness of the zone to other uses (subject to reasonable regard for exploration and exploitation activities).

2. Avoidance of unjustifiable interference with other uses of the marine environment and the area.

3. Protection of the marine environment from damage caused by seabed exploration and exploitation, including the prevention of damage to living resources.

4. Protection of human life and safety.

5. No effect on the legal status of the superjacent waters or that of the air space above these waters.*

6. Revenue sharing with the international community (with income tax jurisdiction over exploitation operations in the zone remaining in the coastal State).

7. Protection against expropriation without adequate compensation.

The Delegation would also stress that the Council of the Authority is to be empowered to fix non-discriminatory minimum standards (the coastal State could apply higher standards) regarding the use of the seabed resource zone in the following fields: 1. Protection of the marine environment from seabed pollution (including non-commercial deep drilling).

2. Prevention of unjustifiable interference by the coastal State in exercise of its resource jurisdiction with navigation in the superjacent waters. With regard to revenue sharing within the zone, it would also be appropriate for the Council to be authorized to establish accounting and other procedures within the limits specified in the Treaty.

With respect to the fully international seabed area (the area beyond the coastal State seabed resource zone), the U.S. Representative will generally pursue previously established positions, but shall take into account, when consistent with the protection of our principal interests, the comments and criticisms made by other nations and experts in the field. For example, the U.S. will continue to oppose an international operating agency and measures that would eliminate protection against developing country control of the Council, but could indicate that developing countries should have greater control over the disposition of international revenues.

3. Fisheries Proposals

In our October 14, 1971, report to you on implementation of NSDM-122 at the July/August 1971 session of the Seabed Committee, we reported in detail on the. fisheries proposal made at that session. In general, the discussion of fisheries jurisdiction reflected three different points of view: First, exclusive coastal State fishing rights over a broad zone, often expressed as 200-mile exclusive resource jurisdiction; second, freedom of fishing on the high seas and the continuation of existing international and regional fishing commissions; and third, a species approach such as proposed by the U.S. under which coastal States would be accorded preferential rights over fisheries on the high seas adjacent to their coasts with respect to coastal species of fish (such as cod and shrimp) and anadromous species (such as salmon) spawning in their rivers and swimming far to sea, but not with respect to highly migratory species such as tuna.

A significant number of developing countries, as well as Australia and France, expressed considerable interest in the first approach, with the LDC’s strongly advocating the right of coastal States to use and manage the living resources adjacent to their coasts. Many developing coastal States emphasized the need for a zone of jurisdiction to protect the living resources off their coasts from over-exploitation by distant-water factory fleets. The LDC’s were also critical of conservation efforts of existing regional and international fishing arrangements.

The principal advocates of freedom of fishing on the high seas were, in addition to the landlocked countries, States with predominant distant-water fishing interests such as the U.K., Japan, the Soviet Union and the Eastern European bloc. These countries have not supported our present fisheries article, believing it goes too far in the direction of coastal States. Their opposition to any further major concessions to coastal States in New York in March is virtually certain.

Since last summer’s meeting of the Seabeds Committee the Organization of African Unity has officially called for an extension of fishing limits to where a water depth of 600 meters is reached. At the meeting of the Afro-Asian Legal Consultative Committee in Lagos last month, the developing countries continued to indicate their support for a 200-mile exclusive resource zone, although certain of them indicated that if the zonal concept were accepted they would be favorably disposed to accept international elements such as international standards for access and license fees.

The U.S. draft fisheries article received little support. It was referred to by some delegations as forming a basis of discussion but was not itself the subject of much specific discussion. Although not all countries have expressed views on the subject, it is our opinion that the principal reasons for the lack of support for the fisheries article presented by the United States are (1) the widespread opposition expressed by developing coastal States (and shared by the U.S. coastal fisheries industry) to the provisions promoting the establishment of regional or international fishing organizations and providing for coastal State jurisdiction over coastal species only when such organizations are not established; (2) coastal fishing States’ objections to retention of protection for traditional fishing (on a negotiated basis); and (3) a broad trend among developing countries in favor of a coastal State exclusive fishing zone.

The U.S. Representative will restate our flexibility on resource issues in accordance with NSDM 122. Pursuant thereto, the U.S. Representative should be authorized to discuss and, if the Delegation so decides, to indicate the United States is prepared to accept modifications along the following lines in its fisheries proposals. The timing of the following scenario will be dependent upon the negotiating situation, including the response of other nations to our moves and upon the initiatives made by other States. The elements, which may be utilized alone or in combination by the U.S. Delegation, follow: (a) Coastal State regulatory and enforcement jurisdiction

Coastal States would be given clear regulatory and enforcement jurisdiction with respect to the coastal and anadromous species adjacent to their coasts, and could designate regulatory areas based on the location of the stocks. Coastal State jurisdiction over trial and punishment could be included, but this could be indicated separately for tactical reasons.

(b) Traditional fishing rights

Coastal States would have the right to phase-out or terminate with compensation, distant-water traditional fishing with respect to coastal and anadromous species to the extent the coastal State’s capacity increased. (A five-year phase-out period might adequately balance the coastal and distant-water interests involved.)

(c) Licensing of foreign fishing

Although distant-water fishing States would have a right of access to under-utilized coastal and anadromous species, coastal States would have the right to license, subject to international standards for reasonable user fees and non-discriminatory access to the fishery, foreign fishing with respect to coastal and anadromous species which the coastal States does not have the capacity to catch. (The non-discrimination requirement should not preclude special reciprocal and other arrangements between States in the region. We are also prepared to accept reasonable and non-discriminatory licensing and user fees established regional or international organizations for oceanic species.)

(d) Effect of coastal State regulations during arbitration

The power of the arbitral commission to delay the implementation of coastal State regulations during arbitration would be reduced or limited.

(e) International register of fishery experts

Introduce the concept of establishing an international register of fishery experts from which any developing State may select an advisory group to assist in designing and carrying out fishery management programs that will enable it to apply the provisions of the modified Article to its best advantage. (The expenses of such advisory groups would be covered by a percentage of the user fees collected by coastal States and oceanic management groups.)

(f) Zonal approach with species elements

Coastal States would manage coastal species (but not highly migratory species, e.g., tuna) in a zone extending from a 12-mile territorial sea out to a distance of up to 200 miles and would also manage anadromous species (e.g., salmon), originating in the coastal State’s rivers, both within the zone and beyond it, throughout their migratory range on the high seas.

The zonal approach in (f) is potentially far-reaching in its effect on our negotiating position with respect to navigation, scientific research, and pollution and with respect to tuna and salmon. Our willingness to accept a zonal approach might encourage nations that support a resource zone to support our national security objectives; on the other hand there is a risk that our acceptance of a zone for fisheries jurisdiction might encourage coastal states to seek further rights that might adversely affect our navigation interests.

Moreover, there is a difference of opinion as to whether the zonal approach will facilitate, or prejudice, our attempt to obtain special treatment for tuna and salmon. On the one hand by approaching jurisdiction over all fisheries on a species approach it is more logical to create special rules with respect to salmon and tuna; in addition, a move to a zonal approach now could make it very difficult to maintain special rules for salmon and tuna throughout the negotiations. On the other hand, the interests of other states in a zonal approach may he such that they would be willing to concede special rules for tuna and salmon in exchange for U.S. willingness to accept a zone; in addition, without U.S. participation and support, the leaders in formulating a zonal approach to fisheries could more likely become irrevocably committed to an exclusive zone without special rules for tuna and salmon.

Both coastal and distant water U.S. fishermen are currently united behind the species approach. The tuna and salmon industries in particular would vigorously oppose a zonal approach as prejudicing the chances of obtaining necessary special rules regarding control over tuna and salmon, unless as a result of their assessments of the negotiating situation and discussions with U.S. Government experts, they became convinced of possible advantage in moving to a zonal approach in order to obtain such rules.

For these reasons, the Delegation, while authorized to discuss this option (taking care to avoid any prejudice to our effort to sell the species approach), should move to indicate its acceptance only after a conscientious effort to sell the species approach steps in the scenario, the most careful consideration of the negotiating situation, and after it is determined to the Delegation’s satisfaction that such a move is necessary to obtain U.S. objectives. The precise tactics in indicating support for a zonal approach of this kind should be the responsibility of the Delegation subject to the following general limitations: the U.S. Representative should not take the initiative in making this proposal but rather should indicate, preferably in private consultations, the U.S. Government’s willingness to support proposals of others along these lines.

The Delegation should, under all of the approaches listed above, insist on treaty standards which limit the exercise of coastal State jurisdiction, and which are subject to compulsory arbitration. These standards should include protection of other uses of the marine environment (e.g., navigation), necessary rules for tuna and salmon, conservation of fish stocks, and maximum utilization of fisheries in the zone (subject to reasonable coastal State conditions regarding access).

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, S/S-I Files: Lot 83 D 305, Box 4, NSDM 122-7/22/71-US Oceans Policy. Unclassified. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. On March 1 Eliot sent a memorandum to Kissinger indicating that the Departments of State, Defense, Commerce, and Interior had cleared the report. (Ibid.) For NSDM 62, see Document 375. For NSDM 122, see Document 405.

* Freedom of navigation in the waters beyond a 12-mile territorial sea and overflight of these waters would be protected elsewhere in the treaty.

424. National Security Decision Memorandum 157 424. National Security Decision Memorandum 1571

Washington, March 13, 1972.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of Interior

SUBJECT:

Preparatory Meeting for the Law of the Sea Conference

1. The President has reviewed the report submitted on February 22, 1972 by the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force. He has approved that report as the negotiating instructions for the American delegation to the current Preparatory Meeting concerning the Law of the Sea, and specifically notes and approves the recommended changes in the U.S. position as set forth in NSDMs 62 and 122 in regard to: (a) the naming, means of establishing the outer boundary of, and applicability of international standards to, the intermediate seabed resource zone.

(b) coastal state authority over coastal and anadromous species of fish. The United States delegation, however, should not indicate receptivity to a fisheries zone defined in mileage terms until an earnest effort has been made to obtain international support for the current U.S. position. If the delegation deems it necessary to move to a zonal approach, the President directs that a particular effort be made by the delegation to convince other distant water fishing states and the U.S. interests involved of that necessity, and does not wish any change in the public or private U.S. fisheries position until that effort has been made and its results reported to and reviewed by the President.

2. The President will wish to review very carefully the position of the United States for the Geneva meeting of the Preparatory Committee in July. He has therefore directed that the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force submit by June 20 both a report on the current meetings of the Preparatory Committee and the suggested instructions for the Geneva session. The President desires that in those documents, full attention be paid to the issues of pollution and scientific research, as well as to the other issues involved in the Law of the Sea negotiations.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

425. Letter From Spanish Chief of State Franco to President Nixon 425. Letter From Spanish Chief of State Franco to President Nixon1

Madrid, March 15, 1972.

My dear Friend:

I thank you for your courtesy in sending me the text of your report of February 9 to the Congress of the United States. I am happy to tell you that I fully share the concerns and the sense of responsibility which motivated it and ensure that it will be favorably received by all countries which are friends of the United States and by all peace-loving nations.

I want to assure you that Spain wishes to contribute to the attainment of a more mature political relationship with the United States, as mentioned in your report, and is ready to concert with the other Western countries its own independent policy.

On the other hand, I should inform you, Mr. President, with the frankness that our friendship permits, of my sincere conviction that a new international rule regarding transit through straits, which would eliminate the legitimate powers of protection of the adjacent coastal State, would only appear to favor the security of peaceful States while affording new opportunities to possible aggressors who would like to put their own interest above the vital interests of the adjacent coastal countries and above peace in general.

Spain can have no fundamental doubts about this matter since the Strait of Gibraltar, where there is a foreign military base whose maintenance is tenaciously desired at the cost of our territorial integrity, and become a source of grave dangers to our tranquility. However, Spain is prepared to collaborate with its friends, and very especially with the United States, on all questions affecting the security of this important zone.

Accept, Mr. President, my sincere thanks and the assurance of my most cordial and friendly consideration.

[s] Francisco Franco

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL SP-US. No classification indicated. Published from a copy that bears Franco’s typed signature. The letter was received in the Department of State and forwarded to Kissinger for the President by Eliot under a March 24 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) Nixon’s Report to Congress, “U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: The Emerging Structure of Peace” is published in the Department of State Bulletin, pp. 314-418. See pp. 409-411 for the section that refers to ocean policy.

426. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon 426. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon1

Washington, March 24, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Recent Brazilian Fishery Negotiations

Attached at Tab A is a memorandum to you from Secretary Rogers reporting the outcome of negotiations with the Government of Brazil on an interim agreement (between now and the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference) to cover the operation of the large US-flag fleet engaged in shrimp fishing within Brazil’s claimed 200 mile territorial sea.

The result of the negotiations was a draft agreement which protects the juridical positions of both sides. Since it protects our legal position and permits continued fishing by US-flag vessels, the agreement can be considered as favorable. We understand that The Departments of State, Defense and Commerce and also the shrimp fishing industry approve the significant features of the agreement. We expect that Secretary Rogers will send you a memorandum in the near future recommending approval of the interim agreement.

Tab A
Memorandum From Secretary of State Rogers to President Nixon

Washington, March 20, 1972.

Subject:

Recent Brazilian Fishery Negotiations

A delegation of State, Commerce and Defense Department officials, with advisers from the fishing industry, was in Brasilia from February 23 to March 6 negotiating an agreement to cover operations of the large U.S. flag fleet engaged in shrimp fishing within Brazil’s claimed 200-mile territorial sea. The U.S. and Brazilian delegations agreed on a text to be submitted to their Governments for approval, and review of the proposed agreement is proceeding in both Governments at this time. If the agreement goes into effect, it should prevent a confrontation between the United States and Brazil over fisheries in the next two years.

The agreement is based on a common interest in conservation of shrimp resources in a clearly defined area off Brazil’s coast. It should meet Brazil’s political requirement for an apparent limitation on foreign fishing without in fact significantly burdening the U.S. industry or implying recognition of Brazil’s jurisdictional claim. Exemption of Brazilian fishermen from certain limitations which apply to U.S. vessels is explained by the unequal development of the fishing industries rather than the geographical position of the countries. The text avoids prejudice to the juridical position or the negotiating position of either Party for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. The agreement is for two years, with possibility of extension but with the tacit understanding that its interim nature is related to the outcome of the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference.

William P. Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 772, Country Files, Latin America, Brazil, Vol. III, 8/1/71-12/72. Confidential. Sent for information. Irwin signed the attached memorandum for Rogers.

427. Circular Airgram A-4339 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts 427. Circular Airgram A-4339 From the Department of State to All Diplomatic Posts1

Washington, May 1, 1972, 1028Z.

Subject:

Law of the Sea (LOS)

Ref:

A-3447

SUMMARY. Preparations for the 1973 LOS Conference, in which some vital US interests are at stake, are now entering a critical phase. There are some doubts—to which we should not contribute—that the Conference can be held on schedule. Indeed, there are several countries, particularly in Latin America, that would probably prefer that it not be held at all, but a majority of countries seem to feel that the conference will be held in 1973 even though it may not conclude all its work that year. This message summarizes developments at the recent UN Seabed Committee meeting and requests (a) the assistance of addressees in supporting our positions with host governments, as well as (b) additional reporting and analysis of host government attitudes. It provides only a brief summary of LOS events to date. Embassy personnel intending to have substantive LOS discussions with officials of host government are urged to review the referenced Airgram, US speeches and additional information on specific LOS subjects sent to the post so that they can fully understand and, thus explain and defend the important and complicated issues and positions. We will be sending a more detailed report of proceedings at the March Seabed Committee meeting as well as summaries of important bilateral discussions with foreign representatives. END SUMMARY

The UN Seabed Committee, which is in fact the preparatory committee for the 1973 LOS Conference, met in New York February 28-March 30, 1972. The Committee made only limited progress in its work, principally because procedural problems occupied so much of the Committee’s attention. Nevertheless, there was wide-ranging discussion of substantive issues, and delegates expressed their countries’ needs and desires in increasingly specific terms. In some areas the Committee made modest progress; in others there was no movement. The Committee agreed that there should be two sets of meetings in 1973 on LOS, the first a five-week session in the Spring and the second an eight week session in the Summer. (One or both of these meetings might be part of the 1973 Conference itself.) These meetings will be subject to UNGA approval this Fall.

Subcommittee I on the seabed regime moved forward seriously and effectively, owing in great part to its strong Chairman (Engo, Cameroon). Subcommittee II is responsible, inter alia, for developing a “comprehensive list of subjects and issues” which could perhaps later become a basis for the Conference agenda. Work on the list moved at a snail’s pace because of regional bloc politics and the delaying tactics of some LAs. Subcommittee III on marine pollution and scientific research succeeded only in agreeing on a program of work.

Seabeds: At the March meeting, Subcommittee I held a detailed, structured discussion of the international regime. More definitive national views were expressed than at previous sessions. The US and a number of other countries indicated continued support for an intermediate seabed zone of mixed national and international rights and obligations. In order to meet the desires of many coastal states, the US Delegation indicated a willingness to agree to greater coastal state control over resources management in the area than we had earlier indicated. We also reiterated our flexibility on using different criteria, including a mileage distance from shore, for the outer limit of the intermediate zone.

Subcommittee I established a working group on the status, scope and basic provisions of the proposed seabed regime based on the Declaration of Principles (UNGA Resolution 2749). The working group is to draw up points of agreement and negotiate points of substance on which no agreement exists. The Subcommittee is expected to create additional working groups on international machinery and other subjects at its Summer 1972 session. Several delegations strongly and emotionally criticized legislation now before the US Congress which would authorize licensing by the US of mineral exploitation in the deep seabed prior to the, establishment of the international regime. They maintain that such legislation would make a mockery of the concept that the deep seabed resources are the common heritage of all mankind. The US Representative made clear that the Executive Branch has not taken any position on the legislation and that US companies, while carrying on exploratory recovery of manganese nodules, are not commercially exploiting deep seabed resources at this time. We will forward shortly to all posts a more detailed Airgram explaining the significance and background of this issue.

Kuwait, supported by 13 other delegations, including the PRC, introduced on the last day of the March session a resolution calling for a moratorium on all activities looking to commercial exploitation of the deep seabed and for a decision of the Committee to deny legal validity to all arrangements made by commercial exploitation of deep seabed resources prior to the establishment of the regime. There was no substantive discussion of the resolution, which is similar, but even more far-reaching than the moratorium resolution on seabed exploitation adopted by the UNGA in 1969 over the opposition of the US and a number of other countries. The Kuwait resolution will probably be discussed at the Summer 1972 session of the Committee.

The List of Issues: The 25th UNGA (1970) directed the Committee to draw up a “comprehensive list of LOS subjects and issues”. Despite intensive work during the 1971 and 1972 meetings of the Committee, no agreed list has emerged. The failure to reach agreement is due at least in part to the conscious delaying tactics of certain states which believe that delay will enhance achievement of their objectives. At the March session many LDCs produced a long list, which is generally satisfactory except for a few crucial formulations prejudicial to our objectives. The list was cosponsored by 56 countries (53 LDCs plus Iceland, Spain and Yugoslavia). We have sent a separate instruction to a number of addressees requesting an approach on the list question in order to insure neutral formulations.

The formulation on straits is very harmful. It reads: “Straits: (a) straits used for international navigation; (b) innocent passage”. This is prejudicial to the position, of such countries as the US which draw a sharp distinction between the concepts of innocent passage and free transit through international straits. By mentioning only innocent passage we might, if the list were later to become the basis for the agenda for the 1973 Conference, find it difficult to even get a hearing for our views on need for free passage. Similarly, the formulation on “exclusive economic zone” is very harmful. It is prejudicial to our efforts to negotiate an acceptable accommodation between, on the one hand, coastal state interests in resources beyond the territorial sea and, on the other, international community interests in such matters as other uses of the area (e.g., navigation and overflight, rational fisheries management, and scientific research). This formulation must be made neutral.

The co-sponsors of the list attempted to force their product down the throats of the other participants, but this effort failed and a number of amendments were submitted by the US and others. The Chairman of the Committee is now engaged in consultations in New York in order to get an agreed list. We are continuing to urge acceptance of a neutral, non-prejudicial formulation on all items.

Fisheries: The major issues are: (a) Should coastal state management authority be limited as we advocate, to those species of fish that the coastal state has the competence to manage (i.e., coastal and anadromous* stocks) and limited to the actual range of such stocks, leaving the wide-ranging oceanic stocks to management by international or regional organizations? Or should coastal state fishery authority extend over a broad zone regardless of the distribution of fish and over-all species, even those that range in the area beyond that which the coastal state can effectively exercise control (i.e., highly migratory oceanic species such as tuna)? (b) Should coastal state preference to the harvest of fish off its coast be limited to its capacity to utilize, as we advocate? Or should the coastal state be given the authority to prevent full utilization of such stocks by being able to prevent access by distant-water fishermen to stocks that clearly could support higher yields?

The species approach is reflected in the US draft Article III presented last August at the LOS preparatory (Seabeds) committee. Many developing coastal states criticized our article in part because of the primary role it gives to international and regional fisheries organizations in regulating coastal species and because of other constraints limiting coastal state controls over coastal species. In light of these comments, we expressed at the March meeting our willingness to consider giving the coastal state greater control over coastal and anadromous species than we had previously. (C.f. The important speech by Ambassador Donald McKernan on March 29, sent by RefAir, with French or Spanish translations where appropriate, in which he spelled out our present position.) The changes made, reflected in McKernan’s speech, include de-emphasis of the roles of international and regional organizations in favor-of greater coastal state control, and elimination of major restrictive requirements on how coastal states exercise control over coastal stocks.

We clarified, but did not change, our position that the United States favors a negotiated settlement of the question of historic fisheries (i.e., the rights of distant-water fishermen off the coasts of other states). Additionally, the species approach was explained in detail, stressing the different treatment to be accorded to coastal and anadromous species on the one hand and to highly migratory stocks on the other.

As a matter of collateral interest, Canada proposed a technical conference of fisheries experts to be held in the Spring of 1973. The US countered that a working group on fisheries should be set up promptly within the framework of the Seabed Committee in order to avoid any delay in drafting treaty articles on fisheries for the LOS Conference. Subsequently, the FAO Committee on fisheries accepted the Canadian invitation to hold a technical fisheries conference in Canada. Responding in part to our concerns, the Canadians agreed that the conference should be held early in 1973. This would permit the Seabed Committee at its March 1973 meeting to take into account the conclusions of the technical conference.

Territorial Seas and Straits: There were no changes in national positions at the March meeting. The 12-mile limit appears to be acceptable to most countries, but major differences remain with respect to straits. We continue to insist on the objective of free transit through and over international straits as a sine qua non to agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea.

PRC Role: The PRC took an active role as a new member in Committee. They indicated privately they were anxious to learn and found LOS more complex than they had anticipated. They used the Committee to make polemical attacks on US, USSR, and Japan, and to make clear their territorial claims to the Senkaku Islands and elsewhere in the East China Sea. They identified themselves with the LDCs wherever possible, giving the LDCs strong support.

Action Requested: We continue to attach the highest importance to achievement of US ocean objectives. We believe it essential that the Conference date (1973) not slip; if it should, we are convinced that the problems will become mare difficult to resolve and there are likely to be further unilateral extensions of jurisdiction over ocean space.

In the past the embassies have provided valuable help, particularly in furnishing the Department with information on developments. In the period ahead we will have to rely increasingly on (a) additional reporting and analysis of host government attitudes, and (b) carrying forward the dialogue on issues with host governments. In contacts between now and the July-August session of the Committee, embassies should at every appropriate opportunity encourage support for our positions, in particular on the need for the 1973 Conference. Posts should draw upon the material we have already furnished, as well as the information contained in this message. In addition, where needed, we are sending specific instructions on particular issues to selected embassies. We are prepared to send teams to capitals where this would be useful; also, where it appears that a particular situation warrants it, we would be willing to consider direct communications at a high level. We welcome embassy recommendations as to the most effective means of persuading their host governments on our LOS positions.

If they have not already done so, we request that Chief of Mission designate a high level political officer to follow LOS. Department should be informed as to which officer is designated.

Rogers

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Limited Official Use. Repeated to USNATO, Geneva, OECD, and USUN, CINCPAC for POLAD, and CINCEUR for POLAD. Drafted by McIntyre and Otto Eskin (IO/UNP) on April 28; cleared in draft in IO, EUR/CAN, NEA/RA, AF, L/OA, S/FW, ARA, EA/RA, Defense, Commerce, NOAA, and Interior; and approved by Stevenson.

* The anadromous species is characterized by fish that spawn and return to the same fresh waters of a state, but range widely in the oceans during a significant portion of their life cycle. An example is salmon.

428. Memorandum From Ashley Hewitt of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 428. Memorandum From Ashley Hewitt of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 22, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador, Peru and Chile

Attached at Tab A is a memo to you from Ted Eliot describing the strategy which the Department of State is implementing in its efforts to resolve the fisheries dispute with Ecuador. Essentially the strategy is to use the fisheries agreement recently concluded with Brazil as a lever to pry Ecuador loose from its hardline position on 200-mile territorial limits while at the same time dangling a carrot in terms of potential economic development and military assistance. Unlike the Brazilians and the Peruvians, Ecuador’s position on the 200-mile limit is basically non-rational and, therefore, the best conceived strategy may well come to nothing. However, it is likely that the GOE is beginning to feel a bit isolated as a result of the Brazilian agreement and our resumption of military assistance relationship with Peru at the end of March when the one-year ban on such assistance as a result of a single fishing boat seizure by Peru in 1971 expired.

We will keep you informed on the progress of our talks with the Ecuadoreans.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 793, Country Files, Latin America, Peru, Vol. III, 1/72-12/31/73. Confidential. Sent for information. Tab A is attached but not published.

429. Memorandum From Denis Clift and Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 429. Memorandum From Denis Clift and Melvin Levine of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, May 25, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Importance of Free Transit Through and Over International Straits for US Law of the Sea Objectives

I. Introduction:

Your memorandum of March 8 to Secretary Laird asked him to submit for the President’s review an analysis of the United States’ interests in the issue of freedom of transit through and over international straits. Our position in the UN Law of the Sea negotiations is that we will agree to a 12-mile territorial sea—we currently recognize three miles—if there is concurrent international agreement on the right of free transit through and over international straits. The US straits position (text at Tab B) was introduced at the 1971 summer session of the UN Seabeds Committee pursuant to the directives of NSDM 122. At this point, it is not certain that we will be able to obtain international assent to the US straits proposal as it is now formulated.

Your memorandum to Secretary Laird asked him to respond specifically to such questions as: -- which straits are essential to our military interests,

-- during 1971, how many US warships and aircraft transited such straits,

-- with what countries would bilateral arrangements be required should free passage through straits 24 miles or less in breadth not be obtained in the law of the sea negotiations,

-- what alternative negotiating positions might be developed for the law of the sea negotiations to protect our straits interests?

II. The Defense Response

With the memorandum at Tab A, Secretary Laird forwards a JCS analysis prepared in response to your request. In so doing, Secretary Laird states that he concurs fully with the position set forth by the Joint Chiefs ”…that an international extension of territorial seas beyond three miles without the concurrent agreement to a right of free transit through and over international straits would severely erode the strategic position of the United States.”

The Joint Chiefs’ paper sets forth the two-part position that: -- free transit through and over international straits wider than six miles is essential to US security;

-- any treaty which would fix the breadth of the territorial sea at greater than three miles must provide for free transit through and over international straits if the United States is to become a party.

In support of this position, the Joint Chiefs state that mobility is fundamental to the US policy of forward strategy, and that US strategy is designed to taker full advantage of the historical freedom of movement on, under and over the world’s seas. Extension of territorial seas to 12 miles without free transit through straits would subject the “choke points”—e.g., the Strait of Gibraltar—of the oceans to unilateral restrictions that could severely restrict US mobility vital to the employment of many US strategic and general purpose forces.

In further support of their position, the Joint Chiefs dismiss the statistical approach to evaluating the importance of freedom of transit through straits stating that: “A strait which today, and for several years past, has been seldom utilized by US forces could tomorrow be the crucial point in a crisis action.” They also argue that it would be unwise to enter into bilateral arrangements, in lieu of multilateral agreement on freedom of transit, in that it would place US interests at the mercy of another sovereign state.

III. Analysis of the Defense/JCS Response

The JCS generally presents a very strong statement in support of the current US position on freedom of transit through and over international straits. It is a very useful paper to have in that it for the first time provides a detailed, official statement of the DOD/JCS position on this law of the sea issue.

However, when viewed in the broader perspective of the current status of UN law of the sea negotiations and US tactics relating thereto the paper is deficient in that it: -- does not offer an analysis of current international opposition to the US straits position;

-- does not present recommendations as to the steps that the United States might take to lessen or eliminate criticism of the US straits position;

-- does not attempt to identify alternative US negotiating positions that might be developed to protect our straits interests. (This is perhaps the paper’s principal weakness.) In response to the question about an alternative US position on straits the Joint Chiefs recommend simply that the US fall back to the status quo—i.e., US insistence on a three-mile territorial sea and freedom of transit through straits wider than six miles. The JCS premise here is that a three-mile territorial sea is now the conventional international law and will remain so unless the LOS Conference changes it, and that the status quo, therefore, is a sufficient basis for maintaining our transit rights. This premise is shaky, both legally and politically, when one considers the growing number of claims by other countries to territorial seas wider than three miles.

In sum, the Joint Chiefs do not want to consider any changes to our straits position. While it will not be necessary tactically to advance any changes to the US straits position during the UN’s preparatory law of the sea negotiations in Geneva this summer, it may be desirable for the US to attempt to answer certain concerns expressed by other countries that relate to the likelihood of international acceptance of our straits position.

The US straits position is not one which the US should plan to alter unnecessarily. However, it is possible that by the time of the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference it will be apparent that the US cannot gain acceptance of the position as now formulated. Accordingly, within the US Government, the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force should continue to keep the US position on this issue under review. As the JCS position indicates, US national security interests relate primarily to straits wider than six miles. However, the JCS and DOD insist that the US law of the sea position provide for freedom of transit through all international straits arguing that to try to differentiate between straits less than six miles and straits greater than six miles would create an arbitrary breach of principle—with the result that all straits States which claim a territorial sea wider than three miles would assert the right to have their “territorial strait” exempted. Despite the JCS’ concerns about a possible “breach of principle,” the task force should, for example, look at alternatives that might permit a distinction to be drawn between straits less than six miles and straits six miles or more.

IV. Next Step in Law of the Sea Negotiations

In response to NSDM 157 of March 13, the Law of the Sea Task Force is currently preparing recommended instructions for the US Delegation to this summers preparatory meeting for the UN Law of the Sea Conference. In so doing the task force is preparing positions designed to counter criticisms related to the US straits position by States such as Spain to the effect that it does not provide for legitimate coastal states’ interests such as safety of navigation and avoidance of marine pollution. The thrust of the US position will be to persuade other countries that it is possible to accommodate their concerns on these issues while at the same time providing for free transit. We are monitoring interagency development of these positions. No action is required on your part at this time. Dick Kennedy concurs.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 383, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume IV, 1972, (3 of 3). Top Secret. Sent for information. The memorandum indicated that it was from Sonnenfeldt as well, but only Clift and Levine initialed it. Tab B is UN Document A/AC.138/SC.II/L.4 (July 30, 1971). The appendices cited in Tab A were not attached.

430. Circular Telegram 96469 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts 430. Circular Telegram 96469 From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1

Washington, June 1, 1972, 1716Z.

All other diplomatic posts by pouch

Subject:

Law of the Sea (LOS) - Interim Policy

REF:

A-439

Summary. We have previously provided posts with background info on various LOS issues, present message supplements this info. It deals with “interim policy” (i.e., policy for dealing with deep seabed exploration/exploitation pending establishment of a new international regime.) Dept request action addressees to discuss interim policy info with host govts and to report reactions special consultations with Washington experts are suggested to cover interim policy and other LOS issues. End summary 1. Developments in UN Seabed Committee concerning exploration and exploitation of seabed mineral resources pending negotiation of final LOS treaty in 1973 are reaching a critical stage.

2. As reported refair, preparatory work for LOS conference has been quite slow. Delaying tactics by several countries have been successful in keeping LOS PREPCOMM from making any substantial progress. Of three subcommittees only first (seabed regime) has begun work which may lead toward drafting of treaty articles. Subcommittee II has been paralyzed by procedural disputes and by preparation of “list of issues” which might form basis for conference agenda. Accordingly, Subcommittee II has not begun substantial work on fisheries, territorial sea or strait. Subcommittee III which will deal with marine pollution and scientific research has gotten off to very slow start. Nevertheless, many countries stated positions are becoming increasingly refined and patterns are beginning to develop. Any delay now will probably cause UN General Assembly in fall to delay formal calling of LOS conference in 1973. Should that occur, fulfillment of US oceans policy by international convention would also be delayed. Early fulfillment of this policy is desired, but only on terms which protect national interests, including those of security.

3. Subject of interim policy explained below, is one of several issues which has potential for causing substantial delay in work of committee and we will want to plan carefully to avoid pitfalls: hence, we are providing considerable background information and some suggested action in hopes that careful, concerted action will deny certain countries opportunity to inhibit progress of committee this summer.

4. In May 23,1970 press statement, President Nixon said, “I do not believe it is either necessary or desirable to try to halt exploration and exploitation of the seabeds beyond a depth of 200 meters during negotiating process. Accordingly, I call on other nations to join us in an interim policy. I suggest that all permits for exploration and exploitation of seabeds beyond 200 meters be issued subject to international regime to be agreed upon. The regime should accordingly include due protection for integrity of investments made in interim period. A substantial portion of revenues derived by a state from exploration beyond 200 meters during this interim period should be turned over to an appropriate international development agency for assistance to developing countries. I would plan to seek appropriate congressional action to make such funds available as soon as a sufficient number of other. States also indicate their willingness to join this interim policy.”

5. Prior to President’s May 23 statement, UN General Assembly passed Resolution 2574-D (known as moratorium resolution) which declares that, pending establishment of aforementioned international regime: (A) States and persons physical and juridical are bound to refrain from all activities of exploitation of resources of areas of seabed and ocean floor, and subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

(B) No claim to any part of that area or its resources shall be recognized.

6. US and 27 others voted against moratorium res: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Byelorussia, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Ghana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malta, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, South Africa, Ukranian SSR, UK, USSR. Many of 35 abstentions were by African states. Most Latin American nations were among 52 in favor of moratorium. US Rep in voting “no” indicated that res would retard development of technology for deep seabed exploitation and thus delay benefits from such exploitation to all nations. US REP said practical effect of res would be to encourage some states that feel it useful or necessary to engage in exploration and exploitation of seabed resources to move toward unjustifiably expansive claims of national jurisdiction just to remove those activities from scope of prohibition in res. Finally, he said res is without binding legal effect. Re latter point, Chairman of Seabed Committee (Amerasinghe, Ceylon) indicated similar view although Ceylon voted in favor of res.

7. US has refrained for last two years from issuing exploitation leases beyond 200 meter boundary. however, Department of Interior has advised one US company, Deepsea Ventures, that its exploration for manganese nodules in an area 130 miles offshore will be “subject to the regime to be agreed upon” in accordance with President’s May 23, 1970 statement.

8. Substantial interests and activities have developed in commercial deep sea mining as large quantities of nickel, copper, and cobalt as well as other metals are expected to be derived from manganese nodules. Hughes Tool is building large ship specifically designed to recover nodules. Consortium of 24 companies under Japanese auspices include nationals of US, France, West Germany, Canada, Australia, and Japan. Companies plan to conduct test of “continuous line bucket dredging system” in summer or fall of 1972. In addition, Kennecott Copper and Deepsea Venture are pursuing own systems of mining manganese nodules. We believe France and West Germany are giving financial support to some of their companies for experimentation in this field.

9. Developing country support (see para 13 below) for a new moratorium res may be very substantial. Many fear that ultimate res on LOS issues will place most of worlds offshore petroleum under national jurisdiction. Accordingly, many want to preserve benefits from exploitation of deep seabed manganese nodules through revenue sharing or direct participation in exploitation. They feel it necessary to keep industrially advanced countries from staking out claims to seabed minerals while LOS treaty is being negotiated. In addition, small group of Latin American and Arab states are pushing moratorium concept because they fear that development of seabed mineral will adversely affect market price of land-based minerals such as copper and petroleum.

10. US hard minerals industry, fearing that Executive Branch delay in implementing interim policy for deep seabed because of international negotiations underway, has responded by preparing legislation (S.2801 and several House versions).

11. Legislation introduced by Senator Metcalf on November 2, 1971 would authorize deep seabed mining beyond limits of national jurisdiction under licenses issued by US Interior Dept. This regime would protect against encroachment by US nationals, and to extent that other nations enacted substantially similar, reciprocating legislation, by such other states nationals. If international negotiations in progress lead to LOS treaty with a different legal regime and if US companies incur financial losses under new treaty, these losses would be repaid by USG as Metcalf bill is presently written.

12. House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee has held, and Senate Interior Committee plans to hold hearing June 2 on this proposed legslation.

13. Introduction of bills and supporting statements by members of Congress caused a significant reaction during March meeting of UN Seabed Committee. Chile, supported by other LAs and certain Arab states, denounced legislation and its proponents. At end of session, Kuwait, supported by 13 countries, introduced a “draft decision” which would reaffirm original moratorium res and would prohibit exploration activities aimed at commercial exploitation of seabed beyond national jurisdiction. Kuwait proposal was deferred for consideration at July-August 1972 meeting of UN Seabed Committee in Geneva. We oppose Kuwait draft “decision” for essentially same reasons as we opposed original moratorium res as well as its delaying effect. We hope other countries will join us in our opposition. in meantime, UNCTAD has passed res similar to Kuwait proposal (57-14 (U.S.)-17).

14. Success in effort to establish new international LOS acceptable to world community depends largely on sufficient progress being made in UN committee this summer so as to justify holding to 1973 as date for LOS conference by UNGA in fall. In addition to continuing debate on “list of issues” (State 070197 of April 22, 1972), debate on new Kuwait moratorium proposal could be enough for those countries, who are looking for an excuse, to delay work of committee, and thus justify postponement of conference by UNGA. Postponement would run risk of making agreement even more difficult, particularly since countries would increasingly seek unilateral solutions to ocean problems, thus leading to chaos and conflict.

15. Current Executive Branch position on proposed legislation, contained in letters to Congress, sent septel. Following elements are part of our existing policy: (A) We do not wish to discourage exploration and exploitation of seabeds beyond 200 meters during negotiating process, but such exploration and exploitation should be subject to regime to be agreed at LOS conference;

(B) We do not have laws at present time which govern American nationals wishing to explore and exploit seabed minerals beyond continental shelf.

(C) Should such exploration and exploitation take place we believe it would be consistent with rights codified in 1958 Convention on High Seas.

D) We do not regard UNGA res 2574-D (moratorium res) as legally binding, but as political fact to be taken into account.

16. We recognize that not all nations agree with above points listed and that our public response to Congress can have substantial impact on negotiations scheduled for this summer. In addition, any deep seabed mining activities by US companies may have an effect on negotiations this summer.

17. action addressees are requested to discuss contents of paras 1 through 16 of this cable with host govts and solicit general views on issues raised herein. Posts should emphasize that US regards the introduction of Kuwait draft “decision”, possibility of a confrontation between developed and developing countries with respect to deep seabed mining, and possibility of delay in convening of 1973 conference as seriously prejudicial to achievement of comprehensive international agreement on LOS. Additional info will be provided to host govts if they request. Dept would appreciate results from approaches ASAP.

18. For Bonn, Moscow, London, Paris: Legal Adviser Stevenson and one rep each from Depts of Defense, Commerce and Interior wish discuss handling of interim policy and other major LOS issues at July-August meeting of UN Seabed Committee with appropriate officials of host govt and are prepared to visit capitals for this purpose, unless Embassy perceives objection. Best timing would be mid-June. Would appreciate posts advice on whether host govts would be prepared to discuss these issues in this time frame.

19. Tokyo. We also wish to hold intensive bilateral discussions with GOJ, preferably in Washington, and would appreciate your advice as to timing and scope of talks.

20. On April 6, Dept Legal Adviser Stevenson accompanied by reps of Commerce and Interior, met with Japanese PermRep to UN, Ambassador Motoo Ogiso and Takeo Iguchi, First Secretary, Japanese mission, to discuss problems raised in this cable. Japanese made following points of interest: (A) While Japan voted against moratorium res, it is not prepared to state that res is not legally binding on UN members.

(B) It interprets present and near term planned activity of mining companies as “experiment” not covered by moratorium res nor by Kuwait draft moratorium res.

(C) Support by US administration for congressional legislation would run serious risk of counterproductive reaction in July-August Seabed Committee meeting with major developing countriessupport for new moratorium res and probably more extreme type of international regime in deep seabed mining—a regime potentially unfavorable to private-enterprise.

(D) They suggest that US take lead in consulting with other countries whose nations are part of 24 company consortium planning seabed mining “experiments” during summer with view toward coordinating positions for July-August meeting.

(E) they recommended against a formal meeting of countries whose nations were participating in consortium since if such a meeting leaked, it would prompt further solidarity among developing countries in opposition to industrially advanced countries.

In later, more informal conversations between Iguchi and Ratiner (Interior) and Johnson (Commerce), Iguchi said in his view US support for legislation would be a disaster for work of Seabed Committee in July-August meeting.

Irwin

1 Source: Department of State Files, OES/OA/MLP Files: Lot 92 D 208, Classified (interim policy documents), Santo Domingo Declaration. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Oxman, McIntyre, and Ratiner (Interior); cleared in draft with EA/RA, EUR/CAN, S/FW, IO, DOD/ISA, and NOAA; and approved by Stevenson. Sent priority to Bonn, Brussels, Canberra, Copenhagen, the Hague, London, Moscow, Oslo, Paris, Reykjavik, Rome, Tokyo, Valletta, Vienna, and Wellington. Sent by pouch to all other diplomatic posts.

431. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 431. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 1, 1972.

Subject:

Report on February/March, 1972 Meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee for the Third Law of the Sea Conference.

Attached is a report regarding the Law of the Sea Negotiations held from February 28 to March 30, 1972. This report is submitted pursuant to NSDM-157 and has been formally cleared by the various agencies.

Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Executive Secretary

Attachment:

REPORT ON FEBRUARY/MARCH, 1972 MEETING ON THE U.N. SEABED COMMITTEE

This memorandum reports on the February/March, 1972 meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee, acting as preparatory committee for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference and is submitted pursuant to NSDM-157. A summary of pertinent bilateral discussions between members of the U.S. Delegation and foreign representatives is annexed.

I. Procedural and Organizational Developments

This was the third meeting of the Committee since it was charged with preparations for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. The five week session was held in New York from February 28 to March 30. The People’s Republic of China, Fiji, Finland, Nicaragua and Zambia were added to the Committee bringing membership to a total of 91 (one Eastern European still to be designated).

In Sub-Committee I, Paul Engo of Cameroon replaced Earle Seaton as Chairman and Charles Mott of Australia replaced Anton Prohaska as Rapporteur. The Committee informed the U.N. Secretariat that funds should be earmarked for two LOS meetings in 1973 — five weeks in the Spring and eight weeks in the Summer. The next UNGA will decide on the sites of the sessions and whether these sessions will be the actual Conference or further preparatory meetings of the Committee.

The advancement of work in the Committee as a whole was considerably slower than the U.S. desired but progress varied within the three Sub-Committees. To a large extent, preoccupation with procedural problems precluded substantive negotiations at this session. Sub-Committee I (seabeds) moved in a constructive way by undertaking structured debate on an agreed work program. This led to the formation of a 33-member working group (U.S. included), with the mandate to prepare draft articles on principles for a seabeds regime as the first section of the treaty. Sub-Committee II (territorial sea, straits and fisheries) made little progress while manifesting the worst sort of regional bloc politics. In the end, Sub-Committee II failed to agree on a comprehensive list of subjects and issues which would, in effect, provide the initial agenda for the Conference. Sub-Committee III (pollution and research) continued to engage in general discussion but did specifically agree to a broad program of work proposed by Canada, which on its face appears overly ambitious.

II. Substantive Developments

A. Main Committee

1. Statements by New Members

China clearly indicated in her first statement that she would seek leadership of the so-called “third world” against the U.S.S.R. and U.S. as superpowers. In a polemic attack, she charged that the superpowers were attempting to dominate the ocean and plunder its resources. The U.S. Representative rejected these assertions. China also endorsed the right of all States to determine the limits of their own territorial sea, including the right of the Latin Americans to make 200-mile territorial sea claims. China also introduced a territorial dispute with Japan by strongly attacking Japanese assertions of sovereignty over the Senkaku (Tiaoyu) Islands in the East China Sea.

Finland supported a 12-mile territorial sea, depth and distance criteria for determining seabed limits, freedom of scientific research and urgent measures to prevent marine pollution. Fiji pressed for recognition of her special. positions on mid-ocean archipelagoes whereby an international “right of communication” over the enclosed waters would be preserved. Zambia, as a landlocked State, stressed the need for a right by all States of free access to the high seas and the “common heritage” of the international seabed area.

2. Statement by Strong

Secretary-General Maurice Strong of the Environmental Conference addressed the Main Committee and stressed the need for close cooperation between the Stockholm meeting and the Seabed Committee. He suggested that overall legal provisions on the marine environment should be formulated in final form at the LOS Conference.

3. Tuna Boat Seizure Legislation

Representatives of Chile, Ecuador and Peru, supported by Brazil and China, accused the U.S. of imperialism for enacting legislation which would eliminate aid to Ecuador because of the tuna boat seizures beyond 12 miles. The U.S. Representative rejected these accusations and pointed out that U.S. Actions were fully consistent with international law.

4. Moratorium Questions and Interim Policy

One disturbing element in both the Main Committee and Sub-Committee I was the revival of the divisive issues inherent in the so-called “Moratorium Resolution” passed by the General Assembly in 1969 over the opposition of the United States and many others. The issue came to the fore as a result of an alarm sounded by Chile that 25 companies from developed countries were planning to test the Japanese continuous bucket method in the Pacific next Summer and that an interim policy bill had been introduced in the U.S. Congress which would authorize exploitation activities in the deep seabed prior to the establishment of a multilateral regime. The Chilean representative asked the States whose companies were involved, to provide full information about the consortium and to explain plans regarding exploration activities in the deep seabed.

Peru strongly supported Chile and asked for assurances that the developed countries would refrain from exploiting the deep seabed before agreement on an international regime. Other Latin American (e.g. Brazil) and several Middle Eastern countries such as Iraq and Algeria also criticized the consortium activities and pending U.S. legislation. Turkey on the other hand opined that the most effective way of insuring observance of the Moratorium Resolution would be to establish the regime as quickly as possible. Belgium and France observed that the proposed activities were experimental in nature.

In response to the request of the Chilean Representative, Dr. McKelvey, Director of the U.S. Geological Survey, gave a factual presentation on the activities of U.S. firms engaged in deep sea mineral studies and on the plans of the consortium, to the extent information was available. In addition he gave a brief summary of progress in the advance of knowledge and technology concerning deep sea manganese-oxide nodules.

The action of the Interior Committee under Senator Jackson in presenting the Metcalf Bill (S.2801) which would authorize licensing by the U.S. of mineral exploitation in the deep seabed prior to the establishment of an international regime was cleverly linked to proposed experimental mining activities by an international consortium. These developments were strongly and emotionally attacked and served as a rallying call for developing countries to unite against the developed States, particularly the U.S.

On the final day of the session, Kuwait, supported by twelve LDC’s plus China, proposed a decision by the Committee which would call for a moratorium on any operations aimed at commercial exploitation in the deep seabed before the establishment of the regime. The resolution would declare that all such arrangements would have no legal validity and would not form the legal basis for any claims. The Committee will consider the Kuwait proposal at the start of the next session.

B. First Committee

Paul Engo (Cameroon) assumed an active leadership role in Sub-Committee I and evidenced a clear desire to conduct the meetings in a businesslike manner. He deserves personal credit for much of the progress made during the March session. The program of work proposed by Jamaica and Australia at the 1971 Summer session was adopted after amendment and five meetings of Sub-Committee I were devoted to debate on item I: Status, scope and basic provisions of the regime based on the Declaration of Principles, Resolution 2749 (XXV).

1. Item 1 Discussion

At Engo’s urging, the U.S. was the first to speak on item 1. We limited ourselves to a restatement of previously expressed positions on the Declaration of Principles and general comments on the regime as outlined in the draft U.S. convention. One of the principal objectives of the U.S. statement of March 6 was to encourage others to commence structured discussion of specific issues.

The consideration of item 1 revealed that wide differences of opinion existed as to the meaning and effect of the notion of “common heritage”. Some developing countries urged that the concept was the foundation for the establishment of international community ownership of the deep seabed area and its resources and that, therefore, all activities in relation thereto could only be carried on when authorized by international machinery. Other States, including the U.S., took the view that the concept of common heritage had no independent significance and had to be defined by reference to the remaining principles. Many States advanced the position that the regime for the seabed should include living as well as non-living resources. Others pointed out that this issue would be determined by the limits which were adopted. The Japanese argued that living resources should not be included in the seabed regime in any case.

There appeared to be some difference of outlook as to whether or not the principles in the future treaty would be binding on all States, whether or not parties. If it were to be universal, the States that addressed themselves to the issue indicated that there should be an exceptionally high number of ratifications before non-parties could be considered bound.

One of the recurring themes, particularly among the Eastern European Group members, was that the international seabed area should be used exclusively for “peaceful purposes”. The precise meaning of this term was not agreed upon but there seemed to be wide acceptance of the notion that the Seabed Committee was not the proper forum for disarmament discussions. Except for Pardo of Malta, there appeared to be no questioning of the fact that the superjacent waters were outside the mandate of Sub-Committee I except to the extent they might incidentally be affected by the seabed regime. Pardo continued to urge a comprehensive approach to “ocean space” as a whole.

Some representatives questioned the exact relationship between regulations concerning exploration and exploitation of resources and the possible need to regulate scientific research and marine pollution, especially with regard to deep drilling. But this subject was not dealt with in depth.

2. Item 2 Discussion

Specific discussion on item 2 of the Jamaican/Australian program of work centered around the powers and functions of the international machinery for the seabed beyond national jurisdiction. One major, unresolved issue concerned whether or not the Authority should itself engage in direct exploitation of resources. Many countries stated that the Authority should have the right to engage in exploration and exploitation of the resources rather than merely the right to license exploitation. The Latin American draft seabed paper proposes the creation of an Enterprise which would conduct all deep seabed exploration and exploitation activities either by itself or in joint ventures with private companies. Other States, such as Australia, have indicated that they are not opposed, in principle, to the Authority engaging in direct exploitation when conditions permit. The U.S. position is contained in our draft seabed convention wherein we propose that the International Authority regulate and license exploration and exploitation, but that it not conduct such activities itself. The U.K. has suggested a quota allocation system whereby each State would periodically select areas for exploitation up to a fixed percentage of the international seabed area. Under this approach, States would be free to decide on the means of exploitation within allocated areas.

The general debate indicated that the LDC’s are pushing for a strong international regime for the deep seabeds based on a one nation-one vote principle. Many LDC’s want this regime to include a production and marketing control mechanism (OPEC style), to provide for transfer of technology from the developed countries, and management by an international operating agency.

A troublesome question for the future will be on the question of voting and membership on the Council. Many States spoke in favor of a one nation-one vote system for decision making within the Council and equitable regional representation. Most LDC’s were strongly against any permanent membership as well as against veto or weighted voting schemes that would favor the developed countries. The US has proposed a Council of six designated members who are the most technologically advanced States, and eighteen elected members, with decision requiring a majority of both groups. The U.S.S.R. and Eastern European bloc laid great stress at this session on the Soviet proposal for consensus voting on the basis of regional groups in the Council, without indicating much flexibility.

There was general agreement on the need for a means of dispute settlement, and many States felt that a compulsory system was desirable. While there did not appear to be general acceptance of a particular mechanism, recourse to the International Court of Justice, special tribunals and ad hoc procedures were commonly mentioned.

The subject of possible adverse economic consequences for land-based producers as a result of seabed resource exploitation continued to receive attention, especially from certain Latin American States and from oil-producing States on the Persian Gulf. These countries urged comprehensive powers for the Authority to control production and marketing as well as to minimize price flexuations.

In connection with the powers of the Authority, there were differences of view on whether or not the Authority should undertake scientific research and whether or not it should control such research as it related to the seabed. There were also questions about the extent to which the Authority might regulate marine pollution connected with the seabed.

Subsidiary organs of various types were discussed but no general trends emerged in favor of organs other than an Assembly, Council and Secretariat. Most discussion centered on the composition or membership of these organs. Some mention was made of the need for developing countries to be trained in seabed technology and for developed States to transfer technology. Direct participation by developing countries in exploitation, rather than revenue sharing, dominated the discussion of equitable sharing of benefits from the seabed. For its part, the U.S. indicated that it was prepared to negotiate on a number of details regarding the equitable sharing of benefits.

In speaking on item 2 (including the intermediate zone) on March 21, the U.S. limited its remarks to a brief outline of views on the major issues. We reviewed the international machinery proposed in our draft seabed convention and stressed the advantages of the intermediate zone concept, a licensing system and other matters encompassed under item 2. We indicated that there could be fuller reliance on coastal State resource management machinery in the intermediate zone and a willingness to consider changes in our position on revenue sharing.

3. Limits

A majority of States continued to stress support for an exclusive resource zone; about twelve countries which included the U.S. and principally members of the landlocked/shelf-locked group continued to express support for an intermediate zone with a mixture of national and international jurisdiction. The Netherlands, supported by Belgium, formally proposed the establishment of a working group to consider the concept of an intermediate zone. This idea was opposed by Canada, Mexico, Tanzania, Peru, Jamaica and Kenya on various grounds and the proposal was not pressed upon the Committee at this session.

Singapore, supported by Afghanistan, and opposed by certain Latin and Arab States, suggested that the Secretariat undertake a study of the economic consequences of various limits proposals before the Committee based on available knowledge. This proposal was adamantly opposed by Brazil, Ecuador and Chile which apparently feared any derogation from the 200-mile figure. The U.S. agreed to cooperate with the Chairman’s request for information by making available a summary of results from certain geographic studies we had undertaken. The Sub-Committee adopted a compromise suggested by Australia that the Secretariat should collect the data and then give an opinion on the feasibility of the project, transmitting to Committee members the information furnished to it by any Committee member.

France expressly endorsed a 200-mile limit as an outer boundary for sovereign rights over the seabed resources. (The French position may have been influenced by the fact that they control a number of islands around the world which could serve as basepoints for extensive seabed entitlement.)

4. Establishment of Working Groups

It was significant that a working group was constituted on item 1—the legal regime—of the program of work. The U.S. had hoped that the working group would meet between the New York and Geneva sessions and this was proposed by Australia and supported by Malta, Canada, Senegal, Poland, Nigeria, USSR, and Kenya. It was rejected by the Chairman, however, after France, Indonesia, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela and Brazil spoke against the suggestion. It was finally agreed that the working group would meet on the first day of the July/August session in Geneva while the work of Sub-Committee I would be postponed for the first week. The Chairman of the working group prepared a comparative table of all the proposals which related to item 1. This table was intended to help organize the working group discussion and aid them in their drafting efforts.

The Chairman stated that four more meetings at the start of the July/August session would be devoted to specific discussion on item 2 (machinery) of the program of work. A second working group would then be constituted to draft proposed treaty articles on the international machinery.

C. Second Sub-Committee

1. List Issue

The most difficult problem faced by the Second Sub-Committee was the question of a list of subjects and issues which would presumably form the basis for the agenda of the LOS Conference. A number of separate lists had been proposed at various times (Afro-Asian, Eastern European, Latin American, Norwegian, Maltese). The Asian, African and Latin American regional groups had been preparing a so-called “Group of 77” list since last summer and were unwilling to proceed with structured discussion of other topics at this session until this list was completed. Their list, the contents of which were very closely held, was presented almost at the end of the meeting. Some co-sponsors took an uncompromising attitude on amendments, including a threat by several to move from the consensus system to voting procedures. The handling of the list issue represented the worst possible example of U.N. dependence on regional groups. Many of the developing countries of Africa and Asia appeared to be more interested in maintaining a unified LDC position vis-a-vis the developed countries than they were in forcing the Latin American countries to engage in constructive, substantial negotiations. Most delegations, including a number of developing countries, were excluded from the secret Group of 77 discussions on the list. This led to a polarization on such issues as straits and exclusive economic zone without an opportunity for substantive exchanges of view in open debate.

The Chairman of the Group of 77, Ambassador Yango of the Philippines, submitted their agreed list of issues two days before the end of the March meeting. This list was co-sponsored by 56 countries, predominately from the developing world. Interestingly, Iceland, Romania, Spain and Yugoslavia were among these co-sponsors. Conspicuously absent from the list of co-sponsors were the group of developing landlocked and shelf-locked States.

When he presented this list, Yango stated that the list was intended as a framework for discussion and for drafting of articles until such time as the agenda for the LOS Conference was adopted. Their list was submitted as a basis for further negotiation within the Sub-Committee with a view to arriving at a final list acceptable to all regional groups. A number of non-co-sponsors criticized the list because of omissions and lack of balance. None of three principal U.S. LOS proposals, i.e., free transit of straits, intermediate seabed resources zone, and species concept of fishing management, elicited sufficient support in the Group of 77 to be specifically included on the proposed conference “list” of subjects and issues.

An effort was made to negotiate with the Group of 77 on the questions in dispute. However, the “Western European and Others Group” failed to agree on a contact group to represent the WEO’s in these negotiations, and the contact group of the co-sponsors refused to attend the negotiating meeting on the grounds it would meet only with other contact groups. The WEO group did meet with the Eastern Europeans, the landlocked and shelf-locked States, and the U.S. but no agreement was reached on a common list of amendments.

The landlocked/shelf-locked group displayed cohesiveness as a bloc on this issue at this session. This group has grown to about 20 members and has representation from all regional groups. Their ability to act as a bloc was illustrated when they detracted from Group of 77 solidarity by not co-sponsoring the list of subjects and issues submitted by many other members of the Group of 77. Instead, eight members of the bloc formally proposed amendments to the Group of 77 list which more accurately reflected the views of landlocked and shelf-locked States.

U.S. Reaction to List Issue

The U.S. objected to the list proposed by the members of the Group of 77 on the ground that certain sections were prejudically formulated. Specifically, the proposed list only mentioned innocent passage and did not refer to free transit for straits. We were also concerned with the heading which referred only to an “exclusive economic zone” and we suggested the addition of “or other coastal State economic jurisdiction or rights”. The U.S. Representative urged that the list be balanced or neutral in its formulation and pointed out that the U.S. had introduced a draft article on straits which had received both support and opposition. He stressed that the U.S. did not seek to deny others the opportunity to express their opposition, but by the same token we were not willing to accept a formulation which attempted to deny the U.S. an opportunity to press vigorously for a position which we regarded as of vital importance. Mr. Stevenson stated that while the U.S. was willing to accept any of several neutral formulations, we could not accept a prejudicial formulation. He stressed that this was an important issue to the U.S. and that the U.S. could not accept a list that did not place our position on an equal footing with the positions maintained by other delegations.

At the final meeting of the March session, was agreed that Chairman Amerasinghe would, in cooperation with Sub-Committee II Chairman Pohl, consult with members prior to the Summer session in an attempt to reach a general agreement on the comprehensive list of subjects and issues.

2. Proposed Fisheries Working Group

On March 15, the U.S. Representative expressed regret at the lack of progress on the list of issues and urged the Sub-Committee to begin substantive discussions on at least some items clearly within Sub-Committee II’s terms of reference. Mr. Stevenson said he believed that a large number of delegations would be interested in proceeding with more specific discussions on the subject of fisheries and he suggested that the Chairman appoint a working group to discuss the issue in more detail with a view toward drafting fisheries articles. Alternatively, Mr. Stevenson suggested that the Sub-Committee commence a short debate on fisheries prior to the formation of a working group. Several other delegations concurred in expressing disappointment in the lack of progress and suggested several various ways to break the impasse. Differences emerged on the feasibility of setting up working groups on specific substantive issues, such as fisheries. The U.S. renewed its proposal for a fisheries working group on March 30 receiving some support, (Australia and Kenya) and opposition (Peru, Ecuador and Brazil). Canada also thought the proposal was premature. Without a consensus, the Chairman ruled that the U.S. proposal would have to be held in abeyance.

Substantive Debate

In spite of the slow progress in organizing the work, there was wide-ranging and often substantive debate on a variety of key issues. While no consensus was reached in any area, the debate did reflect a growing sophistication in the Committee.

3. Straits

Some statements were given on territorial seas and straits and on whether or not the doctrine of innocent passage was adequate. The U.K. specifically supported the U.S. Article II on straits while the Soviets again argued for a limited right of free transit, based on selected straits that would be subject to certain restrictions to protect the coastal State. Several countries (Indonesia, Tanzania, Spain among others) expressed strong opposition to the U.S. article on free transit through and over international straits. Italy urged that different straits be dealt with by different doctrines depending on their width, importance and characteristics. Greece expressed support for the adequacy of the doctrine of innocent passage. There was no significant support indicated for free submerged transit and overflight rights.

Indonesia and the Philippines strongly argued for international recognition of the archipelagic concept with the general support of Fiji and one or two other island States such as Mauritius.

4. Spain

Spain continued vigorously to oppose the U.S. position on free transit through and over straits used for international navigation. (Since the exchange of letters between President Nixon and Franco, Spanish attacks on the U.S. position on straits have become stronger.) Spain circulated a sharply worded memorandum to developing countries which equated U.S. and Soviet political and strategic reasons for wanting a straits article. They accused both of attempting to victimize strait States, to use naval power to pressure other countries and possibly to intervene in their internal affairs. The U.S. and Soviet proposals were characterized as being contrary to U. N. Charter principles.

5. Fisheries

One of the chief subjects of debate was the fisheries regime. Several countries, including the U.S.S.R., U.K. and Japan, expressed opposition to broad exclusive fishing zones. Most other delegations who spoke to this issue favored a zonal approach, usually expressed as a broad exclusive zone but sometimes referred to as a preferential zone for the coastal State. States supporting the zonal approach included Iceland, Tanzania, Mauritania, Mexico, India and Kenya, with the latter two taking a somewhat more moderate stance than at the prior session. The U.S.S.R. moved slightly in the direction of the U.S. proposal by expressing support for preferential rights for developing Coastal States.

Canada, supported by France, made a major statement on fisheries which had many similarities with the U.S. position. The Canadian approach recognized that highly migratory species should be managed by an international authority and coastal and anadromous species by the coastal State as custodian for the international community under internationally agreed principles.

Canada also proposed that there be a meeting of technical experts on fisheries under the aegis of FAO which would report to the Seabed Committee prior to the LOS Conference. This was supported by the U.S.S.R. and France and opposed by the U.S. and Australia. (Subsequent to the March session, at an FAO fisheries conference in Rome, it was agreed that a Canadian financed technical conference participated in by technical fisheries experts would take place in Ottawa early in 1973, probably during February.)

6. U.S. Fisheries Speech

A major presentation of U.S. views on fisheries was made by the U.S. on March 29. It included many modifications to the U.S. fisheries position taken at the July/August, 1971 session. We stated that the U.S. continued to consider the species approach to be the most effective and rational way to deal with fisheries management and conservation. We also stressed that the U.S. continued to believe that highly migratory oceanic species (e.g., tuna) could be managed effectively only through international organizations. In light of many of the comments on the earlier U.S. draft articles on fisheries, the U.S. was prepared to consider whether responsibility for conservation and management of coastal and anadromous (e.g., salmon) species could rest primarily with the coastal State, subject to agreed international standards and review. The U.S. was prepared to consider whether clear regulatory authority could be vested in the coastal State with respect to coastal species adjacent to the State’s coasts and anadromous species throughout their migratory range on the high seas.

More specifically, the U.S. fisheries speech reflected several changes in the U.S. position, including: (a) de-emphasis of the roles of international and regional organizations in favor of greater and clearer coastal State control, and (b) elimination of major restrictive requirements on how coastal States exercise control over coastal stocks. We also indicated that the coastal State could levy reasonable fees for management of the coastal stocks. We clarified, but did not change, our position that the U.S. favors a negotiated settlement of historic fisheries (i.e. the rights of distant water fishermen off the coasts of other States).

7. U.K.-Iceland Fisheries Dispute

The U.K. continued expressly to support the U.S. LOS position more than any other ally. However, the British are becoming increasingly uneasy about pollution hazards in the English Channel. Moreover, the dispute over the 50-mile exclusive fisheries claim of Iceland will affect both countries’ attitudes on LOS matters. The U.K., in particular, was unusually sensitive about the U.S. fisheries speech. There was some indication that the Icelanders are urging other States to make unilateral fisheries claims which would support their own actions.

D. Third Sub-Committee

Sub-Committee III, charged with the subjects of marine pollution and scientific research spent considerable time discussing the coordination of various international activities regarding marine pollution and trying to identify the areas in which the LOS Conference could most usefully concentrate its efforts. Sub-Committee III was addressed by Admiral Langenaar of the Intergovernmental Oceanic Commission, Mr. A. W. H. Needler, Chairman of the December, 1970 FAO Technical Conference on Marine Pollution, Mr. Jens Evenson of Norway who described the Oslo Convention on ocean dumping and Mr. Paul Evans of the International Maritime Consultative Organization who discussed the work of IMCO in the field of marine pollution and in traffic separation schemes in congested ocean areas. Langenaar reported that at the preparatory committee of government experts formulating Ocean Data Acquisition System (ODAS) Convention, a consensus emerged that the convention should not prejudice LOS decisions elsewhere.

Work Program

The Canadian delegation introduced a draft Program of Work which proposed, inter alia, that Sub-Committee III receive reports from other international organs concerned with marine pollution and that it make recommendations to the Stockholm Conference, IMCO and IOC. The Canadian program proposed follow-up action by the Seabed Committee on marine pollution principles and ocean dumping. The Canadians suggested the inclusion of a world-wide dumping convention in the work of Sub-Committee III. The Sub-Committee, after some debate and corridor negotiation, adopted the Canadian proposal (as amended) for a program of work and agreed that the Sub-Committee’s views on the preservation of the marine environment should be forwarded to the Stockholm Conference.

While the debate in Sub-Committee III was general and inconclusive, and no drafting was begun on treaty articles, the agreement on the program of work will presumably clear the way for a more effective approach to these issues at the next session of the Seabed Committee in July/August.

The most significant new development in Sub-Committee III was the emergence of an effort led by certain States such as Canada and Mexico to make that Sub-Committee the focal point for the consideration of all aspects relating to marine pollution, including pollution emanating from the land and air.

BILATERAL DISCUSSIONS WITH OTHER COUNTRIES
RELATED TO MARCH, 1972 SEABED COMMITTEE MEETING

I. Introduction

During the March, 1972 Seabed Committee meeting, members of the U.S. Delegation had a number of informal exchanges with foreign delegates which provided additional information that may not be apparent from the public record of the session. Some points made by foreign delegates in these discussions and, where noted, in some private conversations which the U.S. Representative had following the Seabed Committee meeting, are summarized from reporting cables in the following paragraphs.

II. Summaries of Discussions

Argentina

Argentine representatives to the Seabed Committee stressed repeatedly the strong interest of the GOA in seeing that a final LOS treaty recognizes Argentine rights to 200 miles of fishery jurisdiction as well as jurisdiction over the seabed resources to the edge of the continental margin, which in some places may exceed 700 miles from Argentina’s coast. They emphasized, moreover, that some coastal State control over research off their shores is necessary. With regard to benefit sharing from seabed resources, Argentine reps said that because of the GOA’s large claim off their own coast, they cared little about sharing of benefits as a general principle.

The Argentine Foreign Minister privately told U.S. Representative Stevenson that Argentina wants to establish clearly the right of freedom of navigation beyond 12 miles. He expressed his view that all Latin American States, including Brazil, will accept this principle as part of a general LOS settlement. Regarding free transit through straits, the Foreign Minister was sympathetic to the U.S. position but stressed the importance of finding an international solution to pollution problems and navigational safety in straits. The Foreign Minister also appeared sympathetic when Stevenson emphasized the need to include international standards protecting other uses and against pollution, special treatment for highly migratory species of fish, a coastal preference regarding coastal species based on a capacity to catch, and compulsory dispute settlement. The Foreign Minister indicated his personal belief that it was important to achieve early international agreement; he regretted that the 1960 LOS Conference had failed by one vote to agree on territorial sea and fishing limits.

Canada

The Canadian representative (Beesley) indicated his personal view that coastal enforcement action against foreign vessels in a pollution control zone could be limited to preventive action when an actual or threatened polluting act is occurring. Inspection of vessels for compliance with internationally agreed standards would be handled by port States or internationally, perhaps with an international system of registry certificates. Canada is concerned with IMCO’s slow progress in establishing international standards and its domination by maritime states.

Chile

The Chilean representative to the Seabed Committee (Zegers) claimed that within the past year over 60 countries had endorsed a 200-mile resource zone. He also confirmed that Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela might be able to pro-vide a bridge between the U.S. and the extreme Latin position on the basis of a patrimonial sea compromise. He also confirmed the 200-mile figure had become an issue in itself without regard to the question of effective control over marine resources, particularly fish.

Colombia

One Colombian official (Fonseca) explained that his Government’s law of the sea policy was related almost entirely to fears of Venezuelan “hegemony” in the Caribbean. He suggested that this fear was based on suspicion of Venezuelan arrogance and the steady growth of its military power. With respect to a patrimonial sea concept, he expressed the fear that Venezuelans may seek to use this doctrine to make the Caribbean a closed sea. Colombia wishes to keep the Caribbean open for the use of other countries, notably the United States, and would thus support a significantly narrower resource zone than, say 200 miles. Colombians continue to assure us that they support the U.S. position on straits and claim that a majority of Caribbean countries share this position. The Colombian permanent representative at the UN (Espinosa) indicated that a patrimonial sea or some form of economic zone was essential to an overall LOS accommodation, and that such a zone would include express protection of navigation and overflight rights beyond 12 miles. He reaffirmed that some reference to 200 miles would be indispensable in getting agreement with all Latin American countries. He confirmed that Colombia was not authorized to support the U.S. position on straits at this time.

The Colombian Foreign Minister told U.S. Representative Stevenson privately that he thought it important to achieve first a regional LOS agreement and then agreement among all Hemisphere countries. He was skeptical of whether the UN could reach a general agreement because of the diversity of interests represented and its procedures. The Foreign Minister thought that the Caribbean countries would accept a patrimonial sea where coastal States would have exclusive economic rights between 12 and 200 miles, depending on geography, resources and other circumstances.

Fiji

Fijian representatives have told us that they were attempting to be the middle man on the archipelago issue between the United States, on the one hand, and Indonesia and the Philippines, on the other. Fijian representatives said that true archipelagoes were Mauritius, Indonesia, the Philippines, Solomon Islands and the Bahamas; the Galapagos Islands would not qualify. Fiji’s principal concern appears to be control over fishing and the natural resources on the Fiji plateau. They are also worried about pollution caused by ships from New Zealand and Australia which use ocean passages through the islands en route to the United States.

The Fiji representative had expressed that in their geographical situation they were not that concerned about submerged transits, overflights, and ships passing through Fiji islands; however, he did indicate at one point that Fiji would probably like to have advance notice of submerged transit because they were developing three oil rigs on their shelf.

Greece

Greek representatives in New York expressed their deep concern with possible proposals for demilitarization of the Mediterranean. (Libya was reported to have made such a proposal for the agenda of a suggested meeting of Mediterranean countries to be held some time before the summer Seabed Committee meeting.) Greece stated that to a great extent their security required the continued presence of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean.

The Greek representatives stated they were under strict orders from their government to support only innocent passage in straits and to oppose any form of free transit through straits. Accordingly, Greek opposition to free transit was based on security interests; namely, their concern about Soviet submerged transits and overflights, and their national problem with Turkey over Cyprus. They further expressed that the Greek delegation did not deem it necessary to have a general revision of the regime applicable to straits which are located within territorial waters. The Greek delegates shared the opinion of other delegations as underlined in past sessions that any agreement on the subject of limits should not be inextricably linked with any change in existing international law and practice. If, however, on this subject of innocent passage there is a wide feeling that this notion of innocent passage has to be clarified, the Greek delegation, in view of safeguarding the freedom of navigation, would have no objection to elaborating the rules governing innocent passage.

India

One Indian representative (Ranganathan) stated that India had its own interests in achieving free transit with respect to straits but would not be able to become an advocate of this position. He did not agree with the underlying assumptions of U.S. foreign policy, which give rise to the necessity for free transit and he cited the deployment of the Enterprise. In addition, he wondered whether deployment of a new generation of missle submarines really made it necessary for the US to acquire a right of submerged transit through straits in a treaty that would not in any event come into effect until quite a number of years from now.

Indonesia

It was clear in conversations with Indonesian representatives in New York that they are strongly opposed to our free transit article on straits. However, it was indicated that Indonesia would be willing to discuss a trade-off involving a willingness to designate certain corridors of its archipelagoes within which transit could occur provided general advance notification is given, in exchange for support for the archipelago concept. Further, these qualified’ transits pertained only to designated corridors and did not apply to use of the high seas within the archipelago which are considered internal waters by Indonesia.

Japan

Japanese representatives to the Seabed Committee indicated a number of times that the GOJ is considering taking a more sympathetic attitude toward archipelagoes. They appear more willing to consider the possibility of accepting archipelagoes in relation to the Philippines and Indonesia than with regard to Malaysia. Japan has reached no conclusion on this point, however. It was suggested that since Japan has many islands itself, it might find the archipelago theory suitable for Japan.

Kenya

Kenyan representatives at the Seabed Committee meeting said that they favored a 200-mile exclusive resource zone as did the Afro-Asian group generally. Coastal State economic interests in the zone would be specifically limited and other uses of the area protected. The coastal State would have to license foreign fishing in the zone to the extent that it could not catch fish itself; a license could be required and conditions attached in the form of an obligation to either train coastal State personnel in fisheries or to process fish in the coastal State. It might be possible to have exceptions for highly migratory oceanic species and anadromous stocks. With respect to a seabed regime, they preferred that it begin at the edge of the territorial sea and extend to either 200 miles or 200 meters, whichever was further. In the seabed area, the coastal State should have control over research related to economic interests and should be consulted concerning other research. Regarding marine pollution, Kenya was quite concerned about pollution from oil tankers and was skeptical that flag states could be relied upon to enforce any agreed international pollution control standards.

Mexico

In her public statement, Mexico supported a fishery zone between 12 and 200 miles. Ambassador Castaneda in private conversation admitted that he had been criticized within his own government for his support for a coastal State fishing preference based on capacity within a fishing zone rather than a coastal State exclusive fishing zone. Castaneda confirmed that Mexico intended to continue working with Colombia and Venezuela in seeking a middle ground between the U.S. and Latin America.

Norway

Norway expressed concern about the application of a free transit right to its territorial waters, particularly in view of its long coastline dotted with many islands. They feared that some countries, particularly the Soviet Union might begin to consider the passages among those islands as international straits and thus act as though a free transit right applied to those waters. Norwegian representatives also expressed their view that NATO did not consider law of the sea problems collectively; rather the members of NATO consider LOS as a subject which affects them individually. Pointing out that our earlier security briefings in the NAC on law of the sea had not been persuasive, the Norwegians suggested that we make an effort to explain at a high level the security objectives related to our straits article. The Norwegian representatives, however, did give the impression that they would support the U.S. position on straits in private discussions, but Norway was not prepared to provide public support since the issue has hot been resolved within their government.

Peru

The Peruvian Delegate to the Seabed Committee (Arias-Schreiber) informed us that Peru and other Latin Americans had developed an understanding with Spain and the Arab states to support their position on straits in return for the latter’s support of the Latin position of a 200-mile zone. He also indicated that this understanding could be reconsidered if the U.S. indicated its support for coastal State resource jurisdiction out to 200 miles. He also ventured his view that the U.S. would have to compromise on the straits article by making more explicit the pollution control and navigational safety rules that the coastal State could apply. In response to his query as to whether submerged transit by submarines was really essential to U.S. security in the light of improved detection devices, he was assured that it was and would continue to be so. He stressed that if the United States would support the 200-mile principle (which he claimed over 60 States support), the U.S. could obtain freedom of navigation and overflight beyond 12 miles and a satisfactory solution of straits, as well as special treatment for migratory fish such as tuna within the zone. (On questioning, he reasserted that the freedom of navigation and overflight would have to be negotiated beyond 12 miles in connection with the 200 miles resource zone.) The coastal State could also have special rights regarding salmon beyond 200 miles. He said that. it was impossible for Peru to accept any formula which did not involve 200 miles, and while he preferred a 200-mile territorial sea, he suggested that a 200-mile formula involving coastal State economic jurisdiction (with an exception for migratory fish), protection of navigation and overflight beyond 12 miles, and some arrangement for coastal State participation in scientific research would be acceptable.

In a direct approach early in the Seabed Committee meeting, Arias-Schreiber informed us that Peru would support our straits position if we could indicate some support for an outer boundary regarding marine resources of 200 miles. He emphasized that Peru recognizes that a universal 200-mile boundary would not be acceptable for everyone; however, it could be the maximum outer limit, and different regions might reach different solutions to this question.

Venezuela

Venezuelan representatives reiterated their support for a 12-mile territorial sea with innocent passage, a “patrimonial sea” beyond 12 miles in which freedom of navigation and overflight would be permitted, and free transit through and over international straits. With respect to straits, one Venezuelan representative volunteered that the Venezuelan Navy supports free transit and that his government will most likely also, but that the Head of his delegation informed him Venezuela was not prepared to make an official statement on this point until their entire LOS position was presented at the up-coming Caribbean LOS Conference. Venezuelan representatives discussed two consequences for a patrimonial sea concept in the Caribbean: First, a 200-mile resource zone would, if adopted, make the Caribbean a closed sea; second, a resource zone of 50 to 100 miles would make the Caribbean a semi-enclosed sea with the open area in the middle to be governed by an international authority. With respect to straits, Aguilar indicated Venezuela has not taken a position and stated that he appreciated the importance of free transit to the U.S. The Venezuelans have emphasized that any resource zone adopted for beyond 12 miles would include freedom of navigation and overflight and other high seas uses, as well as free transit through straits. Venezuelans have told us that of the Latin American states, only Brazil, Peru and Ecuador were holding firm for a 200-mile territorial sea. Argentina, Chile and Uruguay were urging a 12-mile territorial sea with a resource zone beyond that to 200 miles.

In separate conversations with Mr. Stevenson, Ambassador Aguilar (Venezuelan permanent representative to the UN) stressed that Venezuela was working closely with Colombia and Mexico to develop a compromise position to bridge the differences in view held by the United States and other Latin American countries. He reaffirmed Venezuela’s position that the most important element in a possible settlement would be a coastal State economic zone beyond 12 miles with freedom of navigation and over-flight expressly protected. While 200 miles had no practical significance for Venezuela in the Caribbean, he saw no possibility of compromising with the other Latin American states without referring to a 200-mile resource boundary. This would be necessary for ideological and domestic political reasons. In this connection, he indicated his view that it would be easier to protect migratory species within an economic resource zone if the 200-mile figure were used.

Ambassador Aguilar told Mr. Stevenson that he wished that the United States had moved further oh fisheries than our March 29 statement indicated. While the U.S. had moved far toward coastal State control, he thought that there was no possibility for the Caribbean countries’ agreeing to anything other than an economic zone approach on fisheries. He personally was disposed to consider regulation of highly migratory fish by inter national organizations and some form of abstention from salmon fishing on the high seas. He preferred a system of obligating coastal States to impose reasonable license terms for foreign fishing to the extent that coastal States were not fully utilizing the resource. He thought that protection of other uses and compulsory dispute settlement could be provided for and felt that there would be little need for the coastal State to regulate scientific research (in a zone) if coastal States had full resource jurisdiction. He did feel, however, that it would be necessary to provide for coastal State participation and dissemination of the results of scientific research in an economic zone. He stressed that while the Caribbean countries might accept international elements as a limitation of coastal States rights in an economic zone, they would not do so now unless this would result in U.S. acceptance of a zonal concept.

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 338. Confidential. Robert T. Curran signed for Eliot.

432. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 432. Memorandum From Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 9, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Report on February/March 1972 U.N. Seabed Meeting

NSDM 157 requested the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force to submit: 1) a report on the U. N. Seabed Committee’s February/March session, and

2) suggested instructions for the US Delegation to the July/August 1972 session.

With the memorandum at Tab A, State forwards the report of the Task Force Chairman, State’s Legal Adviser Jack Stevenson, on the February/March meeting, including as an addendum a summary of the more significant bilateral discussions with other delegations during the meeting. (NOTE: As reported below, progress was slight; the suggested instructions for the July/August session are due for White House review by June 20.)

Summary

The Task Force report reveals the fluid status of negotiations at the preparatory sessions for the LOS Conference. The following are the highlights of the February/March meeting: -- Kuwait, supported by the PRC and 12 LDC’s, sought to revive the moratorium issue, which would bar commercial exploitation of the deep seabed prior to the establishment of an international regime. This proposal is to be considered at Geneva this summer.

-- A majority of States continue to favor an exclusive coastal State resource zone.

-- The African/Asian/Latin American “Group of 77” introduced a list of issues for the LOS Conference agenda with a formulation of the straits and resource zone agenda items unfavorable to US interests.

-- In bilateral discussions with the US Delegation, the Norwegians suggested the need for high level briefing on US security objectives related to free transit of straits.

Meetings of the Main Committee

Progress on substantive issues was modest, with the 91-member committee largely preoccupied with procedural problems. In its maiden address to the Main Committee, the People’s Republic of China announced it would seek leadership of the “third world” against the US and USSR superpowers. The PRC also endorsed the right of all states to determine the limits of their territorial seas including the right of Latin American countries to claim 200 miles.

On the final day of the session, Kuwait, supported of 12 LDCs and the PRC proposed-a decision by the Committee which would call for a moratorium on any operations aimed at commercial exploitation in the deep seabed before the establishment of an international regime. This revival of the issues inherent lithe 1969 UNGA “Moratorium Resolution” came about as a result of two factors: the alarm sounded by Chile over deep-seabed dredging tests planned by a 25-company consortium in the Pacific this summer, and the interim policy Metcalf Bill (S. 2801) introduced in the US Congress which would authorize exploitation activities in the deep seabed prior to the establishment of a regime.

The Seabed Committee will consider the Kuwait proposal at the start of the Geneva session this summer. (The Executive Branch is avoiding comment on the Metcalf Bill at this time, having informed the Congressional Committees involved that we will wish first to see what develops at the summer Geneva Session, and that we will report again to the committees this fall.)

Sub-Committee I

Debate in Sub-Committee I on the seabed regime indicated that: -- There is a wide difference of opinion among countries on the meaning of “common heritage,” with some LDCs urging that the concept is the foundation of international community ownership of the deep seabed and its resources with activities in this area requiring authorization by the international machinery to be established.

-- The LDCs are pushing for a strong international regime based on a one-nation/one-vote principle for decision-making within the Council (as opposed to the US proposal which would require that a majority of the six most technologically advanced states on the 18-member Council also be in favor of any proposal).

-- A majority of States continue to favor an exclusive coastal state resource zone, while the United States continues to favor an intermediate zone with a mixture of national and international jurisdiction.

A 33-member working group, with the US included, has been established to prepare draft articles on principles for a seabed regime.

Sub-Committee II

This subcommittee, charged with developing draft articles on the territorial sea, international straits and fisheries, made little progress “while manifesting the worst sort of regional bloc politics.” The subcommittee debated the contents of the list of substantive issues that would form the basis for the agenda of the conference, and the African/Asian/Latin American “Group of 77” introduced a list which the US objected to because of its prejudicial formulations on straits and resource zone. Amerasinghe, the Seabed Committee Chairman, is attempting to negotiate general agreement on this list before the summer session.

Sub-Committee III

Sub-Committee III began a general debate on the problems of marine pollution and scientific research; no drafting was begun on treaty articles; the sub-committee did, however, agree on a program of work which can be undertaken at the July/August session. (NOTE: The Law of the Sea Task Force has been directed by NSDM 157 to prepare recommended US positions on marine pollution and scientific research.)

Conclusion

As is evident from Jack Stevenson’s report, the negotiating situation in the preparatory sessions for the LOS conference remains very fluid, with progress in some areas and considerable opposition to US positions on several issues. If substantial progress can be made at this summer’s session of the Committee, it is probable that the UN General Assembly will decide this fall to go ahead with the LOS Conference in 1973. If, however, the work of the Committee continues to be hampered by regional bloc tactics and related committee procedural problems, there is the possibility that a growing number of nations may decide that the General Assembly should postpone the LOS Conference until preparations are satisfactory.

The US position is to push for convening of the conference in 1973 with a view to reaching multilateral agreements that will protect US interests on the principal LOS issues. We can expect the Task Force’s recommended instructions for the US Delegation to the summer session to reflect this position. In my opinion, this will be the correct position far the US to take at the summer session. Mel Levine and Dick Kennedy concur.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 383, Subject Files, Seabeds, Volume IV, 1972 (3 of 3). Confidential. Sent for information. For Tab A, see Document 431.

433. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 433. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, June 20, 1972.

Subject:

NSDM 157: July-August Preparatory Meeting for the Law of the Sea Conference

Attached is a report prepared by the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea regarding the July 17-August 18 Geneva preparatory meeting for the Law of the Sea Conference. The report contains negotiating recommendations as requested in NSDM 157 of March 13, 1972. The report is being concurrently submitted to the various agencies for comment and clearance.

A Task Force report on the February-March meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee, a copy of which is attached, was submitted on June 1.

The report is divided into seven sections, containing recommendations and options when necessary, which I have summarized below. In view of earlier submissions on the Law of the Sea, additional background material has been presented only where new issues or additional facts are involved.

Section A: The breadth of the territorial sea and free transit through and over international straits. This section presents recommendations on navigation safety and pollution in straits used for international navigation. All vessels would be required to respect international traffic separation schemes established in straits and on the high seas. State (military) aircraft would be required to respect International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) rules when exercising a right of free transit under our straits proposal, except in special circumstances of operational necessity. Vessels and state aircraft exercising the right of free transit through and over straits would be strictly liable for accidents caused by deviations from the traffic separation and ICAO rules.

Section B: Archipelagos. This section presents background and two options regarding the desire of island States to control the waters within their island groups, and discusses the relationship between the archipelago problem and our straits objectives. Both options contemplate a limited definition of archipelagos in order to prevent abusive application of the concept. The first option would essentially concede exclusive resource jurisdiction in archipelagic waters, but otherwise treat such waters as high seas. The second option would treat such waters as internal or territorial, but subject to a right of free transit for vessels and aircraft, including submerged submarines, through suitable corridors in the archipelago.

Section C: Resources generally. This section recommends greater emphasis at the summer session on the importance of US resource objectives, in particular regarding US opposition to the establishment of a resource zone contrary to US interests and an international monopoly over deep seabed resources.

Section D: Fisheries. This section recommends greater tactical flexibility for the delegation in achieving US fisheries objectives.

Section E: Seabeds. This section contains additional analysis of US seabed resource interests in support of the general recommendation in “Section C: Resources Generally.” In particular, it addresses US interests in secure supplies of petroleum and minerals, and in protecting US investors.

Section F: Marine Pollution. Although seabeds pollution is dealt with in our seabeds proposals, this is the first comprehensive submission on the problem that deals with, inter alia, vessel pollution and prevention of vessel accidents that can cause pollution, in connection with the Law of the Sea negotiations. The basic emphasis is on the establishment of international (as opposed to coastal State) standards regarding vessels through the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO). Coastal State concerns regarding pollution are sought to be accommodated through ‘additional port State enforcement authority regarding construction standards, and the expansion of coastal State enforcement rights on the high seas in one or more of the following ways: an increased coastal State right of intervention on the high seas to prevent imminent danger of pollution, a coastal State enforcement zone, in which specified international standards would be enforced by the coastal State, and enforcement of specified international standards on the high seas by enforcement vessels of all States.

Section G: Scientific Research. Although seabeds research is dealt with in our seabeds proposal, this is the first comprehensive submission on marine research, and background is presented along with the recommendations. The policy proposals are basically designed to persuade and provide coastal developing countries with an interest in maximum freedom of scientific research, particularly by offering to enhance their ability to put scientific data to use for their own economic development. The proposals were formed in the light of moves by coastal developing countries to control scientific research in a broad zone off their coasts.

John R. Stevenson
Chairman
Inter-Agency Task Force
on the Law of the Sea

1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Secret. Attached but not published is Attachment 1-Response to NSDM 157-consisting of 70 pages of detailed recommendations for the U.S. delegation to the July-August 1972 Seabeds Committee meeting. For Attachment 2, see Document 431.

434. National Security Decision Memorandum 177 434. National Security Decision Memorandum 1771

Washington, July 18, 1972.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of the Interior

SUBJECT:

July-August Preparatory Meeting for the Law of the Sea Conference

The President has reviewed the June 20 report of the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force together with the formal agency comments relating thereto. He has approved the report as the negotiating instructions for the U.S. Delegation to the July-August meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee, subject to the specific guidance and interpretations set forth below. In so doing, the President reaffirms the continuing importance attached to gaining international acceptance of U.S. oceans policy positions on marine resources, the breadth of the territorial sea and free transit through and over international straits.

Straits. In tabling US proposals for strict liability, the Delegation should reserve the question of upper limits of liability pending further study.

With regard to state aircraft transiting straits, the delegation should propose that the law of the sea treaty provide that state aircraft, exercising the right of free transit provided for in the U.S. straits proposal, (a) will normally respect International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards, recommended practices and procedures as they apply to civil aircraft over the high seas and (b) will at all times operate with due regard for the safety of navigation of civil aircraft. Should reactions of other delegations lead the representatives of the Departments of State and Defense to agree that this formulation is inadequate to protect the viability of our straits proposal, the delegation may put forward the formulation stated in Section A, Recommendation 3 of the task force report.

Archipelagos. With respect to archipelago claims, the U.S. position should remain that of non-recognition, bearing in mind the need to define more clearly the nature of such claims. During the July-August meeting, the delegation is authorized without committing the United States to undertake private exploratory discussions with Indonesia and other archipelago states indicating U.S. willingness to cooperate with such states in considering possible formulations, including the formulations presented as options in the task force report, of archipelagic claims that might satisfactorily accommodate US marine resource and navigation interests.

Fisheries. The delegation should continue to seek international acceptance of US fisheries positions that 1) give the coastal state effective regulatory and economic control over coastal species and over salmon throughout their migratory range on the high seas, subject to international standards and review regarding conservation and maximum utilization of coastal and anadromous fisheries, and 2) that provide for international regulation of tuna fishing.

In pursuit of these objectives, the delegation is authorized to indicate privately US willingness to support a possible fisheries compromise based on a fixed zonal approach, provided: -- there is appropriate advance consultation with key states, including major, distant-water fishing states, and with US fishing industry representatives on the delegation, and

-- it is the judgment of the Delegation that this tactic will best promote achievement of US fisheries objectives.

Marine Pollution. US policy on land-based pollution, ocean dumping and seabeds pollution as set forth in the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force report is approved. With regard to pollution from vessels, the Delegation should seek international acceptance of positions that would maintain the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization (IMCO) as the major international forum for dealing with pollution originating from vessels. During the July-August meeting, the delegation is authorized to propose expansion of the application of the 1969 Convention Relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, as recommended in the report. The Delegation should not propose either a zonal approach to pollution control or an expansion of the rights of national enforcement vessels to take pollution enforcement action on the high seas.

The President has directed that the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force submit a report on the July-August meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee together with recommended instructions on the Law of the Sea Conference for the U.S. Delegation to the U. N. General Assembly this fall. The report should be submitted no later than September 29, 1972 for consideration by the NSC Senior Review Group.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Decision Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Secret. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Transportation and the Director of Central Intelligence. Section A, Recommendation 3 of the June 20 report (see Document 433) stated: “Propose that the LOS treaty provide that state aircraft, exercising the right of free transit provided for in the U.S. straits proposal, (a) will respect International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards, recommended practices and procedures as they apply to civil aircraft over the high seas, provided that they shall not be required to do so in special circumstances of operational necessity, and (b) will at all times operate with due regard for the safety of navigation of civil aircraft.

435. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon 435. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (Haig) to President Nixon1

Washington, August 15, 1972.

SUBJECT:

UN Law of the Sea Conference: Formulation of Straits Item on Agenda

The UN Seabed Committee charged with preparations for the 1973 law of the sea conference is meeting now in Geneva. The US Delegation has achieved satisfactory formulations of all agenda items with the exception of free transit through straits. There is an unresolved split between Defense and State/Commerce/Interior as to how to handle the problem. Acing Secretary Irwin has forwarded the memorandum at Tab A for your decision.

In negotiations on this agenda item, the United States has found itself pitted against a group of developing countries and straits states, led by Spain, who have sought to exclude mention of free transit from the agenda. However, during negotiations in recent weeks, the following compromise, proposed by Spain, has been reached on this item: “4. Straits Used for International Navigation

4.1 Innocent Passage

4.2 Other related matters, including the Question of the Right of Transit.”

State, Commerce and Interior

All members of the US Delegation with the exception of the Defense representatives believe this compromise formulation should be accepted, and State, Commerce and Interior support this position believing: -- the compromise will protect our ability to negotiate free transit through straits in the 1973 conference;

-- we can treat the compromise as a positive achievement in that it would be clear that free transit is one of the items for negotiation at the conference;

-- if the compromise is rejected this summer, it is likely that the issue will come to a vote in the UN General Assembly this fall where the US will run the risk of a formulation being adopted under circumstances more prejudicial to our position;

-- if the agenda is not settled by the time of the UN General Assembly this fall, it is possible that the UN will vote to postpone the start of the law of the sea conference; this in turn could lead to additional unilateral law of the sea claims detrimental to U.S. resource and security interests.

Defense Position

Defense is opposed to accepting the compromise formulation because it believes that: -- although the drafting of the conference agenda is on the surface procedural, it has become a matter of substance to the United States and the countries opposing us;

-- there is an existing right to transit through straits which we do not need to bargain on. Failure to insist on a non-prejudicial agenda formulation—i.e., Free Transit—would be seen as US capitulation on the transit issue. This is a fundamental part of your oceans policy, a point repeatedly emphasized to the seabeds committee;

-- while acceptance of the compromise would permit us to negotiate the issue, it would adversely prejudge the outcome of these negotiations;

-- acceptance of the compromise is not necessary to the continued work of the Seabeds Committee, inasmuch as the agenda would go forward to the General Assembly with a specific reservation by the United States on the straits issue.

My View

There can be no doubt that this sort of foul-up shows the United Nations in its very worst light, with a group of developing countries and special interest states attempting to keep the United States from inserting an item in what the General Assembly has voted should be a comprehensive list of agenda items.

At the same time, this is in fact a matter more of procedure than of substance; free transit would be a subject for negotiation at the law of the sea conference; and I am not certain that Defense is correct in stating that our ability to negotiate the item would be impaired.

I recommend that you approve the State/Commerce/Interior position that would have the US Delegation accept the straits agenda item as now formulated:

[APPROVE]

DISAPPROVE

However, if you agree with Defense that we should not accept the current compromise in that it will impair our ability to negotiate the vital US interest of free transit through straits, the Delegation will be instructed not to accept the compromise formulation.

APPROVE

DISAPPROVE

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-235, NSDM Files, NSDM 177 [1 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for action. Nixon indicated his approval of the position taken by the Departments of State, Commerce, and Interior. Tab A, an August 14 memorandum from Irwin to Nixon, outlined in more detail the issues summarized by Haig. (Ibid.) Kissinger communicated the President’s decision to the Secretaries of State, Commerce, and Interior in an August 15 memorandum. (Ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8)

436. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Irwin to President Nixon 436. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Irwin to President Nixon1

Washington, August 29, 1972.

Subject:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador: Waiver of the Foreign Military Sales Act Suspension

Problem

Section 3 (b) of the Foreign Military Sales Act as amended, automatically suspends for one year sales, credits or guaranties under the Act to any country which seizes, takes into custody or fines an American fishing vessel for fishing more than twelve miles from the coast of that country. The suspension is at present in effect for Ecuador. Ecuador has taken the position that it will not resume negotiations to end seizures while the suspension is in effect. The Act provides that you may waive the suspension when you receive reasonable assurances from Ecuador that future violations will not occur, and promptly so report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate. Ecuador, for obvious domestic political reasons, is not able to set aside the enforcement of its laws and therefore has not been able to give explicit assurances that there will be no seizures should you waive the FMS suspension. This has been the situation since January 1971.

In the judgment of the Department of State, it is possible to identify the elements of an arrangement which could prevent seizures for the remainder of 1972 and which, in the absence of explicit assurances, nonetheless constitute reasonable assurances that there will be no seizures within the meaning of the Act. If you agree that the scenario outlined below, which is supported by the Departments of State, Commerce and Defense does provide reasonable assurances within the meaning of the Act, I recommend that you exercise your waiver authority and additionally, authorize the Department of State to initiate necessary discussions. As premature disclosure of this scenario would jeopardize its chances of success, I recommend that the attached waiver be classified.

The Department of State believes the following scenario would prevent seizures in 1972 and would make it possible to return to formal negotiations with Ecuador and to develop a longer-term solution for the problem.

1. The United States would lift the Foreign Military Sales suspension and United States representatives would confirm the scenario before the public announcement of the lifting.

2. The United States would notify Ecuador of the names and other pertinent information of all U.S. flag vessels likely to fish in waters off Ecuador for the remainder of 1972.

3. In turn, Ecuador would issue appropriate documents for those vessels which it would consider licenses.

4. Ecuador would expect the United States to pay a flat sum of money for 1972 based on an estimate of the expected United States fishing in the area. The U.S. would interpret this payment as a contribution for the privilege of fishing within 12 miles of Ecuador’s shore and of using port facilities otherwise unavailable. This sum would be payable at the end of 1972 or the payment time would be re-negotiated. We anticipate that the amount would be approximately $150,000. Any binding legal obligation to pay such a sum would, of course, be subject to Congressional authorization and appropriation of funds.

In the next phase of the scenario, both Governments would meet in the fall to try to work out the terms of a formal agreement, which we would hope to obtain in the form of a treaty. If the negotiations were successful, the agreement would be of approximately two years’ duration, or until the end of 1974, in order to cover the estimated period for the United Nations Law of the Sea negotiations.

Conclusion:

The principal risk is, of course, that the initiative will falter. We have concluded that taking this risk is acceptable given the opportunity to negotiate an end to the tuna boat seizure problem, in the course of which we also will have opportunities to restore our military ties with the Ecuadorean Government, to remove an irritant in our relations with Ecuador that is complicating the atmosphere of petroleum negotiations, to demonstrate to Latin America that we are prepared to take the necessary steps to negotiate differences, and to substantially improve the negotiating atmosphere for the Law of the Sea Conference scheduled for 1973 by defusing this long-standing dispute.

Disclosure of this memorandum would seriously jeopardize the chances of success in the negotiations.

Law of the Sea Aspects

The proposed area of application for the arrangements in the scenario for 1972 and the longer agreement would be based, from the United States point of view, on the conservation lines established by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. These lines are hundreds of miles off-shore and do not remotely resemble the 200-mile assertions of Ecuador. Ecuador would interpret the area of application as coinciding with its claimed territorial sea.

With respect to the oral understanding for 1972, the United States would view the monies paid as compensation for services rendered in connection with the implementation of a bilateral fisheries conservation scheme. Ecuador would regard the funds transferred as license fees. In the written agreement, a formula would have to be devised to leave this question ambiguous.

With careful negotiation and draftsmanship similar to that utilized in the Brazil Shrimp Agreement, the United States would be able to protect its juridical position for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. Further, if an acceptable interim accord were reached with Ecuador on fisheries (and then perhaps with Peru and Chile), it is anticipated that their dogged opposition to the United States at the Law of the Sea Conference could be substantially reduced, thereby presenting an opportunity for successful achievement of United States overall objectives.

Recommendations:

1. That you sign the attached waiver of Foreign Military Sales Act suspension.

2. That you authorize the Department of State to work out the details and timing of an arrangement with Ecuador for 1972 and to set the stage for formal negotiations this fall.

John Irwin
Acting Secretary

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential. The attachment was not found.

437. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to President Nixon 437. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Laird to President Nixon1

Washington, September 15, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador

In reviewing the State Department proposal, the Department of Defense is desirous of lending support to its ultimate objectives, that is, resolution of the tuna boat seizure problem and normalization of relations with Ecuador. However, these objectives must be reviewed in proper perspective to other defense security interests. I do not believe the State Department scenario, in its present form, can be implemented without prejudice to these interests.

The State Department proposal suggests there is a similarity between the recently concluded Brazil shrimp agreement and the recommended scenario for an Ecuadorian settlement. Quite to the contrary, Defense believes there are great dissimilarities; it is in these dissimilarities that I see serious problems with law of the sea issues.

1. Zonal Approach. Shrimp are not highly migratory, and our oceans policy would favor a preferential right in the coastal state. Such was clearly the case in the Brazil agreement. By contrast we favor an international regime for tuna and other migratory species. Entering into an interim agreement in which Ecuador is given a preference over tuna is a marked departure from announced policy and seriously undermines our negotiating position for the 1973 Law of the Sea Conference. Moreover, US acknowledgement of coastal state preference in the absence of a broad multilateral agreement clearly belies our repeated assertion that the US does not recognize territorial seas greater than 3 miles nor contiguous fishing zones greater than 12 miles. The Department of Defense is not responsible for formulation of US long-term fisheries policy but must be concerned when the credibility of our juridical and negotiating positions on law of the sea may be jeopardized by shifts in this policy.

2. Area. The Brazil agreement delineates an ocean area, the landward boundary of which is the 30-mater isobath line off the Brazilian coast. The Ecuador scenario concerns an area based from the United States point of view, on the conservation lines as established by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, although recognizing that Ecuador would interpret the area as coinciding with its claimed territorial sea. A glance at the Tuna Commission lines confirms that there is no resemblance between them and the 200-mile claim of Ecuador. Nevertheless, the scenario is vague on this issue and without more specific guidelines there is nothing to ensure that the agreed delimitations will not be used as a basis for Ecuadorian or third-party claims that the US has abandoned its law of the sea policy of non-recognition of expansive territorial sea claims.

3. Fees. The Brazil agreement specifically provides that sums paid are compensation for the enforcement activities of Brazil. The Ecuador scenario provides for a purely oral arrangement which is so clearly a licensing agreement, with documents to be issued by Ecuador, that attempts by us to justify it on any other terms would simply not be credible. The interim procedure would convey an undeniable overtone of acquiescence in Ecuador’s jurisdiction over claimed territorial waters. The oral understanding contains no elements that would protect the US juridical position on the law of the sea. All indications are that Ecuador would deny the existence of a conservationist scheme. In the absence of a written agreement it might well appear to the international community that Ecuador had given nothing in return for the lifting of the FMS ban and the purchase of fishing licenses by the USG.

4. Juridical Positions. The Brazil agreement specifically sets forth the juridical positions of both parties and disclaims any interest prejudicial to either. No such element exists in the Ecuador scenario, and, in view of Ecuador’s apparent unwillingness to accept a Brazil-type agreement, it cannot be assumed that they will accept these essential clauses.

5. Conservation. The Brazil agreement specifically indicates conservation as a purpose. The Ecuador scenario is silent on this matter nor can it be reasonably assumed that Ecuador will be. amenable to such a clause.

The overriding point to be borne in mind is that all of these deleterious factors form part of the scenario upon which we will be operating as soon as the. FMS ban is lifted. It would be unrealistic to proceed on the hope that in subsequent formal negotiations we can achieve a more favorable position from a law of the sea point of view in the final agreement.

The Brazil agreement could legitimately be supported as a conservation agreement which did not unduly derogate. our national security objective in law of the sea. The broad and somewhat vague outline of the Ecuador scenario provides no such basis. It is essentially an oral licensing agreement with provision for further negotiation. In its present form I believe it to be inimical to overall US law of the sea objectives.

Although not related directly to our concern over law of the sea issues there are additional factors that warrant careful consideration.

The starting point of the current proposal is to be the unilateral waiving of the existing ban on Foreign Military Sales to Ecuador by the United States. The. basis for requesting the waiver is the assumption that the. understanding developed in private discussions between Acting Foreign Minister Moncayo and Ambassador McKernan of itself constitutes adequate assurances that there will be no further seizures. The Foreign Military Sales Act requires that reasonable assurances against further seizures be given as a condition for the lifting of the FMS suspension. The Ecuadorian Government apparently cannot and certainly will not give these assurances officially. Quite apart from the legal question of whether or not these private discussions constitute reasonable assurances within the meaning of the FMS Act, there is the very real danger of enormous political embarrassment if such assurances should not prove to have been adequate after the FMS ban had been lifted.

It is unknown to what degree the resumption of MAP and FMS may be motivating Ecuador in seeking a solution to the fisheries dispute. In any case, there are a number of real obstacles to a timely resumption of military assistance or of credit sales if the ban is lifted. Any misunderstanding or disappointment generated because of a failure to appreciate these realities could easily result in even worsened relations between the two countries. Ecuador is now in arrears on a sales contract negotiated under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1967. From experience in the past, it is believed that Ecuador, unfortunately, does not intend to honor that debt. The provisions of the act prohibit resumption of military assistance until the arrearage is paid. An Executive determination could waive the statutory prohibition but only after notification to Congress which has not yet been notified that Ecuador is in arrears. After execution of the Presidential waiver, Ecuador would still not be eligible for military assistance until a new MAP agreement can be negotiated. In the case of credit sales, it is doubtful if Congress would approve more credit for a country in default on a prior transaction. The resumption of military assistance presupposes the reinstatement of a US military mission in Ecuador. Finally, on the matter of compensation for the interim licensing period, there are no appropriated assistance funds or material in kind in the military assistance program that can be used for such purpose.

It is my view that any further discussions with Ecuador must be conducted in such a manner as to avoid any possible prejudice to US juridical positions on the law of the sea, particularly those involving US security interests. At all costs we must avoid undercutting negotiations in preparation for and during a Law of the Sea Conference, and must avoid any appearance that we are willing to accommodate US fishing interests by recognizing in any way Ecuador’s claim to a 200-mile territorial sea.

I believe the proper approach would be to continue the dialogue with Ecuador in an effort to develop a scenario based in fact on conservation principles. It is in the interests of both parties to solve the fisheries dispute; it is certainly of paramount interest to the US to do so in such a way that our law of the sea security objectives are protected. In pursuing the dialogue I continue to believe it would serve our best interest to seek Ecuador’s assurance of positive support for US law of the sea positions.

Melvin Laird

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential.

438. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 438. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea (Stevenson) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, September 29, 1972.

Subject:

NSDM 177: Law of the Sea and the 27th United Nations General Assembly

Attached is a Memorandum prepared by the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea in accordance with NSDM 177 of July 18, 1972. The Memorandum contains recommended instructions on the law of the sea item for the United States Delegation to the 27th United Nations General Assembly. A report on the July-August meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee prepared by the Task Force is attached to the Memorandum. The Memorandum is being concurrently submitted to the various agencies for formal clearance.

John R. Stevenson
Chairman, Inter-Agency Task Force
on the Law of the Sea

Attachment

NSDM 177: Law of the Sea and the 27th U.N. General Assembly

The President directed in NSDM 177 that the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Law of the Sea report on developments at the July-August United Nations Seabed Committee meeting and submit recommended instructions on the law of the sea item for the United States Delegation to the U.N. General Assembly. The Task Force Report describing the summer meeting is attached. The recommended instructions follow.

Introduction

The current law of the sea negotiations began in 1967 with the formation of a U.N. committee to establish an international regime for the seabed beyond national jurisdiction and a joint U.S.- Soviet initiative with other countries to obtain international agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea and a right of free transit through and over international straits. These negotiations are now at a key juncture.

In 1970, the 25th U.N. General Assembly decided in Resolution 2750C to convene a Law of the Sea Conference in 1973 and charged the U.N. Seabed Committee with preparing it. The Seabed Committee held its fourth preparatory session this summer. The forthcoming General Assembly is responsible for reviewing the preparatory work and is authorized under the terms of the 1970 resolution to postpone the Conference if it finds the progress of the Committee’s preparatory work to be insufficient. Since the President’s Oceans Policy Statement of May 23, 1970, the U.S. has strongly urged an early date for the Conference. We originally favored 1972 but went along with 1973 when this matter was discussed at the General Assembly two years ago.

The basic question to be decided by the 27th General Assembly is whether a conference will or will not be convened in 1973 as scheduled. Accordingly, the primary issue presented for decision in this memorandum is what position the U.S. should take at the General Assembly regarding the timing of the Law of the Sea Conference. The General Assembly is expected to begin consideration of this item in November.

The 27th General Assembly will also have to decide the questions of the location and agenda for a conference. Chile and Austria have each offered to host the Conference. With regard to the Conference agenda, the Seabed Committee this summer adopted a list of subjects and issues which is expected to be the basis of an agenda.

The issue of invitations to the Conference may be raised at the 27th UNGA. The USSR may insist that East Germany be invited to the Conference, as it did in the case of the Stockholm Environment Conference, and this could seriously disrupt consideration of the law of the sea item. However, on the basis of our discussions with the FRG, we believe that if the inner-German talks, which are now in progress, are concluded successfully before the German elections scheduled for mid-November then a formula for West and East German participation will probably be found. We are continuing to discuss this issue with our allies.

Background Regarding the Timing of a Conference

Without repeating the contents of the attached report, it is important to note that the summer meeting was marked by more serious substantive work and greater commitment to moving the negotiations forward than at any time in the Seabed Committee’s prior work. Some progress was made on refining national positions and narrowing differences on some important questions of substance, but the negotiation of treaty articles has barely started. By the end of the summer, competing treaty texts had been tabled on issues such as the territorial sea, straits, fisheries, economic zone and seabeds.

There seems to be little doubt after the summer’s meeting that a Law of the Sea Conference will take place. Nearly every nation represented on the Seabed Committee shared the view that a conference should be held as soon as substantive preparations permit, but there was virtually no support within the Committee for beginning a substantive conference next year. A few countries, most notably Peru and Ecuador, still made some attempt to delay progress in the negotiations. Their attitude and tactics found very little support among the other members of the Committee, including other Latin American States.

Several delegations expressed reservations as to whether the progress of preparatory work to date justified a decision by this fall’s UNGA on a date for convening a conference. The French delegate argued that discussion of a conference date was premature and expressed doubt that the Seabed Committee could within a year provide the Conference with an adequate working basis to ensure its success. The French view was explicitly endorsed by Peru, while Ecuador made similar arguments. The Soviet Union consistently stressed the need for further preparatory work to resolve the major substantive issues, but did not express a definite public position on the timing of the Conference. The Soviet Representative indicated privately that in his view it may be desirable to have a clear agreement on the general outline of the treaty before the formal Conference is held because the USSR might be outvoted at the Conference. To a lesser extent, the UK and Japan reflected concern over the lack of progress in the substantive preparations. However, the UK did not address the question of timing, and Japan publicly expressed the hope for an early conference. Apparently, the Japanese lean toward fixing a firm date for the substantive Conference in early 1974.

Some Latin Americans have urged pre-agreement on an outline of a final Law of the Sea settlement. The U.S. has approached this idea cautiously because of our concern that the outline might not hold firm, might encourage further demands at a conference, might encourage delay or simplistic solutions, and generally might be less favorable than a settlement reached at an early conference. Our own approach has been to narrow and refine the areas of disagreement to a minimal number of major issues which can be dealt with at the political level at the Conference, and thus in concept does not allow the firm predictability the Soviets contemplate. At the same time, the U.S. has emphasized that a final law of the sea settlement would have to accommodate certain basic U.S. Oceans Policy objectives.

With respect to the timing of a conference, members of the U.S. Delegation representing the petroleum, seabed minerals, and fishing industries strongly favored beginning the substantive sessions in 1973 and, at the latest, in 1974. This view has been endorsed by other industry members of the Law of the Sea Advisory Committee as well as members from the legal, academic, and scientific communities. Some specific arguments which these representatives made for holding an early Law of the Sea Conference are: the need to proceed with major investments in deep seabed mining, preferably regulated by an internationally agreed regime; the need for international agreement on straits to discourage unilateral action by straits States to regulate traffic through important international straits; and the need to head off unilateral coastal State pollution control restrictions on navigation and restrictions on the conduct of marine scientific research.

A majority of delegations which spoke at the summer meeting regarding the convening of a conference reacted favorably to a suggestion made first by Norway and Chile and endorsed by Committee Chairman Amerasinghe and the U.N. Undersecretary for Legal Affairs Stavropoulos. This proposal for action by the 27th UNGA contemplates two more preparatory sessions of the Seabed Committee in 1973, totaling thirteen weeks, followed by a brief organizational meeting of the Conference during or immediately prior to the 1973 28th General Assembly in New York for the purpose of naming officers for the Conference and establishing the committee framework for the Conference’s work. Although the Conference would have formally begun in 1973, substantive work would begin in early 1974 at a time and place decided by the 27th General Assembly.

One, largely psychological, advantage of the Norwegian-Chilean proposal is that strictly speaking the timetable set in Resolution 2750C for convening a conference in 1973 would be met. In addition, thirteen weeks of additional preparatory meetings would take place under the pressure of a forthcoming full-scale diplomatic conference. This pressure could improve the chances for making greater progress in preparation because States would be encouraged to make necessary political decisions. It would also be possible to hold inter-sessional working group meetings to advance preparations for the substantive Conference in 1974.

On the basis of the above, the 27th General Assembly will in all probability be faced with choosing among three alternatives for the timing of a Law of the Sea Conference.

First, it could decide that the preparatory work had been insufficient to justify calling even an organizational conference in 1973, and that it is too early to fix any date for a conference. Therefore, a decision should be postponed until the 28th UNGA. This decision may be sought by France, Ecuador and Peru, and possibly the Soviet Union. (The Soviets and others may use the issue of inviting all states to the Conference as a lever in delaying a decision on a conference date.)

Second, the General Assembly could adopt the Norwegian-Chilean formula. Preliminary indications at the summer Seabed Committee meeting were that this approach would find considerable support in the General Assembly. A possible compromise was indicated by Brazil in making clear that it would go along with a resolution setting a definite date in 1974 for a conference but only if the resolution included a “condition subsequent,” allowing a future General Assembly to reconsider the decision and, if appropriate, establish a new conference schedule.

Third, the General Assembly could set a firm date in 1974 for the Conference to begin, without a prior organizational meeting. The first few days of the 1974 meeting would be devoted to organizational questions. The Japanese appear to favor this approach.

The U.N. Seabed Committee has until now operated under a rule of consensus. At the Law of the Sea Conference, under normal procedural rules, a two-thirds vote would be necessary for the adoption of treaty articles. Accordingly, the principal risk in setting a specific conference date is that most major law of the sea issues are so contentious that if they are put to a vote prematurely, the Conference could fail or the U.S. could be outvoted on important issues. On the other hand, in the view of the Departments of State, Commerce and Interior, the principal risk in delaying the Conference is that unilateral claims and other trends could prejudice U.S. interests in using the oceans and the ability to achieve a widely accepted international agreement. The recommendations which follow are designed to balance these risks by providing for specific conference dates coupled with the opportunity for further preparatory work and review of the situation by next year’s General Assembly if necessary.

Recommended Instructions

(1) The United States Delegation should support at the 27th U.N. General Assembly a resolution fixing a specific date and place for the Law of the Sea Conference, with two substantive sessions in 1974. The resolution should indicate that the first session would be the beginning of substantive work in the Conference, and the second would be for the purpose of completing the law of the sea treaty and opening it for signature. 1

(2) The U.S. Delegation should also support the inclusion of a provision in the resolution for an opening session of the Conference, primarily devoted to organizational matters and general debate, in the fall of 1973. This objective should be secondary to obtaining specific dates in 1974 for the beginning and end of substantive work.

(3) Since the substantive sessions of the Conference would not begin until 1974, the 28th General Assembly could postpone it without having any specific authority to this effect in a conference resolution. Nevertheless, in the opinion of the Law of the Sea Task Force, a broad measure of support for a conference resolution setting specific dates is very unlikely in the absence of an escape clause, along the lines of the provision in the 1970 U.N. General Assembly’s conference resolution (2750C), permitting next year’s UNGA to postpone the Law of the Sea Conference if it determines that the preparation has been insufficient. Accordingly, the U.S. should support the inclusion of such a clause in the conference resolution.1

(4) The U.S. Delegation should also support inclusion in the conference resolution of an accelerated schedule for the work of the Seabed Committee in 1973. In this connection, the resolution should express the General Assembly’s desire to expedite preparatory work, specifically directing the Seabed Committee to arrange for such inter-sessional meetings and work as may be necessary to meet the conference deadline.

(5) With regard to conference site, we believe this issue to be secondary in importance to the achievement of an acceptable formula on conference dates and to the intensification of substantive preparatory work. Our preference is for the substantive sessions of the Law of the Sea Conference to take place at the permanent U.N. facilities in Geneva. Accordingly, the U.S. Delegation will work actively to obtain support for this position and will, in any event, try to bring about a situation in which the Conference would be held in a place other than Santiago, Chile. However, the U.S. Delegation will not let its position with regard to any particular site stand in the way of supporting an otherwise satisfactory conference resolution if that site obtains wide support in the UNGA and offers adequate conference facilities.

LAW OF THE SEA TASK FORCE
REPORT OF THE JULY-AUGUST 1972
UN SEABED COMMITTEE MEETING

(Geneva 3844, August 18, 1972, sent to all diplomatic posts)

1. SUMMARY. The 91-member UN Seabed Committee (SBC) met in Geneva July 17-August 18 for its fourth preparatory meeting for 1973 LOS Conference. The most important development came at the end of the session with final agreement on the comprehensive list of subjects and issues which should permit the Committee to proceed at the next meeting with negotiations on all issues before the SBC, including straits and resource issues. The Subcommittee I Working Group, dealing with basic articles on the seabed regime, began work on treaty drafting. The US Del worked closely on this with French, UK, USSR, and Japanese reps to coordinate tactic and positions. The Committee agreed to entrust the Same Working Group with preparing draft articles on seabed machinery and organization. Subcommittee III established a working group to draft treaty articles on marine pollution but the working group held only organizational meetings. The US circulated a revised draft fisheries article incorporating modifications of US fisheries policy announced at the February-March meeting. The US gave policy statements on security and resource objectives, international standards for navigational safety in straits and congested areas, marine pollution and marine scientific research. Kenya circulated draft articles on an exclusive economic zone giving the coastal State exclusive rights over resources up to 200 miles. Generally, this meeting exhibited more constructive dedication to substantive work and a better cooperative spirit than prior sessions. Success in negotiating the comprehensive list of issues caused increased optimism with respect to the possibility of a successful LOS Conference which could begin with at least an organizational meeting in the fall of 1973. This cable summarizes developments at the July-August session. END SUMMARY

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Only the summary of the lengthy report on the July-August UN Seabeds Committee meeting, sent to the Department and all diplomatic posts on August 18 as telegram 3844 from Geneva, is published. The full text of telegram 3844 is ibid.

1 With respect to recommendations (1) and (3), the agencies do not agree on what the United States should do in the unlikely event that a widely supported conference resolution could be adopted without an escape clause. The Department of Defense representatives believe the U.S. should insist on such a clause, and vote against a resolution that does not contain one. In the view of the representatives of the Departments of State, Commerce and Interior, if there is general support for a conference resolution without an escape clause, and the final resolution contains no escape clause, the U.S. should vote in favor of the conference resolution. A further Task Force memorandum dealing with the reasons for this divergence of opinion, and the precise developments at the U.N. General Assembly, will be submitted in the unlikely event that a decision on this matter becomes necessary.

439. Memorandum From Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) 439. Memorandum From Denis Clift of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1

Washington, October 19, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea Instructions, 27th Session, U. N. General Assembly

I. Introduction and Summary

In response to NSDM 177, the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force has submitted (Tab B) recommended law of the sea instructions for the U.S. Delegation to the 27th U.N. General Assembly.

The Departments of State, Defense, Commerce and Interior additionally have submitted memoranda (at Tab C) concurring with the task force’s recommendations—the Defense concurrence with qualifications. The primary issue requiring decision is the position the U.S. Delegation should take regarding the timing of the Law of the Sea Conference. (A debate on substantial law of the sea issues is not anticipated during the current UNGA session.)

II. Background

Resolution 2750C, adopted by the UNGA in 1970, set 1973 as the tentative date for the Conference, charging the U.N. Seabed Committee with preparations and authorizing the current session of the UNGA to review the Committee’s work and to postpone the Conference if it finds the preparatory work to be insufficient.

The Seabed Committee, as noted in the task force report at Tab B, held its fourth preparatory session during July and August 1972. That session included international agreement on the “Comprehensive List of Issues” to be considered at the Conference, a step forward breaking a procedural log jam in the Committee’s work and-causing most members of the Committee to assume that it will now be possible to go ahead with the Conference in the 1973-1974 timeframe.

At present, competing treaty texts have been tabled on issues such as the breadth of the territorial sea, freedom of passage through international straits, fisheries and seabed resources. Some progress has been made on refining national positions and narrowing differences on questions of substance, but negotiation of treaty articles has barely begun.

III. Task Force Recommendations

The Departments of State, Defense, Commerce and Interior have reviewed the recommendations of the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force and are generally agreed that the U.S. Delegation to the 27th Session of the United Nations General Assembly should support a resolution: -- fixing a specific date and place for the Law of the Sea Conference, with two substantive sessions in 1974;

-- providing for an opening session of the Conference, devoted primarily to organizational matters, in the fall of 1973;

-- calling for an accelerated schedule of work by the U.N. Sea-bed Committee during 1973 in preparation for the Conference; and

-- stating that if the U.N. General Assembly, at its 28th Session, determines the progress of the preparatory work by the Seabed Committee to be insufficient, it may decide to postpone the Conference.

The Department of Defense attaches importance to the last of these provisions, believing that it is once again important to have an “escape clause” included in the U.N. resolution permitting the United States to make a thorough review of progress following the 1973 preparatory sessions before firmly committing the United States to a substantive Conference. (It is probable that other nations will also want such a clause included. As stated in the task force report, several countries have expressed concern over the relative lack of progress in substantive preparations for the Conference, and they can be expected to request that the UNGA again review progress at its 28th Session.)

Other Issues

-- Location of the Conference: Both Austria and Chile have indicated that they would be pleased to serve as host to the Law of the Sea Conference. U.S. interagency preference (correctly so, in my opinion) is for the substantive sessions of the Conference to take place in Geneva. The U.S. Delegation plans to work actively to obtain support for this position and will, in any event, try to bring about a situation in which the Conference would be held in a place other than Santiago, Chile. However, the U.S. Delegation will not let its position with regard to any particular site stand in the way of supporting an otherwise satisfactory conference resolution if that site obtains wide support in the UNGA and offers adequate conference facilities.

-- Conference Participation: The issue of invitations to the Conference may be raised at the 27th UNGA. The Soviet Union may insist that East Germany be invited to the Conference, as it did in the case of the Stockholm Environmental Conference, and this could disrupt consideration of the law of the sea issue. (This, of course, will be affected by the results of the inner-German talks and subsequent moves relating to the participation of East and West Germany in the U.N. If all goes well on this front, the participation problem may be avoided in the law of the sea forum.)

IV. Required Action

The memorandum for your signature to the President would review the law of the sea issues requiring decision, the background and the interagency recommendations. It would also forward for the President’s review a recommended decision memorandum setting forth the necessary instructions for the U.S. Delegation to the 27th U.N. General Assembly. The NSDM would also direct the Law of the Sea Task Force to report on the results of the 27th UNGA and to submit recommended instructions for the next meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee.

RECOMMENDATION

1) That you sign the memorandum for the President at Tab A.

2) With the President’s approval, that you sign the accompanying NSDM.

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Sent for action. Sent to Kissinger through Haig. Concurred in by Kennedy. The memorandum indicated that it was also from Sonnenfeldt, but only Clift initialed it. For Tab A, see Document 441. For Tab B, see Document 438. Tab C includes brief letters indicating concurrence in the report and recommendations: from the Department of State, Eliot to Kissinger, October 13, from the Defense Department, Laird to Kissinger, October 20, from the Commerce Department, Pollock to Kissinger, October 11, and from the Interior Department, Morton to Kissinger, October 12.

440. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 440. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, October 24, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Dispute with Ecuador

As you know, we have had a long-standing dispute with Ecuador caused by their periodic seizures of U.S. fishing boats operating within what they regard as their territorial waters (in the 200-mile limit), and what we regard as the high seas. The most recent seizure was in February 1972. We, in turn, are obligated under the Foreign Military Sales Act to suspend sales or credits for one year to a country that seizes our boats outside the 12-mile limit. Ecuador has regarded this suspension as insulting and unfair. I believe we have now found a way out of this impasse.

In secret talks with the Ecuador Government, we have found a strong inclination on their part to reach a compromise. It will require concessions on both sides. The attached memo from the Department of State (Tab A) sets forth a scenario for meeting the problem. It calls for: 1. The U.S. to lift the FMS suspension;

2. The U.S. to notify Ecuador of the names and other details of U.S. fishing boats likely to be fishing in waters off Ecuador for the rest of 1972;

3. Ecuador to issue appropriate documents for the boats and agree not to seize boats with proper documentation;

4. The U.S. to pay a flat fee to Ecuador—which we would regard as a conservation fee and Ecuador would consider a licensing fee. We estimate this will come to about $150,000 for the year;

5. At an appropriate point, we would issue a statement (jointly with Ecuador if possible) that a solution of the fishing dispute had been reached without prejudice to the Law of the Sea position of either party;

6. Once this interim arrangement had been agreed upon, we would enter into negotiations aimed at working out a more formal agreement to cover the next two years, or until the end of 1974. (This would cover the estimated period of UN Law of the Sea negotiations.)

Compensation: Details of the proposed payment to Ecuador will have to be worked out. We are assured by State that this will not have to be resolved before the end of the year. We could seek authorization and appropriations in connection with the submission of the formal agreement with Ecuador to the Congress for its approval. We are exploring whether the Foreign Assistance Act already contains the requisite authority. In any event, if other methods fail, the Department of State has assured us that it can raise the necessary payment, in unvouchered funds if necessary.

Congressional Considerations: We will have to inform Congress of a waiver of suspension. Prudence also argues that we keep Congress generally informed of developments on this matter. However, because of the sensitivity of the proposed arrangement, we would inform the leadership and a few most deeply involved Congressmen by means of a classified waiver and similarly classified explanation of what we are doing. Advance consultation with those most involved (the staffs of the House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, Senate Commerce Committee, and Senate Foreign Relations Committee—as well as the affected U.S. fishing industry) has produced favorable reactions.

Position of the Secretary of Defense: In commenting on the original State Department proposal, Secretary Laird raised several reservations (see Laird memo at Tab B). He was mainly concerned about any possible watering down of our Law of the Sea position. [In a separate comment (Tab C) the Office of Management and Budget called attention to two considerations: the problem of financing the payments to Ecuador, and the obstacles to early renewal of military sales to Ecuador given existing arrearages owed to us. But OMB offered no comments or objections to the proposed scenario.]

Secretary Laird’s concerns are valid and they can and should be accommodated by specifically instructing State to make clear to the Ecuadorians that: -- our willingness to reach an interim arrangement on fishing rights is without prejudice to our juridical position on the Law of the Sea;

-- the U.S. does not recognize any coastal state preference over highly migratory fish, such as tuna;

-- we will interpret the interim fees to be paid to Ecuador as conservation fees (though we know they will regard them as licensing fees);

-- our waiver of FMS sales suspension is without prejudice to our position on obstacles that will have to be overcome before military assistance or credit sales to Ecuador can be resumed. (Note: They still owe us for past sales.)

Political Considerations: Bill Timmons is rightly concerned that we avoid or minimize any unfavorable Congressional or public reaction. He is prepared to go along with the proposed scenario provided (1) the waiver of suspension of FMS be classified and (2) that notification to Congress be made no earlier than October 15. Both of these conditions will be met. In addition, I propose that no official public statement on our agreement with Ecuador be made before November 7. We will encourage the Ecuadorians to do likewise.

Conclusions: I believe we should go forward with this proposal as revised. There are risks, but with the provisos taking account of Defense concerns and of the political aspects, those risks are minimal. The risks of not moving are considerably greater. The tuna could be moving into waters off Ecuador at any time. The fishing boats of our country and others will follow immediately. The risk of a new series of seizures will be great. In terms of our own interests—and of improving relations with Ecuador and the rest of Latin America—an early solution to this problem would be most advantageous. We solved a similar problem recently with Brazil (the shrimp agreement). If we can bring Ecuador into line, chances are good for a similar settlement with Peru.

Bill Timmons concurs.

RECOMMENDATIONS:

1. That you sign the proposed Presidential Determination, which waives the suspension of military sales, credits and guarantees to Ecuador, at Tab I.

2. That you approve the proposed National Security Decision Memorandum at Tab II, which authorizes the proposed course of action in negotiating an interim fisheries agreement with Ecuador—including the specific caveats noted above.

Approve
Disapprove

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 194 [2 of 2]. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon initialed approval of both recommendations. Tab A is published as Document 436. Tab B is published as Document 437. At Tab C was a September 22 memorandum from Office of Management and Budget Director Caspar W. Weinberger to Nixon. At Tab I was Presidential Determination 73-4, issued on October 27, which directed Rogers to inform Congress of the waiver but retained its classified status for national security reasons. (Ibid.) Tab II is published as Document 442.

441. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon 441. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1

Washington, October 26, 1972.

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea Instructions, 27th Session U.N. General Assembly

In response to NSDM 177, the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force has submitted recommended instructions for the U.S. Delegation to the 27th U.N. General Assembly. The primary issue requiring decision is the position the Delegation should take regarding the timing of the Law of the Sea Conference.

By way of background, in 1970, the 25th U. N. General Assembly decided in Resolution 2750C to convene a Law of the Sea Conference in 1973 and charged the U. N. Seabed Committee with preparing for the Conference. The Committee held its fourth preparatory session in July and August 1972, a session which included international agreement on the comprehensive list of issues to be considered at the conference. At present, competing treaty texts have been tabled on issues such as the breadth of territorial sea, freedom of passage through straits, fisheries and seabed resources. Some progress has been made on refining national positions and narrowing differences on questions of substance, but the negotiation of treaty articles has barely begun. The current session of the U. N. General Assembly is responsible for reviewing the Committee’s preparatory work and is authorized by the 1970 resolution to postpone the conference if it finds the preparatory work to be insufficient.

The Departments of State, Defense, Commerce and Interior have reviewed the recommendations of the Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force and are generally agreed that the U.S. Delegation to the 27th Session of the United Nations General Assembly should support a resolution: -- fixing a specific date and place for the Law of the Sea Conference, with two substantive sessions in 1974;

-- providing for an opening session of the Conference, devoted primarily to organizational matters, in the fall of 1973;

-- calling for an accelerated schedule of work by the U. N. Seabed Committee during 1973 in preparation for the Conference; and

-- stating that if the U.N. General Assembly, at its 28th Session, determines the progress of the preparatory work by the Seabed Committee to be insufficient, it may decide to postpone the Conference.

The Department of Defense attaches particular importance to the last of these provisions, believing that it is once again important to have an “escape clause” included in the U.N. resolution permitting the United States to make a thorough review of progress following the 1973 preparatory sessions before firmly committing the U.S. to a substantive conference. With your approval, I will issue the National Security Decision Memorandum (at Tab A) authorizing the U.S. Delegation to the U. N. General Assembly to support a law of the sea resolution along the lines outlined above.

[Approve]

DISAPPROVE

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H-237, NSDM Files, NSDM 196. Confidential. Sent for action. A notation on the memorandum indicates that Nixon saw it. Nixon initialed his approval. For Tab A, see Document 443.

442. National Security Decision Memorandum 194 442. National Security Decision Memorandum 1941

Washington, October 27, 1972.

TO:

THE SECRETARY OF STATE

THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE

SUBJECT:

Fisheries Negotiations with Ecuador

The President has reviewed the recommendations of the Departments of State and Commerce forwarded with the Acting Secretary of State’s memorandum of August 29, 1972. He has also considered the comments of the Secretary of Defense relating thereto.

In the interests of maintaining the best possible relations with Ecuador; eliminating the bilateral irritant caused by Ecuadorean seizures of U.S. fishing boats; and, at the same time, safeguarding the juridical position of the United States in the multilateral law of the sea negotiations, the President has taken the following decisions.

The President has approved and signed the Department of State’s recommended waiver of suspension of military sales, credits and guarantees to Ecuador. In taking this action, the President has noted that the lifting of the FMS ban is to be conditioned on an oral understanding between the United States and Ecuador that there will be arrangements to prevent further seizures of U.S. fishing boats off Ecuador.

The President authorizes the Department of State to negotiate the terms of these arrangements and to prepare for subsequent formal bilateral negotiations on the fisheries issue with the Government of Ecuador. In so doing, he instructs the Department of State specifically to emphasize the following points of U.S. policy to the Government of Ecuador: -- The willingness of the United States to enter into interim bilateral fisheries arrangements with the Government of Ecuador is without prejudice to the U.S. juridical position on the law of the sea.

-- The United States does not recognize any coastal state preference over highly migratory fish species such as tuna.

-- The United States will interpret interim fees which will be paid to Ecuador as conservation fees relating to improved multilateral management of tuna stocks within the conservation lines established by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission.

-- The United States waiver of the Foreign Military Sales Act suspension is without prejudice to the United States position on the obstacles, including sales contract arrearages, which must be overcome before military assistance or credit sales to Ecuador can be resumed.

While recognizing the desirability of avoiding undue publicity, the United States reserves the right to make clear as required that the points outlined above represent U.S. policy. Timing and content of any public statement on this matter should be cleared with the White House.

The Department of State is requested to report to the President on the results of the talks with the Government of Ecuador authorized herein.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Decision Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Confidential. A copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

443. National Security Decision Memorandum 196 443. National Security Decision Memorandum 1961

Washington, October 31, 1972.

TO:

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

The Secretary of the Interior

SUBJECT:

Law of the Sea Instructions, 27th Session U.N. General Assembly

With reference to the report and related memoranda forwarded in response to NSDM 177, the President has approved the recommendation that the United States Delegation to the 27th Session of the United Nations General Assembly should support a resolution: -- fixing a specific date and, place for the Law of the Sea Conference, with two substantive sessions in 1974;

-- providing for an opening session of the Conference, devoted primarily to organizational matters, in the fall of 1973;

-- calling for an accelerated schedule of work by the U. N. Seabed Committee during 1973 in preparation for the Conference; and

-- stating that if the U.N. General Assembly, at its 28th Session, determines the progress of the preparatory work by the Seabed-Committee to be insufficient, it may decide to postpone the Conference.

The Interagency Law of the Sea Task Force should submit a prompt report for review by the President on actions taken by the 27th U.N. General Assembly together with recommended instructions for the U.S. Delegation to the next meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee.

Except as affected by the directives of this memorandum, the contents of NSDM 177 remain valid.

Henry A. Kissinger

1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 364, Subject Files, National Security Defense Memoranda, Nos. 145-264. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Transportation and the Director of Central Intelligence. The General Assembly adopted a resolution on December 18 that provided for an organizational session of UNCLOS III in November-December 1973 and a substantive session in April-May 1974. The resolution expressed the expectation that subsequent sessions of UNCLOS III would convene until an agreement was concluded. The General Assembly also called for an accelerated work schedule for the Seabed Committee during 1973 (UN Document A/RES/3209(XXVII))

444. Airgram A-12376 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 444. Airgram A-12376 From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, December 23, 1972, 0826Z.

SUBJECT:

LOS - Seabeds

REF:

Geneva 3844

As you know, (para 3D reftel), in the course of the summer meeting of the U.N. Seabed Committee in Geneva intensive private consultations regarding the negotiation of an international seabed regime developed in the group of five states most interested in deep seabed exploitation: France, Japan, United Kingdom, United States, and USSR. The Group will meet privately in London during the week of January 29 to discuss the international seabed regime in the light of preparations for the March meeting of the UN Seabed Committee.

At the end of the summer session, the Group requested that Leigh Ratiner, Director of Ocean Resources, Department of the Interior, prepare a comparative analysis of the seabed regime proposals to assist participants in preparing for the London meeting. Specific contact points were also established in order to facilitate informal communication. There is a high measure of sensitivity regarding the confidential nature of these considerations, and the British Government has stated that it positively does not want any publicity regarding the meeting.

In view of the short time available before the London meeting you are requested to deliver the enclosed paper as soon as possible. Preferred contact points are indicated below. You should explain that the paper does not necessarily represent views of the United States Government. You are also requested to explain that it was apparently the view of the Group that it could most productively spend its time dealing with underlying questions regarding machinery structure and functions, particularly since in all probability there will be more than ample time to continue coordination with respect to general principles during the March Seabed Committee meeting in New York. In this connection you should point out that the host governments may wish to include economic experts in their delegations to London. Please confirm delivery.

All of the copies of the enclosure have been stamped Confidential except for the copies marked for delivery to the Soviet Union and to Smirnov. American Embassy Moscow and USUN should request the Soviet Government to hold the document in confidence, although we do not by this mean to preclude confidential consultations with allies.

Contact Points: Unless this would entail delay or other difficulties, Embassies should deliver the document to the following Foreign Ministry individuals:

London: Henry Steele (Legal Counsellor)

Moscow: V.A. Romanov (Legal and Treaty Dept.)

Paris: M.A. Martin-Sane (Affaires Scientifiques)

Tokyo: N. Kumagai (Legal Affairs) or H. Owada (UN Bureau).

USUN is requested to deliver additional courtesy copies to Amb. Ogiso of Japan and Mr. Smirnov of the USSR. US Mission Geneva is requested to deliver a courtesy copy to Minister Okawa of the Japanese Mission.

For Bonn: FYI. We wish to continue to keep the FRG well informed on LOS issues in general, and we are considering requesting bilateral consultations in Bonn after the London meeting. We may seek reactions at start of the meeting to our making a copy of the document available to the FRG in the light of its interests, in deep seabed mining. Accordingly, the Embassy is requested to hold the document and should not raise the subject with the FRG pending further instructions. End FYI.

Johnson, Acting

1 Source: National Archives, Central Files 1970-73, POL 33-8. Confidential. Drafted by Oxman on December 21; cleared with IO/UNP, EA/RA, EUR/CAN, EUR/GER, EUR/SOV, and L/OA; and approved by Stevenson. Also sent to Moscow, Paris, Tokyo, USUN, and Geneva. Repeated to Bonn. The enclosure entitled “Comparison and Analysis of Seabeds Regime and Machinery Proposals,” summarized and assessed ideas for organization and operation of an international deep seabed exploitation agency.

Errata Errata

The following change has been made to Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume E–1, Documents on Global Issues, 1969–1972.

1. Documents 248, 249, and 250. (Date of correction: January 18, 2017)

After publication, it was discovered that the text for Document 248 was missing and that the above documents were published in the wrong order. Editors added the text for Document 248 and revised the document numbers, correcting Document 248 to Document 249, Document 249 to Document 250, and Document 250 to Document 248.
